THE EXPERIENCED FARRIER, OR, Farring Completed.

In TWO BOOKS PHYSICAL and CHYRURGICAL.

BRINGING Pleasure to the Gentleman, and Profit to the Countryman.

In Which You have the Whole BODY, SUM and SUBSTANCE of it in one Entire
Volume, in so Full and Ample Manner, that there is Little or Nothing more
Material to be Added Hereto.

For here is Contained Every Thing that Belongs to a True HORSEMAN, GROOM,
FARRIER or HORSE-LEACH, Viz. BREEDING; The Manner How, The Season When, The
Place Where, The Colors, Marks and Shapes of all Stallions and Mares, and what
are Fit for Generation; The Feeder, Rider, Keeper, Ambler and Buyer; As also
the Making of several Precious Drinks, Suppositories, Balls, Purgations,
Scourings, Ointments, Salves, Powders, Waters, Baths, Charges, Perfumes, And
Directions how to use them for all Inward and Outward Diseases.

ALSO The PARING and SHOOING of all Manner of HOOFES, and in what Point that
Art does Consist; The Prices and Virtues of most of the Principal Drugs, both
Simple and Compound belonging to Farring, (and where you may buy them,) Viz.
Roots, Barks, Woods, Flowers, Fruits, Seeds, Juices, Gums, Rozins, Simples from
Plants; Animals, their Parts and their Excrements, Minera's, Metals and Stones;
Together with Chemical Oils and Spirits, Electuaries, Treacles, Powders,
Waters, Plasters and Ointments, etc.

You have Also A Large TABLE of the Virtues of most Simples Set down
Alphabetically, and many Hundreds more of Simples Placed one after another, for
the Cure of all Inward and Outward Diseases, which you are to make Use of
according to your Discretion; With many New Receipts of Excellent Use and
Value; Never yet Printed before in any Author.

The Second EDITION much Enlarged and Amended, and Two New Sheets of the Prices
and Virtues of DRUGS added to the Table of DRUGS, that was not in the Former
Impression, with a Caution to the Farrier about his Buying of them; Also One
Hundred and Fifty New Receipts, and Thirty Directions for the Physicking of
Horses, with about Two Thousand New Simples, and an Advertisement touching
their Usefulness; With many other New Additions, too tedious here to Rehearse.

By E. R. Gent.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Northcott Adjoining to St. Peter's Alley in Cornhil,
and at the Mariner and Ancher upon New-Fish-street Hill, near London Bridge.
1681.

TO THE READER.
Nil dictum quod non prius dictum
YOU would say, That this Book, though New, is no otherwise then Old, by reason
that a great part thereof are Collections, and therefore the less to be
regarded; Let me Ask you one Question, Is the Honey the worse, because the Be
sucks it out of many Flowers? Or, Is the Spiders Web the more to be valued,
because extracted out of her own Bowels; Let not this be any Prejudice to this
Book, but peruse it without Partiality, and with the Judgment of a Farrier;
And you shall then find, That these Old Collections are become New, not because
they are New Printed, but because they are New Digested and Modelized, and put
into a better Form and Method then ever yet before Printed; For let me tell
you, there was never any thing in this Nature ever Printed before, but there
was something or other wanting to make it a Complete Book of Farring; But in
this you shall find nothing wanting, either to the perfecting a Cure of all
Diseases of a Horse, either inward or outward, or to the making a Man a
Complete Horseman. Besides, these Old Collections, you shall find a great many
New Additions; As first, A Table of the Prices and Virtues of most of the
Principal Drugs, both Simple and Compound belonging to Farring, as they are
commonly Sold at the Druggists in London, with a Caution to the Buyer of them;
A Table so very useful, that it is much to be wondered at, that amongst so many
Excellent Books of Farring as are Extant in the World, there should be nothing
of this kind ever before annexed to them. Secondly, you have a large Table of
the Nature, Temperature and Virtues of most Simples, set down Alphabetically.
Thirdly, you have an Account of many Hundreds more of Simples, placed in order
one after another, for the Cure of all inward and outward Diseases, with an
Advertisement touching the Usefulness of them. Fourthly, wherever you find a
Hand pointing in the Margin, you shall find such Receipts as have been often
made use of with very good success, and which was never yet Printed before in
any Author. Fifthly, you have the Gathering, Drying and Preserving of Simples
and their Juices. Sixthly, you have the Method of making of Syrups, Decoctions,
Oils, Ointments, Plasters, Charges, Poultisses, Balls, etc. Seventhly, you
have hot Medicaments appropriate to the Parts of the Body. Eighthly, you have
Cold Medicaments appropriate to the same Use. Ninthly, you have the Properties
of Purging Medicaments. Tenthly, you have the Properties of Altering
Medicaments. Eleventhly, you have a Table of the Diseases of a Horse, either
inward or outward, set down Alphabetically, showing you where they do grow in
any part of the Body; How you may know them, and what were the Causes that bred
them. Twelfthly, you have in the Table of the said Diseases the Page quoted
where to find the proper Cures for every Disease. Thirteenthly and lastly, you
have Five Infallible Cures never yet put to Press before (which the Table of
Diseases will direct you to) viz. The Glanders, Farcin, Staling of Blood,
Scratches, and making the brittlest Hoof that is so Tough that it will carry a
Shoo Passing well; With many other things Contained in this Book, which is not
here Inserted.

By E. R. Gent.
If you desire to Know the Usefulness of your General Simples, set down in
Order one after another, in the First and Second Part, before every Disease.
Look for page 229. and that will inform you.

Amend the Errata's before you fall to Practice.



The BOOKSELLER to the READER.
COURTEOUS READER,
HAving long since Printed with great Care, Pains and Industry, this my
Experienced Farrier, for the Cure of all Inward and Outward Diseases, both in
Horses and Mares; And finding it has been Received by all Lovers of Horses or
Horsemanship with a General and Friendly Liking, Emboldens me once more to
Present You with a Second Impression, well hoping it may find no worse Usage
from you then the former had done, but be Received with the same Candor,
Favor and Esteem equal with that, and the rather, by reason that the many
Errors committed in the former Edition, is now carefully Corrected and Amended
in this, and very many Useful Additions Added hereto, that were not in the
former Impression, there being no less then One Hundred and Fifty New Receipts;
Besides, the Addition of two New Sheets of the Prices and Virtues of Drugs,
very useful* for all Farriers to know, with a Caution to the Buyers of them;
Also about Two Thousand New Simples, (with their Usefulness declared) put to
the End of the other General Simples, for the Cure of all inward and outward
Diseases, which upon your Perusal you may find here and there scattered
throughout the whole Work; You have also Thirty New Directions for the
Physicking and Drenching of Horses, with an Account of Four several sorts of
Aloes (which may serve as the Basis and Ground Work of all Purges and
Scourings) with their Goodness declared, and the distinguishing Marks how you
may know one sort of Aloes from another, with many other things herein
contained, which if at your Leisure you carefully Compare this Impression with
the former, will quickly Inform you of the Truth hereof.

R. Northcott.

The TABLE.
THE shapes of a Horse page 1. The Colors of a house in verse ib. The shapes
of a horse another way ib. and 6* A Proverb amongst Husband men on the colors
of a horse 1 What things are good to strew amongst a horses Provender 2 Things
that you are to have always by you in a readiness ib. The Virtues of them
declared ib. Terms of Art to commend a Horse, if you know him to be good 2.
The Office of the Breeder.
The best manner of Breeding 1 Grounds to Breed in, and Change of Grounds 3
Choice of Stallions and Mares ib. The Age of Stallions and Mares 4 Observations
upon Covering ib. Bad to cover after the Change of the Moon ib. Covering in the
Wane ib. Burning when other horses cover her. ib. Spaying of Mare-Colts, and of
Gelding of Horse-Colts ib. What time is best for a Mare to take horse ib. How
long time a Mare goes with Foal, how to Order her before she is covered, and
how to make her conceive to have a Horse-Colt or Mare-Colt 5 The manner how to
cover her, and to know whether she stands to her Covering ib. How many Mares
for one Horse ib. How to order a Mare after she is covered 6 How to help her if
she cannot Foal ib. How to order her after Foaling ib. How long Foals are to
run with their Dams 7 The time of Foaling looked upon to be very improper
because in the Winter-Season ib. When Mares are fit to take horse 8 To know the
true shape spirit and height of a Foal, from his Shin-bone, from the space
between his Knees and Withers, from his spirit and from his Hoofs ib. Weaning
of Foals ib. Taming of Colts ib. The time to break Colts ib. Coiling the Stud,
or making of Election 9 Of barren Mares ib. General Observations concerning
Mares, viz. Of Covering, of bringing of Foals, of making a Mare slink Foal, and
to make her stand to horse; of Stallions for Trotters, and of Mares to horse.
ib. To put your horse and Mare into an empty house; not to chase the Mares; the
wall-Eye is an imperfect Sight, and of choice of Mares, etc. ib. and 10.
Election of horses for War, for Swiftness, for Travel and for Draught. ib. To
know whether your Mare be with Foal or not ib. To make a Mare conceive a Male
Foal. 11
The Office of the Keeper.
Of the horse in General, his Choice for every several Use, his Ordering, Diet
and best Preservation for Health, both in Travel and Rest ib. Yhe Nature of a
horse in general. ib. Your Choice of a horse for the Wars. ib. What Colors of
a horse is best. ib. Choice of a horse for a Princes Seat. 12 For Travel ib.
For Hunting ib. For Running ib. For the Coach ib. For the Pack ib. For the Cart
and Plough 13 How to Order these several horses, and first of the horse for the
Wars. ib. Ordering a horse for a Prince or a great Ladies Seat. ib. Ordering of
Traveling horses at home and abroad ib. Of Watering in the Morning, of Feeding
betimes, and of Moderate Traveling. 14 To get a horse a Stomach ib. Not to stop
a horses Feet with Cow dung till they be cold ib. Look to his Back, Girts and
Shoes. ib. Not to eat nor drink when he is hot. ib. To labor him moderately,
when the Weather is extreme hot or cold. ib. Not to Travel him too late 15 The
Saddle not to be presently taken off when he is hot ib. Horse-bread very good
food ib. River water not so good as standingwater ib. Swine and Pullen is
naught to be nigh a Stable ib. The light of the Stable is best to be made
toward the South and North. ib. To be Tied with two Reins very safe. ib. To
Ride him on stony ways ib. Wheat-straw and Oat-straw is best for Litter ib. Of
Dressing your horse 16 Of the Stable ib. A Mud-Wall naught to be nigh a horse.
ib. Chopped straw good to throw amongst a horses Provender ib. Bottles of Hay to
be Tied hard is very good ib. To sprinkle Hay with Water is also good, and so
is Fennegreek strowed amongst his Provender ib. Exercise is very good ib. Grass
is also good once a year, to cleanse his Blood and cool his Body ib. A horse
has good store of Blood after Travel ib. What you are to do in case of
necessity coming late to your Inn 17 To give him Mares Milk to drink, if he be
Poor, is very good ib. The best time when to Water in the Winter ib. Not good
to wash a horse when he is hot. ib. To light at every steep Hill very good ib.
How a fat horse is to have his Meat and Water ib. Rubbing very good for a horse
ib, Boiled Barley is very good. ib. Feet Picked after Travel ib. Much Rest
naught 18 Be careful to look to your Saddle for fear of Pinching him ib. A
Horsemans Rule in Verse ib. Riding softly very good ib. Trotters Oil is very
good to help stiff Limbs* ib. Legs Bathed with cold Water is good to prevent
Scabs and Swellings ib. Washing at the Stable-door is very good if necessity
requires ib. Dressing upon Travel and Rest ib. When to let Blood 19 Ordering of
Hunting Horses ib. Sir Robert Chernock's manner of feeding his horse in
Buck-season for hunting ib. Ordering of Running horses ib. Ordering of Coach
horses ib. Ordering of the Pack and Cart-horse. 20
The Office of the RIDER and GROOM, and of things belonging to him, viz. His
general an a particular Knowledge in Handling, Sadling, Mouthing, Backing and
Riding of the great Horse, or Horse of Pleasure ib. Of the Stable, and what it
ought to be built with; A brick Stable preferred before Stone. No Hog-sty nor
Hen-Roost ought to be nigh it. Of the Manger, of a Pitched Floor, a Mud-wall
(...) and of dung not to lie nigh a (...) ^^eels ib. (...) of Stables approved
to be better then Planked Stables for several Reasons ib. The inconveniences
of a Plank-Floor showed ib. Your Care in the Choice of a Groom. 22 How a Rider
ought to be qualified. ib. What manner of Person a Groom ought to be ib. To
Saddle and Bridle a Colt 23 Of Mouthing ib. Of Backing 24 Helps at first
Backing ib. What Lessons for what Horse 25 Helps and Corrections from his
Voice, from his Rod, from his Bit and Snaffle, from the Calves of his Legs,
from his Stirrop's and Stirrop-Leathers, and from the Ground. 25 and 26 Of
large Rings ib. Of stopping 27 Advancing ib. Retiring ib. Of bitting 28 Of
straight turns and turnings ib. The first straight tnrn ib. The other straight
turn 29 How to help an ill Rein and Cure a Runaway Jade 30 The help ib. Another
for unconstant Carriage. ib.
The Office of the Feeder.
The Introduction to the Work touching the time limited for a hunting horse. 31
Their Reasons ib. Long time inconvenient ib. The first Ordering of the Running
Horse, according to the several Estates of their Bodies. 34 To have an Eye to
the particular Estate of a horses Body ib. The first Fortnights feeding of a
horse for a Match, that is fat, foul, or either newly taken from Grass or Soil
35 His feet stopped with Cow Dung ib. Four Considerations in giving of Heats 37
The second Fortnights feeding 38 The first read ib. The Use of the Muzzel ib.
The first Scouring 40 Ordering of him after his Scouring. ib. The third
Fortnights feeding 41 The second Bread ib. The fourth and last Fortnights
feeding 42 The last and best Bread ib. Certain Observations and Advantages for
every Feeder to observe in sundry Accidents 44 Of Meat and Drink ib.
Observations for Lameness 45 Observations from the estate of his Body ib From
his Inclinations ib. From his outward handling ib. From his privy Parts 46 For
his Limbs ib. For Water ib. Observations from the Ground to run on ib.
Observations from Sweat 47 Observations from the hair ib.
The Office of the AMBLER.
Observations in Ambling. 47 Men's Opinions and Errors 48 Ambling by the
Ploughed Field ib. Ambling by the Gallop ib. Ambling by Weights ib. Ambling in
Hand, or not Ridden 49 Ambling by the help of Schooes ib. Ambling by the help
of fine Lists ib. Ambling by the Hand only 50 Ambling by the Tramel ib* Errors
in the Tramel ib. The best Way to Amble a horse 51 The form of the Tramel 52
The true use of the true Tramel 53 When to alter the Tramel ib. When to Mount
his Back 54 When to Journey ib. The Office of the BUYER, wherein is showed all
the Perfections and Imperfections that are or can be in a Horse 55 Observations
and Advertisements for any Man when he goes about to buy a horse ib. The End
for which to buy ib. Election how divided 56 The General Rule ib. Of Breed ib.
Of Color ib. Of Pace, or Trotting ib. Ambling 59 Racking ib. Galloping ib.
Stature 60 The particular Rule ib. How to stand to view his Shapes, viz. His
Ears, his Face, his Eyes, his Cheeks and Chaps, his Nostrils and Muzzle, his
Teeth, his Breast, his fore-Yhighs, his Knees, his Legs, his Pasterns, his
Hoofs, the setting on of his Head, his Crest and Mane, his Back, Ribs, Fillets,
Belly and Stones; his Buttocks, his hinder-Yhighs* his Cambrels, his hinder
Legs and his Tail, etc. from p. 60. to p. 67 An uncontrollable Way to know the
Age of a Horse, viz. By his Teeth, Mouth, Hoofs, Tail, Eyes, Skin, Hair and
Bars of his Mouth, from p. 65 to 67 The perfect shape of a horse altogether
ib. Rules to be observed of putting a horse to Grass, and taking him up again.
68 Of Cleansing and making a horse clean. 69 General Notes concerning some
Simples. ib. Of Syrups, Pills, Powders, Electuaries and Ointments ib. Of Oils,
Roots, Herbs, Seeds, Rind or Bark 69 and 70
A TABLE of the Office of the Farrier, Alphabetically set down, p. 70.
A
Accopium, a Drink, with the Virtues and Nature of it 123 and 124 Atman, a
Confection, with the Virtues of it 125
B.
Baths of all sorts 135 to 137 Bon^s, how many a horse has, and where
situated 72 Blooding a horse, when the best time 73 Blood-letting, with
Observations upon it 87 Of Burning 88 Burning Actual and Potential 90 Bread
made for a horse to keep him in heart and strength of Body, and to keep him
from faintness in his Labor and Exercise, be it never so sore. 116 Bread, to
make another sort ib. Bangle-Eares how to help 121 Balls Cordial, to Cure any
violent Cold, Glanders, which prevents Heart-sickness, which Purges away all
Molten-Grease, which recovers a Lost Stomach, and makes a Lean horse fat
suddenly ib. Blood cleansed, general Simples good for it 149 Bewitched, general
Simples good for it 151
C.
Complexion ^f a horse which is the most necessary Faces that a Farrier can
Judge of his Infirmities by 74 Corrasives, 89. 115 and 145 Cauterizing 89 and
90 Cauterizing, in what cause 114 Cautery Potential 115 and 145 A Caustic 115
and 145 Cordial Powders to make 125 Charges of several sorts* 131 and 132
Copperas water 139 Conglu^inating Simples 146 Clensers of the Blood, Simples
good for it in general, vide Blood cleansed Cordials and Strengthners of Nature;
See for Simples that are good in general for it 151 To cast and overthrow a
horse 153
D.
Diapente, a Drink, how to use it, and to show you the Virtues of it 79
Diahexaple, a Drink, with the Virtues of it 79 and 80 Diatessaron made, or
Horse Mithridate how made ib. Drinks given when you neither have Diatessaron,
Diahexaple or Diapente 81 Diseases of a horse known by the signs he shows,
from 81 to 86 Drugs, the Nature of the principal sorts of them 94 Drinks in
general for all inward Diseases of a horse that troubles the whole Body, from
126 to 128 Other general Drinks for the Cure of all inward Sickness ib. A Drink
very comfortable 131 A Drink Operative ib. Drugs, their Prices; see for the
Table of them between the first and second part Decoction, what it is 146
E.
Of the Elements and their Nature 73 Eyes a Caution about them 90 To make the
black and red Aegyptiacum, which are both Corrasives. For their Naures are to
corrode and eat away all manner of proud and naughty Flesh, out of any old sore
or Ulcer. 126 Drenches in general for all manner of Sicknesses 126 and 127 Dead
Foal to expel, general Simples good for it 148
F.
A Farriers Office, in what part it does consist 70 A Farrier ought to know
principally five things 90 A Farrier what he ought to know before he goes about
to Purge a horse 96 To fat a lean horse in twelve or fifteen days 123 Another
for the same purpose ib. Of Fevers, and how you may know every sort of them
one from another. 129 and 130 Fatning things in general 143 Lust to provoke,
Simples good for it in general 148
G.
Of Glisters and their Uses 90 Glisters for Costiveness 91 A Glister Laxative
90 A Glister Restringent 92 and 93 A Glister for a fat horse that cannot be
kept clean ib. A Glister in case of a desperate sickness ib. A Glister for the
Pestilence and all Fevers ib. A Glister for the Cholick ib. Advice given upon
giving of Glisters, and what are to be put into them. ib. Laxative Glisters,
what simples are to be put into them 94 Gelding of horses, how and in what
Season is best 119 Green Ointments, several sorts of them 138. 139 and 140
Glisters what they are 146
H.
Of the four Humors, Blood, Phlegm^ Choler and Melancholy 74 Health, twelve
causes of it 76 Horse-Treacle how made 80 Halting, where to find the Grief
either before or behind 102 Horse-Spice how made; If you intend to make use of
it amend the fault, for there is left out of it a quarter of a Pound of
Anniseeds, and a quarter of a pound of the Powder of Liquoris. ib. Of Hoofs and
the several Kinds of them, viz. Brittle and rugged hoofr, long hoofs, crooked
hoofs, flat hoofs, with broad Frushes, hoofs with narrow heels from 104 to 106
Of paring the perfect hoof and fore-Feet 106 Of paring the imperfect hoof,
every one according to their Kind; First, of the broken hoof chap. 5, 6. 106 Of
paring the rough and brittle hoof chapter 7. 108 Of Paring the long hoof, chapter 9.
ib. Of paring the crooked hoof, chapter 11. 109 Of paring the flat hoof, chapter 13.
ib. Of paring the over-hollow hoof. chapter 15. 110 Of paring the hoof that has a
broad Frush chapter 17 ib. Of paring the hoof that has a narrow heel chapter 19. ib.
Horse-Bread two sorts of it, to keep him in heart and strength of Body, etc.
116 A horse to be made not to Neigh, either in company, or when he is ridden
120 Humors drove back that flow too fast to a Wound you have in Cure* 140 Hair
made smooth, sleek and soft. 153 Head perfumed, see Perfumes To make a horse
follow his Master, and to challenge him amongst never so many People 154 Heam
to expel, which is the same as the Afterbirth is in Women; see General Simples
good for it 150
K.
Knitting Simples; see Conglutinating things
L.
Lameness, to Know where it lies, either before or behind 102 Loosening things
in general. 143
M.
The principal Members of a horse. 70 Mash, how made 97 Mithridate how made 80
Milk to cause, general Simples good for it 148
N.
Neesing powder, Vide Perfumes for the Head.
O.
Oils 69 Oil of Oats with the Virtues of it. 130 Ointments, Salves, Powders,
and Waters 132 and 133 Ointments green to make. 138, 139 140 and 141 Old Horses
made seemingly young. 120
P.
Planets, their Names 73 Physicking Observations, see for more of them in the
second Part. 86 Purgations, and their several Uses. 96 Physicking a horse and
how to Order him after he has it. 99 Pills of all sorts, and Purgations. 99
and 100 Pu refactives 116 Powders Cordial how to make 1 5 A Powder made of
honey and Lyme, that will dry up any Wound or Ulcer. 131 Pills Purging 13^
Pills what they are for 146 Purgings, or Scouring Simples in General 141
Portion, what it is 146 A Plaster to dissolve and take away evil humors,
which shall at any time fall down into the Legs of a horse. 135 Perfumes and
Purgers of the head of all filthy and gross humors. 137 and 138 Purgings of
all sorts, and they are five, viz. by Portions, by Glisters, by Suppositories
and by Grass 146 Certain Principles concerning Simples 140 Prices of Drugs, see
for them between the two Parts
R.
Rubarb, its Nature 94 Raking of a horse. 87 Roots 69 Rolling of Horses, and of
the Use thereof 11^. 118 and 119 Riding, who first Invented it. 121
S.
Shapes of a horse at large 67 Simples with Notes in general upon them 69
Sinews of a horse, their Number 70 Signs of the Zodiac, and Government of
them 73 Sickness dangerous, how it comes. 7^ Sickness accidental. 73 Sickness
Cured, when it comes, and to prevent it before it comes ib. Of Sickness in
General, and of the Signs from whence it proceeds. 81 and 86 Sorrances, what
they are in general, and Observations in the Cure of them. 88 Simples how mixed
87 Swellings hard and soft, and how you are to use them, in the Cure of them.
89 Of Sores 90 Suppositories, the several sorts of them from 94 to 96
Scourings, what they are 97 Scourings by Grass, by Sorrage, by Sallow and Elm,
by Thistles, by Malt* 98 Scouring of a little stronger Nature. ib. Of Shooing
and paring all manner of Hoofs, and in what Point the Art of it does consist
104 Shooing the perfect Hoofs and four Feet, and how the Shoo, Paring and Nail
should be made 106 Of Shooing the rough and brittle hoof 108 Of Shooing the
long Hoof 109 Of Shooing the crooked Hoof* ib. Of Shooing the flat Hoof ib. Of
Shooing the over-hollow Hoof. 110 Of Shooing the Hoof that has the broad
Frush* ib. Of Shooing the Hoof that has the narrow heel ib. Of Paring and
shooing of the hinder Feet 111 Of shooing the Hoof that has a false quarter
ib. Of shooing and paring the Hoof that is hoof-bound, 112 Of making of
planch-shooes. ib. Of paring and shooing for Enterfering* 111 Shoes with
Calkins, Rings, Welts and turning Vices, and of the patten shoo 112 and 113
Stars, white and black, and how to make them 120 and 154 Suppository, what it
is 146 A Suppository for inward Sickness 127 Salves, Unguents, powders and
Waters 132 and 133 Scouring and purging things in general 141 Particular
Scourings of all sorts for Running Horses, whose Grease must necessarily be
Molten, as also for a fat Horse 142 and 143 Sores and Ulcers of all sorts to
wash, general Simples good for them. 148 Swellings and Risings in the Skin,
hard or soft, general Simples good to take them away 149 Simples and their
certain Principles. ib. Sweat to cause, general Simples good for it 150 Sores
and Ulcers of all sorts to Cure, Simples good in general for them. 152 A
stubborn Horse to be made go. 154
T.
To Trim an unruly horse 154
V.
Of the Vital Blood 71 Veins, their Number that you are to take Blood from ib.
Veins opened, for what use ib. Veins taken up 90 Veins, for what cause they are
taken up 116 Of Vomits 134 Wounds cleansed, old or new, before you dress them
141 Wind to Expel Simples that are good for it in general 150 Venomous Beasts
of all sorts to Cure, General Simples good for them. 151
ERRORS that has Escaped the Press in the First Part of the Experienced
FARRIER.
PAGE 6. line 28. for Clod read Clot. p. 21. l. 38. f. li^ter up Horse r.
litter up your Horse. p. 44. l. 17. f. straight r. start. p. 52. l. 30. f.
Horse. r. Hose. p. 59. l. 7. f. o^g r. long. p. 62. l. 33. f. Melander r.
Malender. p. 72. l. 13. f. Crow-scab r. Crown-scab. p. 75. l. 19. f. Myly Mouth
r. Mayly Mouth. p: 77. l. 32, f. heat r. heats. p. 97. l. 29. f. small r. well.
p. ^00. l. 29. and 30. f. add them to. r. add to them. p. 102. In the Receipt
how to make Horse-spice, put into it A quarter of a pound of Liquoris powder,
and a quarter of a pound* of Anniseeds. which are left out of the Receipt. p.
102. l. the last. f. grie. r. grief p. 114. l. 22. f. Chords. r. Cords. p. 120.
l. 6. f. take of a little r. take a little. p. 125. l. 2. f. of Honey r. take
Honey. p. 147 l. 6. f. and it will r. will. ib. l. 28. f. Flag in Mortar r.
Flag braised in a Mortar. p. 149. l. 24. f. dispenses r. disperseth. p 150. l.
15. f. Ladanum r. Labdanum. p. 154. l. 3. ^. so over r. throw over. p. 157. l.
1. f. Jallop r. Jallap. ib. A Parenthesis wanting to make it sense. p. 164. l.
16. f. Creauna r. Creanna. ib. p. l. 20. f. suppupuration. r. suppuration. p.
165. l. 3. f. eing r. being. p. 168. l. 20. is is wanting. ib. p. l. 30. Irish
Slate 8. d. the pound r. 4. d. the pound.

THE EXPERIENCED FARRIER.
The First Part.
The Shapes of a Horse.

HE must have the Eyes and Joints of an Ox, the Strength of a Mule, the Foot of
the same, the Hoofs and Things of an Ass, the Throat and Neck of a Wolf, the
Ear and Tail of a Fox, the Breast and Hair of a Woman, the Boldness of a
Lion, the sharp and quick Sight of a Serpent, the Pace of a Cat, the Lightness
and Nimbleness of a H^re, a high Pace, a deliberate Trot, a pleasant Gallop, a
swift Running, a rebounding Leap and Present, and be quick in Hand.

The Colors of a Horse in Verse.
If you desire a Horse thee long to serve,
Take a Brown-bay, and him with Care preserve*
The Grey's not ill, but he is prized far
That is Cole-black, and blazed with a Star:
If for thy self, or Friend, thou will procure
A Horse, let him White- Lyard be, he will long endure,
The Shapes of a Horse. Another Way.
1. Ox.
He ought to have three of an Ox, which is a fair and full Eye, a large Neck*
and to be strong and short Joynted.

2. Fox.
Three of a Fox, which is to have a comely and short Trot, small and long
Ears, and a Bushy Tail.

3. Heart*
Three of a Heart. which is to have lean and dry Legs, to be well risen before,
and a lean Head.

4. Woman*
Three of a Woman, which is to have a fair and large Breast, to have a
beautiful and full Hair, and gentle to his Rider and Keeper.

A Proverb amongst Husbandmen.
If you have a Foal with four white Feet, keep him not a day.
If you have a Foal with three white Feet, make him soon away.
If you have a Foal with two white Feet, give him to thy Friend,
If you have a Foal with one white Foot, keep him to his Lives end,

These things are good to strew in a Horses Provender.
Turmerick, white Lilly Roots chopped small and dried.
The Powder of Anniseeds, Licoris, Fennegreek, Bay Berries, Brimstone, Alum,
Hemp Seed, Alacampane, or the Roots of Pollipodium of the Oak or Savin,
Marshmallowes, Rhue, Hysop, Hore-hound, Coltsfoot. If you give him the Herbs
green, you must chop them small, if dry, beat them to powder, which Simples
will keep him sound and in perfect Health; for their Virtues are to purisie the
Blood, prevent Obstructions, open and resolve the Liver, cool the Blood, keep
and preserve the whole structure of the body in sound and perfect Health.


These things you are always to have in a readiness by you.
Fennegreek a pound, Licoris half a pound, Bay Berries a quarter of a pound,
London- Treacle one pound, Anniseeds a quarter of a pound, Cummin-seeds a
quarter of a pound, Grains a quarter of a pound, Turmerick a quarter of a
pound, Long- Pepper two ounces, Alacampane half a pound, Alum half a pound,
Brimstone half a pound, green Copperas half a pound, Savin three handfuls,
Chopped- hair a handful.


These things Repeated over again, with their Virtues declared.
Fennegreek, Licoris, Bay Berries, London-Treacle, Anniseeds, Cummin-seeds,
Grains, Long Pepper, Alacampane, all good for Colds. Colds. Turmerick, good to
Purge the Blood, and to Cure the Yellows. Yellows. Brimstone, Alacampane,
Alum, Savin, Chopt-Hair, good for the Worms. Worms.


Throw these things among his Provender.

If you are ask's what fault your Horse has, if you know him to be sound, you
may answer him in this manner.
He has neither Splint, Spavin, nor wind, gall Scratches, Crepances, nor
Rats-tails, Mules nor Cib'd heels, Sellander, nor Mallender, Curb, Ring- bone,
Quitter- bone, Hough- bonny, Sit- fast, Ambury, Viues, but good Eyes and good
Thighs; Or if you can affirm him further to be sound, you may say he has
neither Farcin, Foundred-foot, broken- wind, Moulten- grease, nor Running
glaunders.

Of the Office of the Breeder.
The best Manner of Breeding.
YOU are not to breed in Fenny, Moorish Pastures, nor in Lands too Fertile, nor
too Barren, the Golden Number is the best temper, yet to incline a little to
hardness, is better then much rankness, the one breeds Health and the other
Disea^es. Let the situation be a little Hilly, and in some places stony and
rocky, for they are very good for Colts to play on, and helps their VVind,
and knitteth their Joints, and hardens and makes tough their Hoofs; and no
matter how rough and uncertain it is, for it will make them the more sure
footed. As much ground as will keep a Milch-Cow, will keep a Milch-Mare.

Change of Groudns.
You are to have three sorts of Grounds, one to Foal in, another to Summer in,
and a third to VVinter in. The first to be without danger, the second not to be
without shelter of Bushes, or under VVoods, to defend from Storms and
Tempests; and the third is, to have good Hovels, Sheds, Barnes, or
Back-stables, wherein may be stored VVinter-Provision. You are likewise to
Accommodate your Grounds with Partitions, to put each Cattle by themselves, as
your young and old, raze or breeding Mares by themselves, your VVeanlings by
themselves, your Fillies by themselves, and your stoned Colts by themselves, or
else your Breed will come to nothing, and you may run the hazard both of your
cost and pains.

Choice of Stallions.
You are to be careful, that neither your Stallion nor Mare have any of these
defects, viz. Neither Moon-eyes, watery-eyes, or Blood-shotten eyes, neither
Splint, nor Spavin, nor Curb, etc. Nor any Natural Imperfection, for the Colts
will take them as Hereditary from their Parents. I shall advise you that you
choose the best and ablest, the highest spirited, the fairest colored, and the
finest shaped, whether it be Neapolitan, T^rk, Spaniard, Barbary, English,
Dutch, Polander, French or German, and that you would inform your self of all
natural defects in the Stallion, (for it is impossible to find out absolute
perfection) and to amend them in the Mare, and what is amiss in the Mare, to
see it Repaired in the Horse.

The Age of Stallions and Mares.
A Stallien ought not to be younger then four years when he Covers a Mare,
and he will beget Colts from that Age to twenty. And a Mare may bring forth
from three years old to thirteen, when she is four years she will nourish her
Colt best, but after she is ten years she is not good, for commonly an old
Mare-Colt will be heavy in Labor.

Observations upon Covering.
Let your Mare be Covered from the end of the first Quarter to the full of the
Moon, or at the full, for those Colts will be more stronger and hardier of
Nature.

After the Change.
It is not good for Mares to be Covered after the Change, for those Colts will
be tender and nice.

The Wain.
Mark the VVain in that time the Mare was Covered, the same time of the Moon
she will Foal.

Burning.
If your Mare has been Covered, and the Colt Knit within her, if another Horse
covers her he burns her.

Of Spaying a Mare-Colt.
If a Mare-Colt be Spayed nine days after it is Foaled, she will prove (as some
say) Fair, Gallant and well.

Of Gelding of Colts.
The time of Gelding is when the Moon is in the Wain, the Sign in Arie: or
Virgo, the time of the year is early in the Spring or Fall.
Horses will be better shaped, and in less danger of Gelding, if they be Gelt
at nine or fifteen days old, if the Stones appear, or so soon as you find them
fall down into the God.

What time a Mare is to take Horse.
If your Mare be Covered of St. Lucies day, which is the thirteenth of
December, then she will Foal about St. Thomas's day, the same Month in the
year following.

How long time a Mare goes.
During the time of her going with Foal, from the day of her Covering unto the
day of her Foaling, is commonly twelve Months and ten days, unless it be a
young Mare upon her first Colt, which may come sooner.

How to Order her before she is Covered.
You are to take her into the House about six weeks before she is Covered, and
feed her well with good Hay and Oats, well sifted, to the end she may have
Strength and Seed to perform the Office of Generation. But if you would have
her certainly conceive, then take Blood from both sides of her Neck, and let
her bleed nigh a quart of either Vein, which you must do five or six days
before you have her Covered; If you desire to have a Horse-Colt of your Mare,
then let her be Covered when one of the first Masculine Signs do reign, which
are either Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, or Leo. But if she be Covered when
any of the Feminine Signs be Predominate, as Virgo, Libra, Scorpio,
Sagita^ius, Capricornus, Aquarius or Pisces, then be confident it will be a
Mare, for it is so certain, that it seldom or never fails, especially if the
VVind be either West or North, but West is best.

The Manner of Covering her.
You are to bring her out into some broad Place, and Tie her to a Post, then
bring out some Stone Jade to dally with her, to provoke her to Appetite, then
let the Stallion be led out by two men, and let him leap her, and let him do it
in the Morning Fasting, and when the Horse is dismounting, throw a pale full of
cold water upon her Shape, which by reason of the coldness will make her shrink
in, and truss up her Body, and will make her retain her Seed the better; then
take away the Stallion, and let her be put out of the Hearing of the Horse, and
let her neither eat nor drink in four or five hours after, and give her a Ma^^
and white water. If she stands to her Covering, you may know it by this, if she
keeps a good Stomach, and does not Neigh at the sight of a Horse, or if she
does not Piss often, or open and shut her Shape often; or that if her Belly,
four days after her Covering, be more gant, and her Hair more slick and close
to her skin, etc.

How many Mares for one Horse.
If you Cover abroad, one Horse will serve twelve Mares, if you expect no other
service from him; but if you keep him in the Stable where he has extraordinary
keeping, he will serve fifteen.

How to Order a Mare after Covering to her Foaling.
Keep her with the same Diet as before Covering, for three weeks or a Month
after, lest the Seed be empaired before it be formed in the Womb; and let her
be kept sweet and clean without any Exercise, during three weeks or a Month,
and to keep her in the House till mid- May, and not to turn her out before mid-
May, and with her Feet well pared, and a thin pair of Shoes upon them, and
take her in again the latter end of September, if not before, and keep her to
the end of her Foaling, and let her be loose in the Stable with good store of
straw with her, that so the Foal may fall the softer, for a Mare does usually
Foal standing.

How to help her if she cannot Foal.
If she cannot Foal, hold her Nostrils so that she cannot take her wind; or if
that will not do, take the quantity of a VVallnut of Madder, and dissolve it in
a Pint of old Ale, and being warm give it the Mare, if both fail, take the help
of some understanding Farrier. If she cannot avoid her Secundine, then boil two
or three Handfuls of Fennel in Running water, and take half a Pint of it with
as much Sack, or for want thereof, a Pint of strong Beer or Ale, with a fourth
part of Sallet Oil, mix them together, and give it her Lukewarm into her
Nostrils, and hold them close for a good space, or, for want thereof, give her
good green Wheat or Rye, (but Rye is the best) and they are as effectual. Let
her not eat her clean, for that is very unwholesom and will dry up her Milk.

To Order her after Foaling.
When she has Foaled, and licked her Foal, Milk and stroke her before the
Colt does suck, which will both cause her to bring down her Milk, but make it
to multiply, and keep it that it does not clod; which may cause her to become
dry, which if there be cause, boil as much Milk as you can get from her, with
the Leaves of Lavender, or Spike, and bath the Udder with it warm till it be
broken, and the Knobs and Knots dissolved. Let her water after Foaling be white
water, which is Bran put into her water, and give her sweet Mashes; and a Month
after her Foaling give her a Mash, and put into it some Brimstone or Savin,
which will be a great preservation to the Colt. And then if she be moderately
labored at Plough, or Harrow, the Mare and Colt will be the better, provided
she be kept from Raw Meats while she remains in the Stable, = which will both
increase her Milk, and cause her Colt to thrive the better. And that you suffer
not the Colt to suck when she is hot, lest thereby you Surfeit the Colt.

How long Foals are to run with their Dams.
Let them run with their Dams a full year at least, but if they be choice
Foals, then two years, for the loss of the use of the Mare will be no loss, in
comparison of the benefit you will receive by the Foal; but if you want
Accommodations VVean at seven Months, but be sure to keep them well, for what
they lose the first year they will hardly gain in three following; And at the
VVeaning give them Savin and Butter for diverse Mornings together, or else the
Worm and Gargil will hazard to destroy them; besides, have an eye to the
Strangle, for it is apt to essay them, and if not taken in time it will destroy
them; The first VVinter spare neither Hay nor Corn, that is, Oats in the Chaff,
or in the Sheaf, or give him any Offal that comes from any Grain whatsoever.

The Time of Foaling looked upon to be very improper, because in the
VVinter-Season.
The Time of Foaling, as I have said before, I would have in December or
January, which most hold to be a very improper time, the VVeather being cold,
and but little Grass, which of Necessity she must be Housed, and fed with hard
Meat, which will dry up her Milk, and so starve the Foal: But to satisfy this
Scruple, and to tell you, That Experience is the best Master, for certainly the
VVinter-season must needs be the best both for the Mare and Foal, being kept in
a warm House; and as for her Milk, she will have great plenty, being fed well,
and that more nourishing then that got at Grass, which will make him more
lusty, and of greater Bone and Stature, and cleaner Limbed, and more neatly
Joynted and Hoof'd, and in better liking then that Colt Foaled in May or June,
or any of the hotter Months, for though Grass does yield great plenty of Milk,
yet it is not so nourishing, because it is very thin and watery, therefore it
will not yield so substantial Nourishment as the VVinter-food, ^if it be good,
for though the quantity of Milk is not so great, yet it is of greater goodness;
And besides, the pinching Cold, Rains and Floods in VVinter, will so Nip the
poor Colt, and enfeeble the Mare in such desperate manner, that the wanting her
former plenty of Food and dry Lodging, her Milk will decay when the Colt has
most need of it, by which means they must needs both fall into extreme Poverty;
And over and above all this, by his Running abroad with the Mare, he becomes
so savage and wild, that if any Infirmity seize upon him, his own unruliness
being so great, the Cure may be very difficult, for infinite are the Number
that has perished in this kind.

When Mares are fit to take Horse.
Observe their Chasing and Galloping up and down morning and evening, and their
throwing up of their Noses, and lifting up of their Tails, riding on one
another Backs, often Pissing, or opening of their Shapes, and closing of them
again, which are Signs of Lust.

To know the true Shape, Spirit and Height of a Foal.
The same Shape that it carries at a Month old, he will carry at six years old,
if he be not abused in after-keeping, and as the good Shape, so the defects
also.

From the Shin-bone.
A large Shin-bone, that is long from the Knee to the Pastern in a Foal, shows
a tall Horse.

From the space between his Knee and VVithers.
Look what space he has between his Knee and VVithers, double that will be his
height when he is a complete Horse.

From their Spirits to know their goodness.
If they are stirring Spirits, free from affrights, wanton of disposition, and
very active in leaping and running, striving for Mastery, prove generally good
mettl'd Horses, the contrary, Jades.

From his Hoofs.
If his Hoofs be strong, deep, tough, smooth, upright standing and hollow, he
cannot be evil, for they are the Foundation of his Building, and lend Fortitude
from all the rest. Therefore the Barbary-Horse is well known by his Hoofs, for
there is no Horse has naturally so good a Hoof as he.

VVeaning of Foals.
VVean your ordinary Foals at the end of seven Months, your better at a year or
two, and let them not be within the hearing of one another, and keep them very
high the second year; but the third and fourth put them to hard Grasing.

Taming of Colts.
You are to make them familiar to you from the first VVeaning, and so VVinter
after VVinter (in the House) use them to familiar Actions, as Rubbing, Clawing,
Haltering, Leading to water, taking up of his Feet, knocking his Hoofs, and the
like.

The Time to break Colts.
The best Time to break Colts to the Saddle is at three years old, and the
advantage, or four at the utmost. But he that has the patience to stay to see
his Horse full five, shall be sure to have him of longer continuance, and less
subject to Disease or Infirmity, and on that (but by death) will hardly come to
the knowledge of tyring.

Coiling of the Stud, or making of Election.
I advise you by no means to make too early Coiling: for some Horses will show
their best Shape at two and three years old, and lose it at four, others not
till five, nay, six, but then keep it ever; some will do their best days work
at six or seven years old, others not till eight or nine. But be the time when
it will, let him preserve for his own use the best; those that be defective, I
mean, such as bring incurable desormities, gross Sorrances, as Spavins,
Ring-boncs, imperfect Eyes, or the like, make away with them.

Barren Mares.
If you f^nd any of your Mares grow into Barrenness, away with them, for though
I could prescribe you Remedies, yet they are not worthy of your use.

General Observations concerning Mares.
In length and height a Mare grows till she be five, and a Horse till he be
six years old.

Covering.
When a Mare is past two years old, she may be Covered, but the best time is
after four years old.

Bringing of Foals.
Common Mares may bring Foals every year, but let your best bring but every
second year, especially if they bring Horse- Colts.


To make a Mare stink Foal.
To make a Mare slink her Foal is to give her down her Throat with a Horn some
water, with three Grig Eeles, which will make her slink with a great deal of
safety.

To make her stand to Horse.
To make a Mare stand to Horse the better, is to let her stand by him two o^
three days before he cover her

Stallion for Trotters.
Let your Stallion for Trotters be either Ne^politan Courser, or Arabian, Turk,
or Barbary, and for Amblers, either the Spanish Jennet, or the Irish Hoboy.

Mares to Horse.
Put your Mares to Horse, from the middle of March, till the middle of May, or
middle June, the Moon having newly changed.

To put your Horse into an empty House.
It is good to put the Horse and the Mare for three or four Nights together in
an empty house, and take him away in the Morning, and feed him well, and feed
your Mare sparingly; but especially give her but little water.

Chasing the Mares.
At the end of six Months chase not the Mares, for then they are a quickening,
and may easily be made to cast their Foals.

The VVall-Eye.
The wall-Eye of a Horse or Mare does never see perfectly, especially when the
Snow is upon the Ground.

Choice of Mares.
For your choice of Mares you ought to respect their Shapes and Mettles, that
they be beautifully fore-handed, and that they be of a mean stature, large and
broad, and the Stallion of like shape, but somewhat broader and taller, and
temper their Natures thus. Put unto the hot Horse the cool Mare, and to the hot
Mare the cool Horse.

If you will Elect a Horse for Service and Warlike Employment, then these are
best.
The Neapolitan, the Sardinian, the Courser, the Almaine, the French, the
Jennet, or the Turk^.

Or if any of these Bastardized in themselves, or with a fair well Shaped and
Mettl'd English Mare.

For Swiftness.
If you will Elect for Swiftness, then

The Arabian, the Barbary, which is a Horse of Africa. The Spanish, the
Grecian, which is the Turkey Horse. Or any of these Bastardized in themselves
with our English Mares.

For Travel.
If you will choose for long Travel and Service. Then, the English, the
Hungarian, the Swedeland, the Poland, the Irish.

For Draught.
If you will choose for Draught and Service. Then, the Flanders, the Friesland,
or any of the Netherlands, either Bastardized in themselves, or with our
English Rases, and these are excellent for Coach, for Cart, for Pack or any
Burden. If you will choose for Ease, then the Irish.

To know whether your Mares be with Foal, or not.
If you pour a spoonful of cold Vinegar or Water into her Ear, if she shake
only her Head, it is a sign she is with Foal; but if she shake her Head, Body
and all, then it is a sign she is not with Foal. Or if she scoures, her Coat
grow smooth and shining, and that she grows Fat, it is a sign that she holds.

To make the Mare Conceive Male Foals.
To make your Mare Conceive Male Foals, is to keep your Stallion proud, and
your Mare poor; that his Lust mastering hers, he may only be predominate and
chief in the Action.

Of the Office of the Keeper.
Of the Horse in general, his Choice for every several Use, his Ordering, Diet,
and best Preservation for Health, both in Travel and in Rest.
Of the Nature of Horses in general.
HE is Valiant, Strong and Nimble, and above all other Beasts most apt and able
to endure the extremest Labors, the moist quality of his Composition being
such, that neither extreme heat does dry up his strength, nor the violence of
Cold, freeze the warm temper of his moving spirits, for he withstandeth all
defects of Sickness with an uncontrouled constancy. He is most Gentle and
Loving to Man, apt to be taught, and not forgetful when an Impression is fixed
in his Brain; he is watchful above all other Beasts, and will endure his Labor
with the most empty Stomach, he is naturally given to much cleanliness, he is
of an excellent Scent, and therefore not so much as to offend any man with his
evil Savours.

Your Choice of a Horse for the Wars.
Choose him of a tall stature with a comely Head, and out-swelling Forehead, a
large sparkling Eye, the white thereof covered with the Eyebrows, a small thin
Ear, short and pricking; if it be long, well carried, and ever moving, a deep
Neck, a large Crest, broad Breast, bending Ribs, broad and straight Chine,
round and full Buttocks, a Tail high and broad, neither too thick nor too thin,
a full swelling Thigh, a broad, flat and lean Leg, short Pasterned, strong
Joynted.

Colors of a Horse.
The best Colors are brown Bay, Daple-gray, Roand, Bright-Bay, Black, with a
white near Foot behind, white sore-Foot before, white Star, Chestnut or Sorrel,
with any of those marks, or Dun with a black List.

Horses for a Princes Seat.
If you will choose a Horse for a Princes Seat, or for any Supreme Magistrate,
or any great Lady; then choose the finest shape, that is Nimble, with an easy
Pace, and Gentle to get up, familiar and quiet in the company of other Horses,
and let his color be Milk-white, with red Frains or without, or else
Dapple-grey, with a white Mane, and white Tail.

Horses for Travel.
If you choose a Horse for Travel, choose him for Strength, viz. His Joints
strong, his Pastornes short and straight without bending in his going, hollow
and tough Hoofs, let him be of a temperate Nature, neither too furious, nor too
dull.

Hunting Horses.
If you choose a Horse for Hunting, let his Shape be generally strong, and well
knit together, making equal Proportions, for as unequal Shapes show weakness,
so equal Shapes show strength and durance; your unequal Shapes, are a great
Head and a little Neck, a big Body and a thin Buttock, a large Limb to a little
Foot, etc. Let him have a large and lean Head, wide Nostrils, open Chauld, a
big VVheasand, and the VVindpipe straight.

Running Horses
If you choose him for Running, let him have all the finest Shapes that may be.
Let him be nimble, quick and siery, apt to fly with the least motion; long
Shapes are sufferable, for though they show weakness, yet they assure sudden
speed.

Coach-Horses.
If you choose him for the Coach, which is called the swift Draught, let his
^hape be tall, broad and well furnished, not gross with much flesh, but with
the bigness of his Bones; let him have a strong Neck, a broad Breast, a large
Chine, sound clean Limbs, and tough Hoofs. And for this purpose your large
English Geldings are best, your Flemish Mares next, and your strong
Stone-Horses tolerable.

P^ck-Horses.
If you choose a Horse for Portage, that is, for the Pack or Hampers. Let him
have a strong Body and Limb:, but not tall, with a broad Back, out-Ribs, full
Shoulders and thick VVithers; for if it be thin in that Part, you shall hardly
keep his Back from Galling, and be sure he take a large stride, for he that
takes the largest stride goes at the most ease, and rids his Ground the
fastest.

Cart or Plough.
Lastly, if you will choose a Horse for Cart or Plough, which is the slow
draught, choose him that is of an ordinary height, for Horses in the Cart
unequally sorted never draw at ease, but the tall hang up the low Horse. Let
him be big, large Bodied and strong Limbed, by Nature rather inclined to crave
the Whip, then to draw more then is needful. And for this purpose, Mares are
most profitable, if you have cheap keeping for them, for they will not only do
your work, but bring you yearly increase; be sure you take them
well-forehanded, that is, good Head, Neck, Breast and Shoulders; for the rest,
it is not so regardful, only let her Body be large, for the more room a Foal
has in her Dams Belly, the sairer are his Members. And be sure you never put
your Draught-Beasts to the Saddle for that alters their Pace, and hurts them in
their Labor.

How to Order these several Horses. And first of the Horse for the Wars.
During his time of teaching, which is out of the Wars, you shall keep him
high; let his Food be good Hay and clean Oats, or two parts Oats, and one part
Beans or Pease well dried and hard, half a Peck at a Morning, Noon, and at
Evening is sufficient. In his days of rest, Dress him betwixt five and six in
the Morning, and Water him at seven or eight in the Afternoon. Dress him
between three and four, and Water him about four or five, and give him
Provender always after watering; Litter him at eight, and give Food for all
Night. The Night before he is ridden, about Nine at Night take away his Hay,
and at four of the Clock in the Morning give him a Handful or two of Oats,
which being eaten, turn him upon the Snaffle, Rub him all over with dry
Clothes, then Saddle him and make him Fit for his exercise; and when you have
done with him, bring him into the Stable all sweaty, as he is, and Rub him all
over with dry VVisps, then take off his Saddle, and after you have rubbed him
all over with dry Clothes, put on his Housing-Cloth, then put on the Saddle
again, and girt it, and walk him about gently while he be cold, then set him
up, and after two or three hours fasting, put him to his Meat, then in the
Afternoon, curb, rub and dress him, and water him, and order him as aforesaid.

Ordering a Horse for a Prince, or great Ladies Seat.
You must Order him in the time of his Rest, like unto the Horse for Service;
and in his time of Labor like the Traveling Horse, only you are to keep him
more choicely. I mean, in a beautiful manner, his Coat lying smooth and
shining; if he come in sweating into the Stable, after you have rubbed him down
take off the sweat with a Sword Blade, whose edge is rebated.

Ordering of Traveling Horses at home and abroad.
Feed him with good Hay in the VVinter, and good Grass in the Summer. His
Provender, let it be good dry Oats, Beans, Pease or Bread, according to his
Stomach; In the time of Rest, half a Peck at a Watering is sufficient, in the
time of Labor as much as he will eat with a good Stomach.

Of Watering in the Morning.
When you Travel him, Water two hours before you Ride, then rub, dress and
lustily feed, then bridle up, and let him stand an hour before you take his
back.

Of Feeding betimes.
In your Travel feed your Horse betimes for all night, that thereby he may the
sooner take his rest.

Moderate Traveling.
Travel moderately in the Morning, till his wind be rackt, and his Limbs
warmed, then after do as your Affairs require. Be sure at Night to water your
Horse two miles before you come to your Journey's end; then the warmer you
bring him to his Inn the better, walk not, nor wash not at all, the one does
beget Colds, the other Foundrings in the Feet or Body, but set him up warm,
well stopped, and well rubbed, with clean Litter; Give no Meat whilst the
outward parts of your Horse are hot or wet with sweat, as the Ear-roots, the
Flanck, the Neck, or under his Chaps; but being dry, rub and feed him according
to the goodness* of his Stomach.

To get a Stomach.
Change of Food begets a Stomach, so does the washing the Tongue or Nostrils
with Vinegar, Wine and Salt, or warm Urine.

Not to stop the Horses Feet with Cow Dung till they be cold.
Stop not your Horses Feet with Cow Dung till he be sufficiently cold, and that
the Blood and Humors which were dispersed, be settled into their proper places.

Look to his Back, Girts and Shoes.
Look well to his Back, that the Saddle hurt not; to the Girts, that they gall
not; and to his Shoes, that they be large, fast and easy.

Not to eat nor drink when he is hot.
Let him neither eat nor drink when he is hot, nor presently after his Travel.

To Labor him moderately, when the Weather is either extreme hot or cold.
Labor him moderately when the Weather is either extreme hot, or extreme cold,
that so you may avoid extreme Heats or sudden Colds.

Not to Travel him too late.
Travel him not too late, that your own eye may see him well dried, and well
fed, before you take your own rest.

The Saddle not to be presently taken off.
Take not the Saddle from your Horses Back suddenly.

Horse-bread very good Food.
Horse-bread which is made of clean Pease, Beans or Fitches, feeds
exceedingly.

River-water is not so good as standing-water.
Let your Horses Meat and Drink be exceeding sweet and clean, Standing-water is
better then River-water, for that is too piercing.

Swine and Pullen is naught to be nigh a Stable.
Let him lie clean and dry, keep your Stable sweet, let no Swine lie near it,
nor let any Pullen come within it.

Let the Light of your Stable be toward the South and North.
Let the Light of your Stable be ever toward the South and North; yet so as
the North-windows may in the Winter be shut close at Pleasure.

To be Tied with two Reins.
Let him be Tied with two Reins.

To Ride him on stony ways.
Ride him often on stony ways, that he may the better feel his Feet, and harden
his Hoofs.

Wheat-straw, and Oat-straw, best for Litter.
Let his Bed be of Wheat-straw above his Knees, the Barley-straw is the
softest, yet a Horse will covet to eat it, which is unwholesom; Wheat-straw,
though it be hard to lie upon, yet it is wholesome to eat, and as for Oat-straw,
it is the best in the Superlative, for it is not only wholesome to eat, but soft
to lie upon.

Of Dressing your Horse.
Curry or Dress your Horse twice a day, that is before water; and when he is
Curried, rub him well with your Hand, and with a Rubber, his Head should be
rubbed with a wet Cloth, and his Cods made clean with a dry Cloth, otherwise he
would be scabby between his Legs; you should wet his fore-top, his Mane and his
Tail with a wet Mane-Comb, and ever where the Horses Hair is thinnest, there
Curry the gentlest.

Of the Stable.
Let the Plaunchers of your Stable lie even and level, that your Horse may
stand at his ease, and not prove Lame by too much oppressing his hinder Feet.

A Mud-wall is naught to be nigh a Horse.
Let not any Mud-wall be within your Horses reach, for he will naturally covet
to eat it, and nothing is more unwholesom.

Chopped Straw is good to strew amongst his Provender.
Give your Horse plenty of Garbage (which is Chopped VVheat-straw) both with his
Provender and without, for it is a mighty Clenser of a Horses Body.

Bottles of Hay to be Tied hard.
Let your Hay-bottles be very little, and Tied very hard, for so your Horse
shall eat with a better Stomach, and make least waste.

To sprinkle the Hay with water is good, and to strew Fennegreek amongst his
Provender.
To sprinkle water upon your Hay is most wholesome, and to sprinkle Fennegreek
upon your Provender, is as sovereign; The ^rst is good for the VVind, the
latter for Worms.

Exercise good.
Let your Horse have daily Exercise, for that begets a good Stomach to his Meat.

Grafs is good once a year, to cleanse the Blood and cool the Body.
Purge your Horse once a year with Grass, or green Blades of Corn called
Forage, for fifteen days together; yet before you purge him, in any case let
him Blood, and whilst he is in Purging let him have no Prevender.

A Horse good store of Blood after Travel.
A Horse after Travel has ever more Blood then any Beast what^o^ever,
therefore it is good to take Blood from him to prevent the Yellows, or other
Diseases that may follow.

What you are to do in Case of Necessity, coming late to your Inn.
If you come late to your Inn, so that your Journey be great and earnest, and
that your Horse will not eat till he has drunk, and yet is hot
notwithstanding, then let his Drink be Milk given in the dark, lest the
whiteness make him refuse it; this is both cordial and pleasant: If you cannot
get Milk enough, then mingle Milk with water lukewarm.

To give him Mares Milk to drink if he be poor.
If your Horse either by Labor, or any Surfeits be brought low, lean and weak,
give him Mares Milk to drink many days*together, and it will make him strong.

The best-times to Water in the Winter.
The best Hours to water your Horse in the Winter (when he is at Rest) is
betwixt seven and eight in the Morning, or four or five in the Evening.

Not good to wash a Horse if he be hot.
It is not good to wash a Horse when he is hot, but you may wash him above the
Knees, so that you do not wash his Belly; and that you ride him after he is
washed, and so set him up and dress him. The purer the water is wherein you
wash your Horse, the more wholesome it is, so that it be not too extreme cold.

To light at every steep Hill.
When you Travel, at every steep Hill, light, both to refresh your Horse and
your self.

How a fat Horse is to have his Meat and his Water.
Let a fat Horse have his water at four times, and not as much as he will drink
at once, and let him stand two or three hours every day without Meat.

Rubbing is good for a Horse.
Rubbing much, hard and well, does profit, preserve, and it keeps both legs and
body in strength, and he does much delight in it, and it does better then much
Meat.

Boiled Barley is good.
Boiled Barley is a great Fatner of a Horse.

To Pick his Feet after Travel.
Cleanse and pick the Soles of his Feet ever after Travel, and stuff them well
with Ox-dung, and anoint his Hoofs with Grease, Tarr or Turpentine.

Much Rest naught.
Much Rest is the Nurse and Mother of many Diseases.

Be careful to look to your Saddle.
When you Ride, look often to your Saddle and your Horses Shoes, and you shall
find much more ease in your Journey.

A Horse-Mans Rule.
If you do intend to keep your Horse in his Skin,
Go softly out, and come softly in.
Riding softly.
Ride moderately the first two hours, but after according to your occasions.

Trotters Oil is good to help stiff Limbs.
Trotters Oil is an excellent Ointment, being applied very warm to your Horses
Limbs, to nimble them, and to help Stiffness and Lameness. And Dogs Grease is
better, therefore never want one of them in the Stable.

To Bath his Legs with cold water, is good to Keep his Legs from Scabs and
Swellings.
Bath the Forelegs from the knees and Gambrels downwards with cold water, for
it is wholesome, and both comfort the Sinews, and prevents Scabs and
Swellings.

To Wash at the Stable door, if Necessity requires.
If foul ways compel you to wash your Horses Legs, then do it with a Pail of
water at the Stable-door, rather then to endanger him in Pond or River; and for
walking, rather Sit on your Horses back to keep his spirit stirring, then to
walk him in your Hand, for he will soon catch Cold that way, the Wind and Air
getting between his Saddle and Back.

Dressing upon Travel and Rest.
Dress your Horse twice a day upon Rest, and once upon Travel.

Blooding.
Spring and Fall are the best times to take Blood from a Horse.

Ordering of Hunting Horses.
While he is at Rest, let him have all the quietness that may be, let him have
much Meat, much Litter, much Dressing, and Water ever by him, and let him sleep
as long as he pleases, keep him to Dung rather soft then hard, and look that
it be well colored and bright, for Darkness shows Grease, and Redness inward
heating. Let Exercises and Mashes of sweet Malt, after his usual Scourings; or
let Bread of clean Beans, or Beans and Wheat mixed together, be his best food,
and Beans and Oats the most ordinary.


Sir Robert Chernock's Manner of Hunting in Buck-season.
He never takes his Horse up into the Stable during the Season, but Hunts him
upon Grass, only allowing him as many Oats as he can well eat. And he approves
of this to be a very good way, by reason that if there be any Molten Grease
within him which violent Hunting may raise up, this going to Grass will purge
it out; He has Rid his Horse three days in a week during the Season, and never
yet found any hurt, but rather good by it, so that you turn your Horse out very
cool.

The Ordering of your Running Horse,
Let him have no more Meat then will suffice Nature, drink once in twenty four
hours, and dressing every day once at Noon only; Let him have moderate
Exercise Morning and Evening, Ayrings, or the fetching of his water, and know
no other violence but in his Courses only. If he be very fat, scour often; if of
reasonable stature, seldom; If lean, then scour but with a sweet Mash only;
let him stand dark and warm, having many Clothes and much Litter, and that
Wheat-straw only. Let him be empty before you Run, and let his Food be the
finest, lightest and quickest of Digestion that may be; The Sweats are most
wholesome that are given abroad, and the Cooling most natural which is given
before he comes into the Stable. Keep his Limbs with cool Ointments, and let
not any hot Spices come into his Body. If he grow dry inwardly, washed Meats is
most wholesome. If he grow loose, give him Wheat-straw in more abundance. And be
sure do every thing Neat and cleanly about him, which will Nourish him the
better.

Ordering of Coach-Horses.
Let them have good Dressing twice a day, Hay and Provender their Belly-full,
and Litter enough to tumble on. Let them be walked and washed after Travel, for
by reason of their many occasions to stand still, they must be inured with all
hardness, though it be much unwholesom. Their best food is sweet Hay, or well
dried Beans and Oats, or Beanbread; Look well to the strength of their Shoes,
and the Galling of their Harness; Keep their Legs clean, especially about their
hinder Fetlocks; And let them stand in the House warmly Clothed.

Ordering of the Pack and Cart-Horse.
They need no walking, washing, or hours of Fasting, only dress them well,
look to their Shoes and Backs, and then fill their Bellies, and they will do
their Labor. Their best Food is sweet Hay, Chaff or Pease, or Oat-hulls and
Pease, or chopped straw and Pease mixed together; To give them warm Grains and
Salt once a week will not be amiss, which will prevent the breeding of Worms,
and such like Mischief.

The Office of the Rider and Groom, and of things belonging to him, Viz. His
General and Particular Knowledge in Handling, Sadling, Mouthing, Backing and
Riding of the Great Horse, or Horse of Pleasure.
Of the Stable, and what it ought to be built with.
TO begin first with the Winter-house of the Horse, the Stable: You ought to
place it in a good Air, and to be made of Brick, and not Stone, for Brick is
most wholesome and warmest, for Stone will sweat upon change of Weather, which
begets damps, and causes Rheums in Horses. There ought not to be nigh it
any unsavory Gutter nor Sink, no Jakes, Hog-sty or Hen-Roust to annoy it. The
Rack ought to be placed neither too high nor too low, and so well-Placed, that
the Haydust fall not into his Neck, Mane nor Face. The Manger ought to be of an
indifferent height, made deep, and of one entire Piece, as well for strength as
convenience. Let the Floor be Pitched and not Planked, and let there be no Mud
or Lome-wall near it, for he will eat it, which will cause him to be sick, for
Lome and Lime are suffocating things, and they will infect and putrify the
Blood, and endanger his Lungs, and spoil his Wind; Neither let any dung lie
near his heels, for that will breed Cib'd and scabby heels.

Paving of Stables is better then Planked Stables for these Reasons.
First, they are much more durable and lasting.

Secondly, they are less charges by much.

Thirdly, for him to stand continually upon a pitched Floor, it emboldneth his
Feet and treading the more.

Fourthly, it is the most excellent thing that may be for Colts, who are
unshod, for it hardens their Hoofs, so that by custom they will be as bold to
go upon stones, rocky and hard ways, as Horses that are shod; neither will it
suffer the Hoofs to grow abroad in the manner of an Oyster; besides, the use
thereof will make their Hoofs more tough, durable and hollow, insomuch that
when they come to be shod, they will carry their Shoes much longer.

To show the Inconveniences of a Planked Floor.
First, it is more slippery, out of which reason a mettl'd Horse may be
endangered, to be lamed or spoiled by some sudden slip, which a pitched Stable
is not so subject to.

Secondly, the Planks oftentimes shrinking, if the Horse be high Mettl'd and be
subject to Curvet, he may break a Plank, and so Plunging may easily spoil or
break his Leg.

Thirdly, when you put forth your Horse to Grass in the Summer, the Sun will so
dry the Planks, that they will warp and loosen the Pins, and make them give
way, that so when Horses that have gone for some Months before, not being
handled, become wild and unruly, that when they come into the Stable, and feel
the Planks to give way under them, will fall to Flinging and Leaping till they
have dislocated the Planks, and not only both endanger himself but his Fellows
also.

Fourthly, whereas you may imagine a Planked Stable warmer then a Paved one, I
know the contrary, for your Pitched Floors have no Vaults or Channels under
them, like as your Planked ones have, to carry away the water that the Horses
make, by which means the Horses lies over a dampish, moist Vault; and besides,
the evil savor of the Horse-Piss will be ever in their Nose, which is very
unwholesom and noisome, and many times the cause of many infirmities; neither
can it be so warm as the other for chinks and holes, which are made by the
Awger through the Planks, (which must always be kept open to let forth the
Urine) to give way to the cold wind which comes from thence, which cannot but
be very unwholesom. Therefore I do affirm, that if your Groom do Litter up
Horse well, so that he may lie soft and warm, he will prosper better then upon
a Planked Floor, provided it be laid even, not higher before then behind, more
then will carry the water to his hinder-feet, where there ought to be a small
Gutter to carry it away, for by raising your Floor too much, his hinder Legs
will swell, and so he will become Lame, by reason he bears too much weight on
his hinder parts.

Of the Care in the Choice of a Groom.
After you have bred Colts according to my Instructions, and that that they
prove to your Mind, then the next care you ought to have is of Grooms, which
ought to be very expert in their Faculties, which consists their Making or
Marring, for you cannot say that a Colt three or four years old can be a
perfect Horse, till he come to be Handled and made fit for his Masters Riding,
which is to be made Gentle, Shod, Backed, Broken, Ridden, Wayed, Mouthed, and
in brief brought to his utmost Perfection. His Rider therefore must be an
Expert and able Horseman, and his Keeper every way as sufficient, otherwise
what defects you find in your Horse, are not to be attributed to him, but
either to his Rider, or to his Groom; therefore let your care be, that they be
both sufficient.

How a Rider ought to be Qualified.
If you desire your Colts to come to their utmost Perfection, then let your
Rider be one who is Cried up to be an Experienced Horseman; he must not be of
life dissolute or debaucht, nor of Nature harsh, furious, choleric or
hair-brained, for the least of either of these Vices are very unseemly in a
Person of this Profession; He must be Master over his Passions, for he that is
not cannot make a good Horseman. And it is not much to be wondered at, if a
Horse fall into Imperfections or Vices, for these his evil conditions and
faults are not so much to be imputed to the Horse, but to the Teacher, for he
is not a good Horseman that does not bring his Horse to Perfection, by sweet
and gentle means, rather then by Correction and severe Chastisements; yet not
but that I allow of Correction, and that it is as necessary as Meat, if it do
not exceed the limited Bounds of Moderation, and that it be done at the very
instant when he offends, and does justly merit the same, or else he will not
know the Cause why he is Chastised; so on the other side, when he does well,
let him be Cherished and made much of, which will encourage him to go forward
in well-doing.

What Manner of Person a Groom ought to be.
The Groom must be a Man that must truly love his Horse, and so shape his
course toward him, as that the Horse may love and dote upon him; for a Horse
is the most lovingest Creature to Man of all other bruit Creatures, and none
more Obedient to him; Wherefore, if he be mildly dealt withal, he will be also
reciprocal; but if he be harsh and choleric, the Horse will be put by his
Patience, and become Rebellious, and fall to biting and striking; For the old
Proverb is, Patience once wronged, will turn into Fury. He must continually
toy, dally and play with him, be always talking and speaking pleasing words
unto him; He must lead him abroad in the Sunshine, and then run, scope and
show him all the delight he can; he must duly Curry, Comb and Dress him, wipe
dust, pick and cleanse him, feed, pamper and cherish him, and be always doing
somewhat about him, either about his heels, or taking up his Feet, or rapping
him upon the Soles; And he must keep him so well dressed that he may almost see
his Face upon his Coat; he must keep his Feet stopped, and daily Anointed, his
Heels free from Scratches and other Sorrances, and to have so vigilant an eye
upon him, to oversee all his Actions, as well feeding as drinking, that so no
inward infirmity may seize upon him, but that he may be able to discover it,
and being discovered may seek for to Cure it.

To Saddle and Bridle a Colt.
When your Horse is made Gentle, take a sweet Watering Trench, washed and
Anointed with Honey and Salt, put it into his Mouth, and so place it, that it
may hang about his Tush; then offer him the Saddle; but with that carefulness
that you do not affright him therewith, suffering him to smell at it, to be
rubbed with it, and then to feel it; then in the end to Fix it on, and Girt it
fast, and at what part and motion he seems most coy, with that make him most
familiar; then being thus Sadled and Bridled lead him forth to water, then
bring him in, and after he has stood a little Reined upon the Trench, an hour
or more, take away the Bridle and Saddle, and let him go to his Meat till the
Evening, then lead him forth as before, and when he is set up Gently, take off
his Saddle and dress him, and cloth him up for all Night. The way to make him
endure the Saddle the better, is by making it familiar unto him, by clapping
the Saddle with your Hand as it stands upon his Back, to shake it and sway upon
it, to dangle the Stirrops by his Sides, and to rub them on his Sides, and make
much of him, and be familiar with all things about him, as straining the
Crooper, fastening and loosening the Girts, or taking up and letting out of the
Stirrops.

Of Mouthing.
When he will Trot with the Saddle obediently, then you shall wash a trench of
a full Mouth, and put it into his Mouth, and throw the Reins over the sore-part
of the Saddle, so that the Horse may have a full feeling of it; then put on a
Martingal, and you shall buckle it at such length, that he may no more then
feel it when he Jirketh up his Head, then take a broad piece of Leather, and
put it about the Horses Neck, and make the two ends of it fast by Platting, or
otherwise at the Withers and midpart before his Weasand, about two handfuls
below the Throple, betwixt the Leather and his Neck, let the Mattingal pass, so
that when at any time he shall offer to duck or throw down his Head, the
Cavezan being placed upon the tender Gristle of his Nose, may correct and
punish him, which will make him bring down his Head, and fashion him to an
absolute Rein. Then Trot him abroad, and if you find the Reins or Martingal
grow slack, straiten them, for where there is no feeling there is no Virtue.

Of Backing.
When you have Exercised your Horse thus, diverse Mornings, Noons, or Evenings,
and find him Obedient, then take him into some Ploughed Ground (the lighter the
better) and after you have made him Trot a good Pace about you in your hand,
and thereby taken from him all his wantonness, look and see whether your
tackling be firm and good, and every thing in his true and due place, you may
then (having one to stay his Head and govern the Chasing Rain) take his Back,
yet not suddenly, but by degrees, and with diverse heavings, and half-raisings,
which if he endure patiently, then settle your self; but if he shrink or
dislike, then forbear to mount, and chase him about again, and then offer to
mount, and do thus till he be willing to receive you. Then when you are settled,
and have received your Stirrops and Cherisht him, put your Toes forward, and he
that stays his Head, ler him lead him forward half a dozen Paces, then Cherish
him; then lead him a little further and Cherish him, and shake and move your
self in the Saddle, then let him stay his Head, and remove his Hand a little
from the Cavezan, and as you thrust forwards your Toes, let him move him
forward with his Rein, till you have made the Horse apprehend your own Motion
of Body and Foot, (which must go equally together, and with spirit also) so
that he will go forward without the other Assistance, and stay upon the
restraint of your own hand, then Cherish him, and give him Grass and Bread to
eat, alight from his Back, then mount and unmount twice or thrice together,
ever mixing them with Cherishings. Thus Exercise him till you have made him
perfect in going forward, and standing still at your pleasure.

Helps at first Backing.
When this is effected, you may lay by the long Rein, and the Band about the
Neck, and only use the Trenches and Cavezan, and the Martingal, and let a Groom
lead the way before you on another Horse, and go only straight forward, and
stand still when you please, which will soon be effected, by Trotting him after
another Horse, and bring him home sometimes after the Horse, and sometimes
equally with him, and sometimes before, so that he may six upon no certainty,
but your own pleasure; And be sure to have regard to the well-carriage of his
Neck and Head, and as the Martingal slackneth so to streighten it.

What Lessons for what Horse.
When this Work is finished, then Teach your Horse these Lessons: As if he be
for Hunting, Running, Travel, Hackney, or the like, then the chiefest things
you are to apply your self to, are to preserve a good Mouth, to Trot freely and
comely, to Amble surely and easily, to Gallop strongly and swiftly, to Obey the
Hand in stopping gently, and Retiring willingly, and to turn on the other Hand
readily and nimbly. But if you intend him for the great Saddle, or the use of
the Wars, then although the Lessons be the same, yet they are to be done in a
more punctual manner. So that if any Horse can be brought to the best, the
easier must needs follow with little industry. And it is a Rule in
Horseman-ship, That no Lesson which belong to the Wars can be hur^ful, or do
injury to any Horse whatsoever, that is kept for any other purpose. Whence it
comes, that any Horse for the Wars may be trained for a Runner, or Hunter, at
pleasure; but every Runner, or Hunter, will not serve the Wars; and every
Horseman that can make a Horse for the Wars, may be a Jocky when he pleases;
but no Jocky (that I know) can make a Horse for the Wars. Therefore I will run
a middle way, and suit my Lessons to both purposes.

Helps and Corrections.
Before you Teach your Horse any Lessons, you must know there are seven Helps
to advantage him in his Lessons, to punish him for faults gotten in his
Lessons. And they be, The Voice, the Rod, the Bit or Snaffle, the Calves of the
Legs, the Stirrup, Spur, and the Ground.

Voice.
The Voice is an help when it is sweet and accompanied with Cherishings, and it
is a Correction when it is rough or terrible, and accompanied with strokes or
threatenings.

Rod.
The Rod is an help in the shaking, and a Correction in the striking.

Bit or Snaffle.
The Bit is an Help in its sweetness, the Snaffle in its smoothness, and they
are Corrections, the one in its hardness, the other in its roughness, and both
in slatness and squareness.

Calves of the Legs
Are Helps when you lay them to the Horses Sides gently, and Corrections when
you strike them hard, because they give warning that the Spurs follow.

Stirrup and Stirrop-Leathers.
Are Corrections, when you strike it against the hinder part of the Shoulder,
and they are Helps when you thrust them forward in a quick Motion.

Spur.
Is a Help when it is gently delivered in any Motion that asks quickness and
agility, whether on the Ground, or above the Ground, and a Correction when it
is stricken hard in the sides, upon any sloth, or any fault committed

The Ground.
The Ground is an Help when it is plain and smooth, and not painful to tread
upon; and it is a Correction when it is rough, deep and uneven, for the
Amendment of any Vice conceived.

Of large Rings,
When your Horse will receive you to and from his Back gently, Trot forward
willingly, and stand still obediently. Then intending him for the Wars, or
other purpose, (for these Lessons serve all occasions,) you shall in some
gravelly or sandy place, where his Footsteps may be discerned, labor him
within the large Ring, that is, at least fifty Paces in Compass; And having
Trod it about three or four times on the right hand, rest and cherish; then
change the Hand again, and do as much on the left Hand, then rest and cherish;
and change the Hand again, and do as much on the right Hand, ever observing
upon every stop to make him retire and go back a step or two.

Thus labor him, till he will Trot his Ring on which Hand you please, changing
within the Ring in the manner of a Roman S, and to do it readily and willingly;
Then teach him to Gallop them as he did Trot them, and that also with true
Footing, lofty Carriage and brave Rein, ever observing when he Gallops to the
right Hand, to lead with his left forefoot, and when he Gallops to the left
Hand, to lead with the right forefoot.

Object. Now here is to be cleared a Paradox held by many of our Horsemen,
which is, That the Exercise of the Ring is not good for Running Horses, because
it raises up his fore-feet, and make him Gallop painfully, and so an hindrance
unto speed.

Answ. But if they consider that this habit, (if it be taken) is soon broken,
either by the Horse-mans hand or discretion, who has Power to make him move as
he pleases; Or if they will truly look into the benefit of the thing it self,
they shall find it is the only means to bring an Horse to the true use of his
Feet, and the nimble carriage of them in all advantages. For every Runner of
Horses will allow, that for an Horse (in his course) to lead with his right
foot, is most proper, and when at any time he breaks or alters it, it must be
disadvantage, because, (not well acquainted to lead with the other,) he cannot
handle it so nimbly. Now at his first Backing, by the use of his Ring and
Change of Hands, he will become so expert and cunning with both, that
whatsoever mischance shall alter his stroke, yet shall his speed and nimbleness
keep one and the same goodness.

Of Stopping.
When you come to the place of Stop, or would stop, by a sudden drawing in of
your Bridle-hand, somewhat hard and sharp, make him stop close, firm and
straight, in an even Line; and if he err in any thing, put him to it again, and
leave not till you have made him understand his error, and amend it.

Advancing.
Now if you do Accompany this stop with an Advancement a little from the
Ground, it will be more gallant, and may be done by laying the Calves of your
Legs to his Sides, and shaking your Rod over him as he stops.

If it chance at first he understand you not, yet by continuance and laboring
him herein, he will soon attain unto it, especially, if you forget not to
cherish him, when he gives the least show to apprehend you.

Retiring.
After Stopping and Advancing, make him Retire, as before showed. And this
Motion of Retiring, you must both Cherish and Increase, making it so familiar
with him, that no Lesson may be more perfect; neither must he retire in a
confused manner, but with a brave Rein, a constant Head, and a direct Line;
neither must he draw or sweep his Legs one after another, but take them clean,
nimbly and loftily, as when he Trotted forward.

Of Bitting.
When your Horse is come to Perfection in these Lessons, and has his Head
firmly settled, his Reins constant, and his Mouth sweetened; You may then (if you
intend him for the Wars) take away his Trench and Martingal, and only use the
Cavezan of four or three Pieces, that is, a Joint or no Joint in the midst, and
to that Joint a strong Ring, and a Joint of each side, with Rings before the
Joints, to which you shall put several Reins to use, either at the Post or
otherwise. Into his Mouth you shall put a smooth sweet Canon bit, with a French
Cheek suitable to the Proportion of the Horses Neck; knowing that the long
Cheek raises up the Head, and the short pulls it down. And with these you shall
Exercise the Horse in all the Lessons before taught, till he be perfect in
them, without disorder or amazement.

Of straight Turns and Turnings.
When he is settled upon his Bit, then you are to teach him to turn roundly and
readily in the streighter Rings; and of these there are diverse kinds, and
diverse methods to teach them. But I shall Fix upon two manner of straight
Turns, as the Perfection from whence all Turnings are derived.

The one is when a Horse keeps his hinder Parts inward and close to the Post
or Center, and so comes about and makes his Circumference with his hinder
Parts, opposing face to face with his Enemy.

The first straight Turn.
You shall to the Ring in the mid-part of the Cavezan, Fix a long Rein of two
Fathom or more, and to the other Rings two other shorter Reins; then having
Saddled the Horse, and put on his Bit, bring him to the Post, and put the Reins
of the Bit over the forepart of the Saddle, Bolsters and all, and Fix them at
a constant streightness on the top of the Pomel, so that the Horse may have a
feeling both of the Bit and Curb. Then if you will have him turn to the right
hand, take the short Rein on the left side of the Cavezan, and bringing it
under the fore-Bolster of the Saddle up to the Pomel, and there Fix it at such
a streightness, that the Horse may rather look from, then to the Post on the
right side. Then let some Groom or skilful Attendant hold the right-side Rein
of the Cavezan at the Post, governing the fore-parts of his Body to come about
at large: Then your self taking the long Rein into your hand, and keeping his
hinder parts inward, with your Rod on his outward Shoulder, and sometimes on
his outward Thigh, make him move about the Post, keeping his inward parts as a
Center, and making his fore-parts move in a larger Circumference. Thus you
shall Exercise him a pretty space on one hand, till he grow to some
Perfectness; then Changing the Reins of the Cavezan, make him do the like to
the other hand. And thus apply him diverse Mornings, and cherishing him in his
Exercise according to his deservings, till you have brought him to that
readiness, that he will upon the moving of your Rod couch his hinder Parts in
toward the Post, and lapping the outward fore-leg over the inward, Trot about
the Post swiftly, distinctly, and in as strait a Compass as you can desire, or
is convenient for the motion of the Horse; And from Trotting you may bring him
to Flying and Wheeling about, with that swiftness, that both the forelegs
rising and moving together, the hinder Parts may follow in one and the same
instant. When you have made him thus perfect in your hand, you shall then Mount
his Back; and making some skilful Groom govern the long Rein, and another the
short, by the Motion of your Hand upon the Bit, and soft Rein of the Cavezan,
keeping the Horses Head from the Post, and by the help of the Calve of your Leg
laid on his Side, and your Rod turned toward his outward Thigh, to keep his
hinder parts into the Post, labor and exercise him till you have brought him
to that Perfection which you desire. Then take away the long Rein, and only
exercise him with the help of the short Rein of the Cavezan, and no other.
After take both the Reins of the Cavezan into your hands, and exercise him from
the Post; making him as ready in any place where you please to Ride him, as he
was at the Post.

The other straight Turn.
Now for the other straight Flying Turn, which is to keep his Face fixed on the
Post as on his Enemy, and to move about only with his hinder parts, you shall
take the same helps of the long Rein, and the short Reins of the Cavezan, and
govern them, as before showed, only you shall not give the short Rein to the
Post-ward, so much liberty as before, but keep his Head closer to the Post, and
following his hinder parts with the long Rein, by the help of your Rod make him
bring his hinder parts round about the Post; and observe, that as before he did
Iap one foot over another, so now he must lap the hinder Legs one over another.
In this Exercise, exercise him as the former, then (after a perfectness) mount
his Back, and labor him, as before showed. Then lastly, leaving the Post and
all other helps, only apply him in such open and free places as you shall think
couvenient, for upon the finishing of this Work your Horse is made complete,
and can perform all things that can be required, either for the Service in the
Wars, for the Highway, or any other Galloping Pleasure.

How to Help an ill Rein, and Cure a Runaway Jade.
Many Horses are so evil -beholding to Nature, for giving them short Necks, and
worse set-on Heads, and so little beholding to Art to amend them, which causes
many a good Horse to be left Cureless of those two gross insufferable faults,
which are either a deformed carriage of the Head, like a Pig on a Broach, or
else a furious Running away, got by a spoiled Mouth, or an evil habit.

The Help.
If it be a young Horse at his first Riding, then to his Trench; if an old,
then to his Snaffle, (for I speak not of the Bit) but a pair of Reins, half as
long again as any ordinary Reins, and Loops to fasten and unfasten at the Eye
of the Snaffle, as other Reins have. Now when you see that the Horse will not
yield to your Hand, but the more you draw the more he thrusts out his Nose, or
the more violently he runs away; then undo the Buttons of the Reins from the
Eye of the Snaffle, and draw them through the Eyes, and bring them to the
Buckles of the foremost Girt, and there button them fast: then Riding the Horse
in that manner, labor him with the gentle Motions of your Hand, coming and
going by degrees, and sometimes accompanied with your Spur, to gather up his
Body, and to feel your Command, and in a short time he will bring his Head
where you will place it. And for Running away, if you draw one Rein, you turn
him about in despite of all Fury; and if you draw both, you break his Chaps, or
bring them to his Bosom. In the end, finding himself not able to Resist, he
will be willing to obey.

Another Help for unc^nstant Carriage.
There is another soul Error in many Horses, which these Reins also Cure, as
this, When your Horse is either so wythie cragg'd (as the Northern Man calls
it) or so loose and unsteady Necked, that which way soever you draw your Hand,
his Head and Neck will follow it, sometimes beating against your Knees,
sometimes dashing against your Bosom, and indeed, generally so loose and
uncertain, that a man knows not when he has steady hold of him; A Vice
wonderful incident to Running Horses, especially the furious ones. In this Case
you shall take these long Reins, and as before you drew them to the Buckles of
the Girts, so now Martingal-wise draw from the Eyes of the Snaffle, betwixt his
Forelegs to the Girts, and there fasten them. Thus Ride him with a constant
Hand, firm and somewhat hard, Correcting him both with the Spurs and Rod, and
sometimes with hard Twitches in his Mouth when he errs; and with a few weeks
labor, his Head will come to a constant carriage, provided, that you labor
him as well upon his Gallop as his Trot, and leave him not till you find him
fully reclaimed.

The Office of the Feeder.
An Introduction to the Work touching the Limitation of time for Preparing the
Running Horse.

I will not dispute the several Opinions of Men in this Kingdom, touching the
Keeping of Running Horses, because they are idle and frivolous. Only this I
shall do, clear one Paradox, and that is the limitation of time, allowed for
the making ready of a Horse for a Match or Wager.

Some do affirm, that a Horse newly taken from Grass, being foul, cannot be
made fit under six Months: By which they Rob their Masters of half a years
pleasure, thrust him upon a tyring Charge to make the Sport lothsom, and get
nothing but a Cloak for Ignorance, and a few false got Crowns, that melt as
they are possessed.

Their Reasons.
Yet as Heretics cite Scripture, so these find Reasons to defend want of
Knowledge.

As, The danger of too early Exercise, the Offense of Grease suddenly broken,
the Moving of evil Humors too hastily, which leads to mortal Sickness; And the
Moderation, or Helping of these by a slow Proceeding, or bringing of the Horse
into Order by degrees and time; Or (as I may say) by an ignorant Sufferance.

These Reasons have show of a good Ground, for too early Exercise is dangerous,
but not if free from violence.

To break Grease too suddenly is an offense insufferable, for it puts both
Limbs and Life in hazard, but not if it be purged away by wholesome Scourings.
The hasty stirring up of Humors in the Body, where they superabound, and are
generally dispersed, and not settled, cannot choose but breed Sickness; but not
where Discretion and Judgment evacuateth them in wholesome, sweet and moderate
Ayrings.

Long time Inconvenient.
And for the Moderation of all these, by the tediousness of time, as two Months
for the first, two Months for the second, and as much for the last. It is like
the Curing of the Gangreen in an old man; better to die then to be dismembered,
better lose the price then bear the charge. For I appeal to any Noble
Judgment, whose Purse has experienced these Actions, if six Months
Preparation, and the dependents to it, do not devour up a hundred pounds wager.

Now I allow but of two Months time at any time of the year whatsoever, for an
old Horse, or an Horse formerly trained, for I speak not of Colts; if he does
it not in two Months, he shall not do it in fifteen.

But reply they, no Scouring is to be allowed, for they are Physical; they
force Nature, and so hurt Nature; they make Sickness, and fo empair Health. And
that indeed nothing is comparable to the length of time, because Nature works
every thing it self, and though she be longer, she has less danger.

I confess that Sibbesauce Scourings, which are stuffed with poisonous
Ingredients, cannot choose but bring forth Infirmity; but wholesome Scourings,
that are composed of beneficial and nourishing Simples, neither occasion
Sickness, nor any manner of Infirmity, but brings away Grease and all foulness,
in that kindly and abundant sort, that one week shall effect more then two
Months dilatory and doubtful forbearance,

I call it dilatory and doubtful, because no man (in this lingering Course) can
certainly tell which way the Grease and other soulness will avoid, as whether
in his Ordure (which is the safest) into Sweat, (which is hazardous,) into his
Limbs, (which is mischievous) or remain and putrify in his Body, (which is
mortally dangerous) since the Issue of any, or all these fall out according to
the strength and estate of the Horses Body, and the diligence of the Feeder.
And if either the one fail in Power, or the other in Care, Farewell Horse for
that year.

All this Envy cannot choose but confess; only they have one broken Crutch to
support them, which is, they know no Scouring, therefore they will allow of no
Scouring.

Against Barbarism I will not dispute, only I*appeal to Art or Discretion,
whether Purgation or Sufferance, when Nature is offended, be the better doers.

But they Reply by a Figure called, Absurdity, that whatsoever is given to any
Horse more then his Natural Food, and which he will Naturally and willingly
receive, is both improper and unwholesom, To this I Answer, the Natural Food of
Man is Bread only, all other things (according to the Philosopher) are
superfluous, and so to be avoided.

At this Argument both Humanity and Divinity laughs. For other Helps, as
Physic, diverse Meats, and diverse Means, ordained for both, even by the Power
of the Almighty himself, tells the Contemners hereof, how grossly they err in
this foolish Opinion. Nay, allow them a little shadow of truth, that things
most Natural are most beneficial, then it must follow, that Grass or Hay,
(which is but withered Grass) is most natural, and so most beneficial. Now
Grass is Physical, for in it is contained all manner of Simples, of all manner
of Mixtures, as hot, cold, moist, dry, of all qualities, all quantities. So
that whatsoever I give (which is good) is but that which he has formerly
gathered out of his own Nature, only with this difference, that what he
gathers is in a confused manner, clapping contraries together so abundantly,
that we are not able to judge where the Predominant Quality lies; and that
which we compound is so governed by Art and Reason, that we know how it should
work, and we expect the event, if it be not crossed by some greater disaster.

But will they bind themselves to keep the Running Horse only with Grass or
Hay? They know then the end of their Labors will be loss. Nay, they will allow
Corn, nay, diverse Corns, some nourishing and loosening, as Oats and Rye; some
Astringent and Binding, as Beans; and some Fatning, breeding both Blood and
Spirit, as Wheat; nay, they will allow Bread, nay, Bread of diverse
Compositions, and diverse Mixtures, some before heat, and some after, some quick
of Digestion, and some slow, And if this be not as Physical as Scourings a good
Horseman gives, I repent me that I have said any thing.

Nay, these Contemners of Scourings will allow an Egg, and that mixed with other
Ingredients. And for Butter and Garlic they will use it, though it be never so
fulsom; the Reason is, because their knowledge can arise to no higher a Stair
in Physic; and Authorized Ignorance will ever wage battle with the best
Understanding; Like foolish Gallants on St. George's day, who neither having
ability to buy, nor Credit to borrow a Gold Chain, scorn at them that wear
them; or Martin Mar-Prelate, that not having Learning worthy of a Deacon, found
no felicity, but in Railing at Divine Fathers. There are another sort of
Feeders, which in a contrary extreme, run beyond these into mischiefs, and
those are they that ov r-scoure their Horses, and are never at Peace, but when
they are giving of Portions, (which they call Scourings) sometimes without
cause, always without order, bringing upon an Horse such intolerable weakness,
that he is not able to perform any violent labor.

From this too little, and too much, I would have our Feeder to gather a mean;
that is, first to look that his Simples be wholesome: then to the occasion, that
he be sure there is foulness: And lastly, to the Estate of Body, that he may
rather Augment then decrease Vigor, so shall his Work be prosperous, and his
Actions without Controulment. To conclude, two Months I allow for Preparation,
and according to that time have laid my directions. Mine humble suit is, out of
a sincere Opinion to Truth and Justice, so to allow or disallow, to refrain or
imitate.

The first Ordering of the Running Horse. according to the several Estates of
their Bodies.
This Office of the Feeder, albeit in general it belong to all Horsemen, yet
in particular it is most appropriate to the Feeder of the Running-Horse;
because other general Horses have a general way of Feeding, these are
Artificial and Prescript from, full of Curiosity and Circumspection, from which
whosoever errs, he shall sooner bring his Horse to destruction then perfection.
You are to have regard to three Estates of a Horses Body.

The first is, if he be very Fat, Foul, or either taken from Grass or Soil.

The second, if he be extreme Lean and poor, either through over-Riding,
disorder or other infirmity.

And the third, if he be in good and well-liking estate, having had good usage
and moderate exercise.

If he be in the first Estate of Body, you shall take longer time for his Feed,
as two Months at the least: for he will ask much labor in Airing, great
carefulness in hearing, and discretion in Scouring, and rather a strict then
liberal hand in feeding, If he be in the second Estate of Body (which is poor)
then take a longer time, and let his Airings be moderate, as not before and
after Sun, rather to increase Appetite then harden Flesh, and let him have a
bountiful hand in Feeding, but not so much as to cloy him.

If he be in the third Estate of Body, which is a mean betwixt the other
extremes, then a Month of six Weeks, or a Fort-night, or less, may be time
sufficient to diet him for his Match. Now as this Estate participates with both
the former, so it would borrow from them a share in all their Orderings, that
is, to be neither too early, nor too late in Airings, laborious, but not
painful Heatings, nourishing in Scouring, and constant in a moderate way of
Feeding.

To have an Eye to the particular Estate of a Horses Body.
Now as you regard these general Estates of Bodies, so you must have an eye to
certain particular estates of Bodies. As if an Horse be Fat and Foul, yet of a
free and spending Nature, apt quickly to consume and lose his Flesh, this Horse
must not have so strict a Hand, neither can he endure so violent Exercise as he
that is of an hardy disposition, and will feed and be fat upon all Meats and
all Exercises.

Again, if your Horse be in extreme Poverty, through disorder and misusage, yet
is by Nature very hard, and apt both soon to recover his Flesh, and long to
hold it; then over this Horse you shall by no means hold so liberai a hand, nor
forbear that Exercise, which is of a tender Nature, a weak Stomach, and a free
Spirit, provided always you have regard to his Limbs and the Imperfections of
Lameness.

The first Fortnights feeding of an Horse for Match, that is, fat, foul, or
either newly taken from Grass or Soil.
If you Match a Horse that is fat and foul, either by running at Grass, or
standing at Soil, or any other means of Rest, or too high feeding; you shall
(after his Body be emptied, and the Grass avoided, which will be within three
or four days) for the first Fortnight at leust, rise early in the Morning
before day, or at the spring of day according to the time of the year; and
having put on his Bridle washed in Beer, and tied him up to the Rack, take away
his dung and other foulness of the Stabie; then dress him well, as in The
Office of the Keeper. When that Work is finished, take a fair large Body-cloth
of thick House-Wives Kersie, (if it be in Winter,) or of Cotton or other light
stuff (if it be in Summer,) and fold it round about his Body, then clap on the
Saddle, and Girt the foremost Girt pretty straight, but the other somewhat
slack, and Wisp it on each side his Heart, that both the Girts may be of equal
streightness.

Then put before his Breast a Breast-cloth suitable to the Body-cloth, and let
it cover both his Shoulders, then take a little Beer into your Mouth, and
squirt it into the Horses Mouth, and so draw him out of the Stable, and take
his Back, leaving a Groom behind you to trim up the Stable to carry out your
dung, and to truss up the Litter. For, you are to understand that he is to
stand upon good store of dry Litter both Night and Day, and it must be
Wheat-straw or Oat-straw, for Barley-straw and Rye-straw are very unwholesom
and dangerous, the one does Heart-burn, the other causes Scouring. When you
are Mounted, Rack the Horse a Foot-pace, (for you must neither Amble nor Trot,
for they both hurt speed) at least a mile or two, or more, upon smooth and
sound Ground, and (as near as you can) to the steepest Hills you can find;
there Gallop him gently up those Hills, and rack and walk him softly down, that
he may cool as much one way, as he warmeth another. And when you have thus
exercised him a pretty space, and seeing the Sun begin to Rise, or else Risen,
Rack down either to some fresh River, or clear Pond, and there let him drink at
his pleasure. After he has drunk bring him gently out of the water, and so
Ride him a little space with all gentleness, and not according to the ignorance
of some Grooms, ru^h him presently into a Gallop, for that brings with it two
Mischiefs, either it teaches the Horse to run away with you so soon as he is
watered, or else refuse to drink, fearing the violence of his Exercise which
follows upon it. When you have used him a little calmly, put him into a Gallop
gently, and exercise him moderately, as you did before; then walk him a little
space, after offer him more water; if he drink, then Galhim again (after calm
usage;) if he refuse, then Gallop him to occasion thirst. And thus always give
him Exercise both before and after water. When he has drunk sufficient, bring
him home gently, without a wet Hair, or any sweat about him. When you come to
the Stable Door, provoke him to Piss if you can, by stirring up his Litter
under him, which if he do not a little custom will make him do it, and it is a
wholesome Action, both for his Health and the sweet keeping of the Stable. This
done, bring him to the Stall, and Tie him up to the Rack, and Rub him well with
Wisps, then loose his Breast-Cloth, and Rub his Head and Neck with a dry Cloth,
then take off the Saddle and hang it by, then take his Body-Cloth and Rub him
all over with it, especially his Back, where the Saddle stood. Then Cloth him
up first with a Linnen-sheet, and then over that a good strong Housing-Cloth,
and above it his Woollen Body-cloth, which in the Winter it is not amiss to
have loyned with some Cotton, but in the Summer the Kersie is sufficient. When
these are Girt about him, stop his Circingle with small Wisps very loose, for
they will be the softer.

His Feet stopped with Cows dung.
After he is Clothed, stop his Feet with Cows dung, then throw into the Rack a
little bundle of Hay, hard bound together, and well dusted, and let him eat it,
standing upon his Bridle. When he has stood an hour upon his Bridle, take it
off, and Rub his Head and Neck very well with a Rubber of Hempen Cloth, for
this is good to dissolve all gross and thick Humors from the Head; Then after
you have made clean the Manger, take a quart of sweet, dry, old and clean
dressed Oats, for those that are unsweet breed infirmities; Those that are
moist cause swelling in the Body; Those that are New breed Worms; And they
which are half-dress'd deceive the Stomach, and bring the Horse to ruin.
Though the black Oat is tolerable, yet it makes foul dung, and hinder a Man's
knowledge in the state of his Body. This quart of Oats you shall dress in such
a Sieve as will let a light Oat pass thorough it, and if he eat them with a
good stomach, let him have another, and let him rest till eleven of the Clock.
Then Rub his Head and Neck as before, and dress him another quart of Oats, then
leave him till one of the Clock, with the Windows close, for the darker you
keep him the better, and will cause him to lie down and take his rest, which
otherwise he would not, therefore you are to Arm the Stable with Canvass, both
for darkness, warmth, and that the filth may not come near him. Then at one of
the Clock use him as you did before, and give him another quart of Oats in the
same manner, making of him clean by taking away his dung, and give him a little
Knob of Hay, and leave him till the Evening. At the Evening come to the Stable,
and having made all things clean, bridle as in the Morning, take off his
Clothes, and dress him as before. Then Cloth, Saddle, bring him forth, and
urge him to empty; Mount, rack him abroad, but not to the Hills, if you can
find any other plain Ground, and Air him in all Points as you did in the
Morning. When you have Watered and spent the Evening in Ayring, till within
Night, (for nothing is more wholesome and consumes foulness, more then early
and late Ayrings;) Rack him home to the Stable door, and there alight and do as
you did in the Morning, both within doors and without, and so let him Rest till
Nine at Night; then at Night come to him, and Rub down his Legs well with
Wisps, and his Face and Neck with a clean Cloth, and turning up his Clothes Rub
all his hinder parts, then give him a quart of Oats in the same manner as you
did before, and after that a little bundle of Hay; then Toss up his Litter, and
make his bed soft, and leave him till the next Morning. Then the next Morning
do every thing to him, without the least Omission, as has formerly been
declared, and thus keep him for the first Fortnight, which will so take away
his foulness, and harden his flesh, that the next Fortnight you may adventure
to give him some Heats.

Object. But to Answer an Objection that may be urged, touching the quantity of
Provender which is prescribed, Being but a quart at a Meal, seeing there be
many Horses that will eat a larger Proportion, and to scant them to this
little, were to starve, or at the best to breed weakness.

Answ. I set not down this as an infallible Rule, but a President that may be
imitated, yet altered at Pleasure: For I have left you this Caveat, that if he
eat this with a good Stomach, you may give him another, leaving the Proportion
to the Feeders Discretion.

Four Considerations in giving of Heats.
First, That two Heats in the Week, is a sufficient proportion for any Horse of
what Condition or state of Body whatsoever. That one Heat should ever be given
on that day in the Week, on which he is to run his Match, as thus; Your
Match-day is a Monday, your Heating-days are then Mondays and Fridays, and the
Monday to be ever the sharper Heat, but because it is the day of his Match, and
there are three days betwixt it and the other Heat. If the day be Tuesday, then
the Heating-days are Tuesdays and Saturdays; if Wednesday, then Wednesdays and
Saturdays, by reason of the Lords day; if on Thursday, then Thursdays and
Mondays, and so of the rest.

You shall give no Heat (but in case of Necessity) in Rain or foul Weather, but
rather to defer hours and change times; for it is unwholesom and dangerous.
And therefore in case of Showers and uncertain Weather, you shall have for the
Horse a loyned Hood, with loyned Ears, and the Nape of the Neck loyned to keep
out Rain, for nothing is more dangerous then cold wet falling into the Ears,
and upon the Nape of the Neck and Fillets.

4. And lastly, observe to give the Heats, (the Weather being seasonable) as
early in the Morning as you can, that is, by the Spring of day, but by no means
in the dark, for it is to the Horse both unwholesom and unpleasant, to the Man
a great Testimony of folly, and to both an Act of danger and precipitation.

The second Fortnights Feeding.
You shall do all things as in the first Fortnight, only before you put on his
Bridle, give him a Quart of Oats, then Bridle him up and dress him, as before
showed, then Cloth, Saddle, Air, Water, Exercise and bring him home, as before
showed, only you shall not put Hay into his Rack, but give it him out of your
hand, handful after handful, and so leave him on his Bridle for an hour, then
rub him, and after other Ceremonies, Sift him a Quart of Oats, and set them by,
then take a Loas of Bread that is three days old, and made in this manner.

The First Bread.
Take three Pecks of clean Beans, and one Peck of Wheat, mix them together, and
grind them, and bolt it pretty sine, and Knead it up with good store of Barm
and Lightning, but with as little water as may be, labor it in the Trough very
well, and break it, and so cover it warm, that so it may swell, then Knead it
over again, and make it up in big Loaves, and so bake it well, and let it soak
soundly, and when they are drawn, turn the bottom upwards, that so they may
cool. At three days old give it him, for new Bread is hurtful, when you give it
him, chip it very well, and cut some of it into small Pieces, and put them into
his Quart of Oats you had formerly Sifted. About eleven of the Clock give him
the same quantity of Oats, and let him rest till the Afternoon. At one of the
Clock in the Afternoon, if you intend not to give him a Heat that day, Feed him
with Bread and Oats as you did in the Forenoon, and so consequently every Meal
following for that day.

But if you intend the next day to give him a Heat (to which I now bend mine
aim) you shall only then give him a quart of Oats clean Sifted, but no Hay, and
so let him rest till Evening.

At four of the Clock give him a quart of clean Sifted Oats, and after they are
eaten, Bridle him up; Dress, Cloth, Saddle, Air, Water, Exercise, bring home
and order, as before showed, only give him no Hay at all. After he has stood
an hour upon his Bridle, give him a quart of Oats, and after they are eaten
put on his Head a sweet Muzzle, and let him rest till Nine at Night.

The Use of the Muzzle.
The Use of the Muzzle being rightly made, is to keep the Horse from eating up
his Litter, from gnawing upon Boards and Mud-walls, and indeed to keep him from
eating any thing but what he receives from your own hands, they are made
sometimes of Leather, and stamped full of holes, or else close, but they are
unsavory and unwholesom. Nay, indeed all Leather is unpleasant. Besides, they
are too close and too hot for him The best Summer Muzzle, (and indeed best at
all times) is the Ner-Muzzle, made of strong Pack-thread, and knit very thick
and close in the bottom, and so enlarged wider and wider upwards to the middle
of the Horses Head; then bound upon the top with Tape, and on the nether side a
Loop, and on the farther side a long String to fasten it to the Horfes Head.
The best Winter Muzzle (and indeed tolerable at any time) is made of double
Canvass, with a round Button, and a square Latice Window of small Tape before
both his Nostrils, down to the very bottom of the Muzzle, and upward more then
a handful, and must also have a Loop and a String to fasten about his Head. At
Nine of the Clock at Night, give him a quart of clean Oats, and when they are
eaten, put on his Muzzle, and toss up his Litter, and so leave him.

The next day early give him a quart of clean Oats, rubbed between your hands
with some Beer or Ale, and when he has eaten them, Dress him and Saddle him as
before, and being ready to depart, give him a new laid Egg or two, and wash his
Mouth after it with Beer or Ale, and so lead him away, and at the door provoke
him to empty, then Mount and Rack him gently to the Course, ever and anon
making him smell another Horses dung.

When you are come within a Mile of the starting Post, alight and take off his
Body-Cloth and Breast-Cloth, and Girt on the Saddle again; then sending away
your Grooms both with those Clothes, and other dry Clothes to rub with, let him
stay at the end of the Course till you come: then your self Rack your Horse
gently up to the starting Post, and beyond, making him smell to that Post,
(which you call the weighing Post) that he may take notice of the beginning and
ending of the Course. There start your Horse roundly and sharply, at near a
three quarters speed, and according to his Strength of Body, Ability of Wind,
and Cheerfulness of Spirit, run him the whole Course through. But by no means
do any thing in extremity, or above his Wind, but when you find him a little
yield, then give him a little ease, so that all he does may be done with
Pleasure, and not with Anguish; For this manner of training will make him take
delight in his labor, and so increase it: The contrary will breed discomsort,
and make Exercise irksom. Also during the time you thus course him, you shall
Note upon what Ground he runs best, and whether up the Hill or down the
Hill; whether on the smooth, or on the rough, on the wet or on the dry, or on
the level, or the Earth somewhat Rising: and according as you find his Nature,
so manage him for your own advantage. When you have Finished the Heats, and a
little slightly Galloped him up and down to Rate his Wind and cheer his
Spirits, you shall then (the Groom being ready) Ride into some warm Place, and
with your Glassing Knife, or scraping Knife, made either of some broken Sword
blade, or some old broken Sithe, or for want of that, a thin piece of old hard
Oaken wood, fashioned like a long broad Knife with a sharp edge, scrape off the
Sweat of your Horse in every part (Buttocks excepted) till there will none
arise, ever and anon moving him up and down: Then with dry Clothes Rub him all
over (Buttocks excepted) then take off his Saddle, and having Glassed his Back,
and rubbed it near dry, put on his Body-Cloth and Breast-Cloth, and set on his
Saddle again and Girt it, then Mount and Gallop him gently, and ever and anon
Rubbing his Head, Neck and Body, as you sit, then walk him about the Fields to
cool him; And when you find he dries apace, then Rack him homewards, sometimes
Racking, and sometimes Galloping; and by no means bring him to the Stable, till
you find him thoroughly dry. When you are come to the Stable-door entice him to
empty, then set him up and Tie him to the Rack, and (as having prepared it
before) give him this Scouring, made in this manner.

The first Scouring.
Take a Pint of the Syrup of Roses, or a pint of strong Honyed-water, and
dissolve into it of Cassa, Agarick and Myrrh, of each an ounce, and Jumble
them well together in a Viol-Glass. Then being Mul'd, and made warm at the
Fire, and the Horse newly come from his Heat (as before showed) give him this
Scouring, for it is a strong one, and avoideth all manner of Molten Grease and
Foulness.

Ordering him after his Scouring.
When you have given it him, rub his Legs well, then take off his Saddle, and
if his Body be dry, run slightly over it with a Curry-Comb, and after that the
French Brush, and lastly, rub him all over with dry Clothes very well, and
Cloth him up very warm, and if the Weather be very cold, to throw over him a
loose Blanket. He must fast full two Hours after his Scouring, not departing
out of the Stable, and keep him stirring therein, for it will work the better.
After he has Fasted on the Bridle two hours, then take a Handful of
Wheat-Ears, and coming to him, handle the Roots of his Ears, then put your Hand
under his Clothes next to his Heart upon his Flanks, and on the nether part of
his things; and if you find any new Sweat arise, or any Coldness arise, or if
you see his Body beat, or his Breast move fast, then forbear to give him any
thing, for it shows there is much soulness stirred up, on which the Medicine
works with a conquering quality; the Horse is brought to a little Sickness,
therefore in this case you shall only take off his Bridle, put on his Collar,
toss up his Litter, and absent your self, (having made the Stable dark and
still) for other two hours, which is the utmost end of that Sickness. But if
you find no such offense, then give him the Ears of Wheat, by three or four
together, and if he eat this handful, give him another, and so another or two.
Then give him a little Knob of Hay well dusted, and draw his Bridle, and rub
his Head well. An hour after give him a quart of clean Oats, and put two or
three handfuls of spelted Beans amongst them, and see that they be very clean,
and break amongst them two or three Shives of Bread clean chipt, and so leave
him for two or three hours. At Evening before you dress him, give him the like
quantity of Oats, Beans and Bread, and when he has eaten them, Bridle him,
Dress and Cloth him; for you shall neither Saddle, or Air him forth, because
this Evening after his Heat, the Horse being foul, and the Scouring yet working
in his Body, he may not receive any cold water at all. After he is dressed, and
has stood two hours on his Bridle, then wash three pints of clean Oats in
Beer or Ale, and give them him, for this will inwardly cool him, as if he had
drunk water

After he has eaten his washed Meat, and rested upon it a little, you shall at
his feeding times with Oats and spelt Beans, or Oats and Bread, or
altogether, or each several, or simply of it self, according to the liking of
the Horse, feed him that night in plentiful manner, and leave a Knob of Hay in
his Rack when you go to Bed.

The next day early, first feed, then dress, Cloth, Saddle, Air, Water and
bring home as at other times; only have a more careful eye to his emptying, and
see how his Grease and Foulness wastes.

At his feeding times feed as was last showed you, only*but little Hay, and
keep your Heating-days, and the preparation of the day before, as was before
showed. Thus you shall speed the second Fortnight, in which your Horse having
received four Heats, Horseman like given him, and four Scourings, there is no
doubt but his Body will be drawn inwardly clean, you shall then the third
Fortnight Order him according to the Rules following.

The third Fortnights Feeding.
The third Fortnight you shall make his Bread Finer then it was formerly. As
thus,

The Second Bread.
Take two Pecks of clean Beans, and two pecks of fine Wheat, Grind them well,
and Searce them through a fine Raunge, and Knead them up with Barm and great
store of Lightning, and make it up as you did the former Bread. With this Bread
after the Crust is taken away, and being old, feed your Horse, as before
showed, for this Fortnight, as you did the former, putting it amongst his Beans
and Oats, observing his Dressings, Airings, Feedings, Heatings and
Preparations, as in the former Fortnight, only with these differences.

First, you shall not give your Heats so violently as before, but with a little
more pleasure, as thus. If the first Heat have violence, the second shall have
ease, and indeed none to over-strain him or to make his Body sore. Next, you
shall not after his Heats, give him any more of the former Scouring, but in
stead thereof, instantly upon the end of the Heat, after the Horse is a little
cooled and clothed up; and in the same place where you Rub him, give him a
Ball as big as a Hens Egg, of that Confection which is mentioned in the Office
of the Farrier, and goes by this Title, The true Manner of Making those
Cordial Balls, which Cure any violent Cold, or Glanders, which, etc.

The fourth and last Fortnights Feeding.
The fourth and last Fortnight you shall make your Bread much Finer then either
of the former.

The last and best Bread.
Take three Pecks of fine Wheat, and one Peck of Beans, Grind them on the black
Stones, and boult them through the finest Boulter you can get, then Knead it up
with sweet Ale, Barm, and new strong Ale and the Barm beaten together, and the
Whites of twenty or thirty Eggs; But in any wise no Water at all, but in stead
thereof some small quantity of New Milk, then work it up. Bake it and Order it
as the former. With this Bread, having the Crnst cut clean away, and with Oats
well Sunned, Beaten and Rubbed between your Hands, then new Winnowed, Sifted
and Dressed, with the purest spelt Beans, and some fine Chiltern Wheat, with
any Simple, or any Compound, feed your Horse at his Feeding times, as in the
Fortnight last mentioned.

You shall keep your Heating-days the first Week or Fortnight, but the last
Week you shall forbear one Heat, and not give any five days before the
Match-day, only you shall give him strong and long Airings.

You shall not need this Fortnight to give him any Scouring at all. If this
Fortnight Morning and Evening, you burn the best Frankincense in your Stable,
you shall find it exceeding wholesome for him, and he will take wonderful
delight therein.

In this Fortnight, when you give him any washed Meat, wash it in the Whites of
Eggs, or Muskadine, for that is most wholesome and less Pursie.

This Fortnight give him no Hay, but what he takes out of your hand after his
Heats, and that in little quantity, and clear dusted.

The last Week of this Fortnight, if the Horse be a foul Feeder, you must use
the Muzzle continually; but if he be a clean Feeder, then three days before the
Match is sufficient.

The Morning, the day before your Match, feed well both before and after
Airing, and water as at other times, before Noon and after Noon, scant his
Portion of Meat a little; before and after Evening Airing, feed as at Noon, and
Water as at other times, but be sure to come home before Sunset.

Late at Night feed as you did in the Evening, and give him what he likes,
according to his stomach, only as you can, forbear Bread and Beans.

This day you shall Coul your Horse, Shoo him, and do all extraordinary things
of Ornament about him, provided that you do not give him offense to hinder his
Feeding or Resting; For I have heard some Horsemen say, that when they had shod
their Horses with light Shoos, the Night before the Course, that their Horse
has taken such notice thereof, that they have refused to eat, or lie down. But
you must understand, that those Horses must be old, and long Experienced in
this Exercise, or else they cannot reach these subtle apprehensions. But to
pass by Curiosity, as plating of Tails, and all other unnecessary Ornaments,
whereby they do injury to the Horse, I shall advise you for necessary and
indifferent things, that they be done the day before, then in the Morning of
the Course, because I would have him that Morning find neither trouble nor
vexation.

The next Morning (which is the Match-day) come to him very early, and take off
his Muzzle, Rub his Head well, right his Clothes, and give them ease by wisping
and using the plain Circingle, then give him a pretty quantity of Oats washed
in Muscadine, or the Whites of Eggs, or if he refuse them, try him with fine
dressed Oats, mixed with Wheat, or Oats simple; when he has eaten them, if he
be a slow emptier, walk him abroad, and in the places where he uses to empty,
there entice him to empty, which when he has done, bring him home and let him
rest till you have warning to make ready. But if he be a free Emptier, let him
lie quiet.

When you have warning to make ready, take off his Muzzle, and put on his
Snassle well washed in Muscadine, but before you Bridle him (if you think him
to empty) give him three or four Mouths full of washed Meat last spoken of,
then Bridle him up and dress him, and after pitch the Saddle and Girts with
Cordwainers Wax, set it on and girt it gently, so as he may have feeling, but
no straitness; then lay a clean Sheet over the Saddle, over it his ordinary
Clothes, then his Body-cloth and Breast-cloth, and wisp him round with soft
Wisps, then if you have a Counterpane, or Cloth of state for bravery sake, let
it be fastened above all. Being now ready to draw out, give him half a pint of
Muscadine, and so lead away.

In all your Leadings upon the Course, use gentle and calm Motions, suffering
him to smell upon any Dung, and in especial places of advantage, as where you
find Rushes, long Grass lying, Heath or the like, walk in and entice him to
Piss. But if you find no such help, then in especial places on the Course, and
chiefly toward the latter end, and having used the same means before, break
some of the Wisps under him, and entice him to piss.

Also in your leading, if any white or thick foam or froth rise about the
Horses Mouth, with a clean Handkerchief wipe it away, and carrying a Bottle of
clean water about you, wash his Mouth now and then with it.

When you come to the place of straight, before you uncloath, rub or chase his
Legs with hard Wisps; then pick his Feet, uncloath, wash his Mouth with water,
Mount his Rider, start fair, and leave the rest to Gods good Will and Pleasure.

Certain Observations and Advantages for every Feeder to observe in sundry
Accidents.
There is no unreasonable Creature of Pleasure subject to so many disasterous
chances of Fortune, as the Horse, and especially the Running Horse, both by
reason of the multiplicity of diseases belonging unto them, as also the
violence of their Exercise, and the nice tenderness of their keeping: and
therefore it behooveth every Feeder to be Armed with such Observations as may
concern Mischiefs, and those Helps which may amend them when they happen.

Of Meat and Drink.
The first Observation that I shall Arm the Feeder withal, is the true
distribution of Meat and Drink.

Let him observe, if there be any Meat, Drink or other Nourishment which you
know to be good for him, yet he refuses it; in this case you are not to thrust
it violently upon him, but by gentle means and cunning enticements win him
thereunto, tempting him when he is most hungry, and most dry; and if he get but
a bit at a time, it will soon increase to a greater quantity, and ever let him
have less then he desires; and that the sooner he may be brought unto it, mix
the Meat he loves best with that he loves worst, till both be made alike
familiar, and so shall the Horse be a stranger to nothing that is good and
wholesome.

Observations for Lameness.
Our Feeder must observe, if his Horse be subject to Lameness or Stiffness, to
surbate or tenderness of Feet, then to give him his Heat upon smooth Carpet
Earth, or to forbear strong Ground, hard Highways, cross Ruts and Furrows,
till extremity compel him.

Observations from the State of his Body.
Our Feeder must observe, that the strongest state of Body, (which I account
the highest and fullest of Flesh, so it be good, hard, and without inward
foulness) to be the best and ablest for the performance of these Wagers; yet
herein he must take two Considerations; the one the Shape of the Horse Body,
the other his Inclination and manner of Feeding.

For the Shape of his Body. There be some Horses that are round, plump and
close knit together, so that they will appear Fat and well Shaped, when they
are lean and in poverty. Others are raw-boned, slender and loose knit together,
and will appear lean and deformed, when they are Fat, foul and full of gross
Humors.

From his Inclination.
So likewise for their Inclination, some Horses (at the first) will feed
outwardly, and carry a thick Rib, when they are inwardly lean as may be. There
be others that will appear lean to the Eye, when they are only Grease. In this
case the Feeder has two Helps to advantage his knowledge, the one outward, the
other inward.

From his outward Handling.
The outward Help, is the outward Handling and feeling the Horses Body,
generally over all his Ribs, but particularly upon his short and hindermost
Ribs.

If his Flesh generally handle soft and loose, and the Fingers sink into it as
into Down, then is he foul without all question; but if generally it be hard
and firm, only upon the hindermost Rib is softness, then he has grease and
foul matter within him, which must be avoided, how lean and poor soever he
appear in outward speculation.

The inward Help is only sharp Exercise, and strong Scouring; the (...) will
dissolve the foulness, the latter will bring it away.

Observations from the Privy Parts.
Our Feeder must observe his Horses Stones, for if they hang down Side, or low
from his Body, then is he out of lust and heart, and is either sick of Grease,
or other foul humors; but if they lie close, couched up, and hid in a small
room, then he is Healthful and in good plight.

Observations for the Limbs.
Our Feeder must observe ever the Night before he runs any Match, or fore heat,
to bathe his Legs well, from the Knees and Gambrels downwards, either with
clarified Dogs-grease, (which is the best) or Trotters Oil (which is the next;)
or else the best Hog's Grease, which is sufficient, and to work it well in with
your hands, and not with Fire. For what he gets not in the first Night, will be
got in the next Morning, and what is not got in the next Morning, will be got
when he comes to uncloath at the end of the Course: So that you shall need to
use the Ointment but once, but the rubbing as often as you find opportunity.

Observations for Water.
Our Feeder shall observe, that albeit I give no directions for Watering him
after the H^^^s, yet he may in any of the latter Fortnights (finding him clean,
and his grease consumed,) somewhat late at Night, as about six of the Clock,
give him water in reasonable quantity, being made lukewarm, and fasting an
hour af er it. Also if through the unseasonableness of the Weather, you cannot
water abroad, then you shall at your watering hours water in the house, with
warm water, as aforesaid. If you throw a handful of Wheat-Meal, Bran or
Oat-meal finely powdered (but Oat-meal is the best) into the water, it is very
wholesome.

Observations for the Ground to run in.
Our Feeder shall observe, that if the Ground whereon he is to Run his Match,
be dangerous and apt for mischievous Accidents, as strains, overreaches,
Sinew-bruises and the like, that then he is not bound to give all his Heats
thereon; but having made him acquainted with the Nature thereof, then either to
take part of the Course, as a Mile, two or three, according to the goodness of
the Ground, and so to run him forth, and again (which we call turning Heats)
provided always that he end his Heat at he weighing Post, and that he make not
his Course less, but rather more in quantity then that he must run. But if for
some special Cases, he like no part of the Course, then he may many times (but
not ever) give his heat upon any other good Ground, about any spacious and
large Field, where the Horse may lay down his Body and run at Pleasure.

Observations from Sweat.
Our Feeder shall take especial regard in all Airings, Heatings, and all manner
of Exercises whatsoever, to the Sweating of the Horse, and the occasions of his
Sweating; as if he Sweat upon little or no occasion, as walking a Foot-pace,
standing still in the Stable, and the like, it is then apparent that the Horse
is faint, foul sed, and wants Exercise.

If upon good occasion, as strong Heats, great Labor, and the like, he Sweat,
yet his Sweat is white Froth, and like Sope-suds, then is the Horse inwardly
foul, and wants also Exercise. But if the Sweat be black, and as it were only
water thrown upon him, without any frothiness, then is he clean sed, in good
lust and good case, and you may Adventure Riding without danger.

Observations from the Hair.
Our Feeder shall observe his Hair in general, but especially his Neck, and
those Parts that are uncovered, and if they lie slick, smooth and close, and
hold the Beauty of their natural color, then is he in good case; but if they
be Rough or staring, or if they be discolored, then is he inwardly cold at the
Heart, and wants both Clothes and warm keeping.

Many other Observations there are, but these are most material, and I hope
sufficient for any Understanding.

The Office of the Ambler.
Observations in Ambling.
THere is not any Motion in a Horse more desired, more useful, nor indeed more
hard to be obtained unto by a right way, then the Motion of Ambling; and yet
(if we will believe the Protestations of the Professors) not any thing in all
the Art of Horsemanship more easy, or more several ways to be effected, every
man conceiving to himself a several Method, and all those Methods held as
infallible Maxims, that can never fail in the Accomplishment of the Work.

Men's Opinions and Errors.
But they which know truths, know the Errors in these Opinions, for albeit
every man that has hardly a smell of Horsemanship, can discourse of a way how
to make a Horse Amble, yet when they come to the Performance of the Motion,
their failings are so great, and their errors so gross, that for mine own part,
I never yet saw an exact Ambler, I confess some one man may make a Horse Amble
well and perfectly, nay, more then one, peradventure many, and thereby assume
unto himself the name of Perfection, yet such a man have I seen err grossly,
and spoil more then his labor was able to recompense.

But leaving Men's Errors, because they are past my Reformation, I will only
touch at some special Observations, which in mine Opinion I hold to be the
easiest, the certainest and readiest for the effecting of this work, and withal
glance at those absurdities, which I have seen followed, though to little
purpose, and less benefit,

Ambling by the Plowed Field.
There is one commends the new Plowed Lands, and affirms, that by toyling the
Horse thereon in his Foot-pace, there is no way so excellent for the making of
him Amble; but, he forgets what weakness, nay, what Lameness, such disorderly
toil brings to a young Horse, nay, to any Horse; because the Work cannot be
done without weariness, and no weariness is wholesome.

Ambling by the Gallop.
Another will teach his Horse to Amble from the Gallop, by sudden stopping, a
more sudden choking him in the Cheeks of the Mouth, thrusting him into such an
amazedness betwixt his Gallop and his Trot, that losing both he cannot choose
but find out Ambling.

But this Man forgets not alone the Error before spoken (which is too great
toil) but also spoils a good Mouth, (if the Horse had one,) loses a good Rein
(if there were any,) and by overreaching and clapping one Foot against
another, endangers upon every step an Hoof-breach or Sinewstrain.

Ambling by Weights.
Another says there is no better way then Ambling by Weights, and thereupon
overloads his Horse with unmerciful Shoes of intolerable Weight, and forgets
how they make him enterfere, strike short with his Hind-feet, and though his
Motion be true, yet is to slow, that it is not worth his Labor. Another solds
great Weights of Load about his Feetlock Pasterns, and forgets that they have
all the Mischiefs of the former; besides, the endangering of incurable Strains,
the crushing of the Crownet, and the Breeding of Ring-bones, Crown-scabs and
Quitter-bones.

Another Loads his Horse upon the Fillets with Earth, Load, or some other Massy
substance, and forgets the swaying of the Back, the over straining of the
Fillets, and a general disabling of all the hinder parts.

Ambling in Hand, or not ridden.
Another struggles to make his Horse Amble in his Hand, before he Mounts his
Back, by the help of some Wall, smooth Pail or Rail, and by Chocking him in the
Mouth with the Bridle Hand, and Correcting him with his Rod on the hinder
Hoofs, and under the Belly, when he treads false, and never remembers in what
desperate frantickness it drives an Horse, before he can make him understand
his meaning, as Plauging. Rearing, Sprauling out his Legs, and using a World of
A^tick Postures, which once settled, are hardly ever after reclaimed; besides,
when he has spent all his labor, and done his utmost, as soon as he Mounts
his Back, he is as sar to seek of his Pace as if he had never known such a
Motion.

Ambling by the Help of Shoes.
Another finds out a new Stratagem, and in despite of all opposition in the
Horse, will make him Amble perfectly, and thereupon he makes him a pair of
hinder Shoes, with long Spurns or Plates before the Toes, and of such length,
that if the Horse offer to Trot, the hinder-Foot beats the fore-Foot before it.
But he forgets that the Shoes are made of Iron, and the Horses Legs of Flesh
and Blood, neither does he remember with what violence the hinder-Foot follows
the fore-Foot, nor that every stroke it gives can light upon any place but the
Back-Sinews, then which there is no part more tender, nor any wound that brings
such incurable Lameness.

Ambling by the Help of fine Lists.
Another (out of quaintness more then strong Reason) strives to make his Horse
Amble by taking of fine soft Lists, and solding them straight about the
Cambrels, in that place where you Garter an Horse for a sti^^strain, and then
turn him to Grass for a Fortnight, or more, in which time (says he) he will
fall to a perfect Amble, (for it is true, he cannot Trot but with pain, then
taking away the Lists, the Work is finished.

But under the Correction of the Professors of this foreign trick, for it is a
Spanish Practice; I must assure them, that if they gain their purpose, they
must offend the Members; If they hurt not the Limbs, they lose their labor;
but however, this is most assured, that the Amble thus gained, must be
disgraceful, or Ambling and cringing in the hinder Parts, without comeliness,
speed or clear deliverance.

Ambling by the Hand only.
Another (and he calls himself the Master Ambler of all Amblers) affirms, there
is no true way of making an Horse to Amble, but by the Hand only, and I am of
this opinion, could this secret be sound out, or could a Man make a Horse do
all that he imagined; but Horses are Rebellious, and Men are furious, and the
least of either of these spoils the whole Work; and it is impossible for any
Man to ^adge an Horse to a new Motion, utterly unknown, against which he will
not resist with his uttermost power. Besides, to do this Action with the Hand
only, it must only be done from the Horses Mouth, and that Mouth must of
necessity be altered from his first manner of Riding; for to use all one Hand
must preserve all one Motion, and then where is his Ambling, which was not
known at the first Backing? Again, we strive at the first Backing of an Horse,
to bring his Mouth to all sweetness, his Rein to all Stateliness, and the
general carriage of his Body to all Comeliness. Now in this course of Ambling
by the Hand only, the Mouth must be changed from the Chaps to the W^eks o^ the
Mouth, which is from sweetness to harshness, his Rein must be brought from
constancy to unconstancy; for the Eyes that did look upward, the Nose and
Muzzle which was couched Inward, must be turned outward, and the general
comeliness of the Bodies Carriage must be brought to disorder and false
treading; or else he shall never Accomplish the true Art of Ambling by the Hand
only.

Ambling by the Tramel.
There is another, (I will not call him the best,) because his Error may be as
great as any) and he will make his Horse Amble by the help of the Tramel only,
which I confess is nearest, the best and most assured way, yet he has many
Errors, as follows.

Errors in the Tramel.
First, he loses himself in the want of knowledge, for the length of the
Tramel, and either he makes it too long, (which gives no stroke,) or too short,
(which gives a false stroke) the first makes an Horse hackle and shuffle his
Feet confusedly, the latter makes him Roll and Twitch up his hinder Feet so
suddenly, that by Custom it brings him to a string-halt, from which he will
hardly be recovered ever after. Another loses himself and his labor by
misplacing the Tramel, and out of a Niceness to seem more expert then he is, or
out of fearfulness to prevent falling (to which the Tramel is subject) places
them above the Knee, and above the hinder Foot-hoof. But the Rule is neither
good nor handsome; for if the Tramel be too long or loose, that is, gives no
offense to the Sinews, and other ligaments, about which they must necessarily
be bound, when they are raised so high, then they can give no true stroke,
neither can the fore-Leg compel the hinder to follow it. And if they be so
short or straight, that the fore-Leg cannot step forward, but the hinder must
go equal with it, then will it so press the main Sinew of the hinder-Leg, and
the Veins and Fleshy part of the sore-Thighs, that the Horse will not be able
to go without halting before, and cringing and crambling his hinder-parts so
illfavouredly, that it will be irksom to behold it; besides, it will occasion
Sweatings, and draw down humors, which will be more noisome then the Pace will
be beneficial.

Another makes his Tramel of such course and hard stuff, or else Girts it so
straight, or leaves it fretting up and down so loose, that he Galls his Horses
Legs, and leaves neither Hair nor Skin upon them, at the best it leaves such a
soul print and mark upon the Legs, that every one will accuse both the Horse
and his Teacher of disgrace and indiscretion.

As these, so I must conclude with the last Error of the Tramel, which is Men's
Opinions, and though it be the most insufficient, yet it has the greatest
power to over-sway Truth, and that is, the Tramel is utterly unnecessary and
unprofitable, and the Defender worthy of no Employment, alleging the Land only
to be excellent.

The ^rrors I have already confuted; it now remains (after all these faults
finding, that I show the truest, easiest, and that way which is most
uncontrollable for the making of an Horse to Amble, with all the gracefulness
and perfection that can be required.

The best way to Amble an Horse.
When you are about to make an Horse Amble truly, and without controulment.
First, try with your Hand by a gentle and deliberate racking and thrusting of
the Horse forward, by helping him in the Weeks of his Mouth with your Snaffle,
(which must be smooth, big and full) and correcting him first on one side, then
on another with the Calves of your Legs, and sometimes with the Spur, if you
can make him of himself strike into an Amble, though shuffling disorderly,
there will be much labor saved; for that proc^ivity or aptness to Amble, will
make him with more easiness and less danger, endure the use of the Tramel, and
make him find the Motion without stumbling or amazement: but if you find he
will by no means either apprehend the Motions or Intentions, then struggle not
with him, but fall to the use of the Tramel in this manner following.

The Form of the Tramel.
But before I come to the Use and Virtue thereof, I will show you the form and
substance whereof it ought to be made; because nothing has ever done this
Instrument more Injury, then false Substances and false Shapes. Therefore some
make these Tramels of all Leather, and they will either reach or break, the
first marrs the Work by uncertainty, the other loses the labor.

Another makes it of Canvass, and that galls.

A third makes it of strong Lists, and that has all the faults of both the
former, for the softness will not let it lie close, and the gentleness makes it
stretch out of all compass, or break upon every stumble. And as these, so there
are a World of other useless Tramels, for you must understand, that touching
the true Tramel, the Side-Ropes must be firm without yielding an hair: The Hose
must be soft, lie close, and not move from his first place, and the Back-band
must be flat, no matter how light, and so defended from the Fillets, that it
may not gall. And this Tramel must be thus made, and of these Substances.

First, for the Side-Ropes, they must be made of the best, finest and strongest
Pack-thread, such as your Turky-thread, and turned by the Roper into a delicate
strong Cord, yet at the utmost, not above the bigness of a small Jack-line,
with a Noose at each end, so strong as is possible to be made; neither must
these Side-Ropes be twined too hard, but gentle, and with a yielding condition,
for that will bring on the Motion more easy, and keep the Tramel from
breaking, now these Side-Ropes must be just thirty six Inches in length, and so
equal one with another, that no difference may be espied.

For the Horse which must be placed in the small of the Fore-leg, and the small
of the hinder-Leg, above the Feet lock, they must be made of fine Girt-Web,
which is soft and pliant, and loyned with double Cotton: Over the Girt-Web must
be fastened strong Tabbs of white Neats Leather well Tallowed, and suited to an
even length, and stamped with holes of equal distance, which shall pass through
the Nooses of the Side*Ropes, and be made longer or shorter at pleasure, with
very strong Buckles. These Hose, the Girt would be four Inches in length, and
the Tabbs ten.

The Back-band being of no other use but to bear up the Side Ropes, would (if
you Tramel all the Forelegs) be made of fine Girt Web, and ^oyned with Cotton;
but if you Tramel but one side, then an ordinary Tape will serve, being sure
that it carries the side-Ropes in an even Line, without either Rising or
falling; for if it rise, it shortens the side-Rope, and if it falls, it
endangers tangling.

Thus you see what the true Tramel is, and how to be made; touching the use, it
thus follows.

The true Use of the true Tramel.
When you have brought your Horse into an even smooth Path, without Rubs or
roughness, you shall there loose the near fore-Leg, and the near hinder-Leg,
then put to them the side-Rope, and see that he stand at that just proportion
which Nature her self has formed him, without either straining or enlarging
his Members, and in that even and just length, stay the side-Rope by a small
Tape fastened up to the Saddle. Then with your hand on the Bridle, straining
his Head, put him gently forward, and if need be, have the help of a by-stander
to put him forward also, and so force him to Amble up and down the Road, with
all the Gentleness you can, suffering him to take his own leisure, that thereby
he may come to an understanding of his restraint, and your Will for the
Performance of the Motion, and though he snapper or stumble, or peradventure
fall now and then, yet it matters not, do you only stay his Head, give him
leave to Rise, and with all gentleness put him forward again, till finding his
own fault, and understanding the Motion, he will become perfect, and Amble in
your Hand to your contentment. And that this may be done with more ease and
less amazement to the Horse, it is not amiss (at his first Trameling) that you
give your Side-Ropes more length then ordinary, both that the Twitches may be
less sudden, and Motion coming more gently, the Horse may sooner apprehend it.

But as soon as he comes to any perfectness, then instantly put the Side-Ropes
to their true length. For an Inch too long, is a Foot too slow in the Pace; and
an Inch too short causes Rouling, a Twitching up of the Legs, and indeed a
kind of plain Halting.

When to alter the Tramel.
When the Horse will thus Amble in your Hand perfectly, being Tramelled on one
side, you shall then change them to the other side, and make him Amble in your
hand as you did before. And thus you shall do, changing from one side to
another, till with this half*Tramel he will Run and Amble in your hand, without
snappering or stumbling, both readily and swiftly; when this is attained unto,
which cannot be above two or three hours labor, (if there be any
tractableness) you may then put on the whole Tramel, and the broad, flat back
Band, Trameling both sides equally, and so Run him in your hand (at the utmost
length of the Bridle) up and down the Road diverse times, then pause, cherish,
and to it again; and thus apply him, till you have brought him to that
Perfection, that he will Amble swiftly, truly and readily, when, where, and how
you please; then put him upon uneven and uncertain ways, as up-hill and
down-hill, where there are clots and roughness, and where there is hollowness
and false treading.

When to Mount his Back.
Now when he is perfect in your Hand upon all these, you may then adventure to
Mount his Back, which (if you please) you may first do by a Boy, or Groom;
making the Horse Amble under him, whilst you stay his Head to prevent danger,
or to see how he strikes. Then after Mount your self, and with all gentleness
and lenity, increasing his Pace more and more, till you come to the height of
Perfection. And thus as you did before in your Hand, so do now on his Back,
first with the whole Tramel, then with the half, and changing the Tramel often,
first from one side, then to another, then altering Grounds, till you find
that exquisiteness which you desire, and this must be done by daily exercise
and labor, as twice, thrice, sometimes oftener in the day.

When to Journey.
When you have obtained your Wish in the Perfection of his stroke, the
nimbleness of his Limbs, and the good carriage of his Head and Body, you may
then take away the Tramel altogether, and exercise him without it. But this
ExerciseI would have upon the Highway, (and not Horsecourser like) in a
private smooth Road, for that affords but a cousening Pace, which is left upon
every small weariness; therefore take the Highway forward for three, four or
five miles in a Morning, more or less, as you find his aptness and ability.
Now if in this journeying, either through weariness, ignorance or peevishness,
you find in him a willingness to forsake his Pace, then (ever carrying in your
Pocket the half Tramel) alight and put them on, and so exercise him in them,
and now and then give him ease, bring him home in his true Pace. This Exercise
you shall follow day by day; and every day increasing it more and more, till
you have brought him from one mile to many; which done, you may then give him
ease, as letting him rest a day or two, or more, and then apply him again; and
if you find in him neither error nor alteration, then you may conclude your
Work is finished.

But if any alteration do happen (as many fantastic Horses are subject unto,)
if it be in the motion of his Pace, then with your hand reform it. But if that
fail, then the use of the half-Tramel will never fail you.

Now if the Error proceed from any other occasion, look seriously into the
cause thereof, and taking that away the effect will soon cease; for you are to
understand, that in this manner of teaching him to Amble, you are forbidden no
help whatsoever which belongs unto Horsemanship, as Chain, Cavezan, Musroul,
Head-strain, Martingale, Bit, or any other necessary Instrument, because this
Motion is not drawn from the Mouth, but from the Limbs.

Many things else might be spoken on this subject, but it would but load paper,
and weary Memory; and I am only at short Essays, and true Experiments,
therefore take this as sufficient.

The Office of the Buyer, wherein is showed all the Perfections and
Imperfections that are or can be in a Horse.
Observations and Advertisements for any Man when he goes about to buy an Horse.
THERE is nothing more difficult in all the Art of Horsemanship, then to set
down constant and uncontrollable Resolutions, by which to bind every Man's Mind
to an unity of Consent in the buying of an Horse; for, according to the old
Adage, What is one Man's Meat, is another Man's Poison; What one affects, another
dislikes. But to proceed according to the Rule of Reason, the Precepts of the
Ancients, and the Modern Practice of our conceived Opinions, I will as briefly
as I can, (and the rather, because it is a labor I never undertook in this
wise before) show you those Observations and Advertisements which may fortify
you in any hard Election.

The End for which to buy.
First, therefore you are to observe, that if ^ou Elect an Horse for your
Hearts Contentment, you must consider the end and purpose for which you buy
him, as whether for the Wars, Running, Hunting, Traveling, Draught or Burden,
every one having their several Characters, and their several Faces both of
Beauty and Uncomeliness.

But because there is but one Truth and one Perfection, I will under the
Description of the perfect and untainted Horse, show all the Imperfections and
Attaindures, which either Nature or Mischance can put upon him of greatest
deformity.

Let me then advise you that intend to buy an Horse, to acquaint your self with
all the true Shape; and Excellencies which belong to an Horse, whether it be in
his natural and true Proportion, or in any accidental or outward increase or
decrease of any Limb or Member, and from their Contraries, to gather all things
whatsoever that may give dislike or offense.

Election how divided.
To begin therefore with the first Principle of Election, you shall understand
they are divided into two especial Heads, the one General, the other particular.

The General Rule.
The General Rule of Election is, First, the End for which you buy; Then his
Breed or Generation, his Color, his Pace, and his Stature; These are said to
be General, because they have a general dependence upon every Man's several
opinions, as the first, which is the End for which you buy, it is a thing shut
up only in your own bosom.

Of Breed.
The other, which is Breed, you must either take it from faithful report, your
own knowledge, or from some known and certain Characters, by which one strain,
or one Country is distinguished from another, as the Neapolitan is known by
his Hawk-Nose, the Spaniard by his small Limbs, the Barbary by his fine Head
and deep Hoof, the Dutch by his rough Legs, the English by his general strong
knitting together, and so forth of diverse others.

Of Color.
As for his Color, though there is no Color exempt from goodness, for I have
seen good of all, yet there are some better reputed then others, as the Dapple
Gray for Beauty, the Brown Bay for Service, the Black with Silver Hairs for
Courage, and the Liard and true mixed Roan for Countenance. As for the Sorrel,
the Black without White, and the unchangeable Iron Gray, are reputed Choleric;
the bright Bay, the Flea-bitten, and the Black with white Marks, are
Sanguinists; the Black, White, Yellow, Dun, Kite-glewed and the Py-bald, are
Phlegmatic; and the Chestnut, the Mouse dun, the Red Bay, the blew Gray, are
Melancholy.

Pace* as Trotting.
Now for his Pace, which is either Trot, Amble, Rack or Gallop, you must Refer
it to the end also for which you buy; as if it be for the Wars, Running,
Hunting, or your own Pleasure, then the Trot is most tolerable, and this Motion
you shall know by a Cross Moving of the Horses Limbs, as when the fore-Leg, and
the near Hinder-Leg, or the near fore-Leg, and the far Hinder-Leg move and go
forward in one instant. And in this Motion, the nearer the Horse takes his
Limbs from the Ground, the opener, the evener and the shorter is his Pace; for
to take up his Feet slovenly, shows stumbling and lameness; To tread narrow or
cross, shows enterfering or failing; to step uneven, shows toil and weariness,
and to tread long, shows overreaching.

Ambling.
Now if you Elect for Ease, great Persons Seats, or long Travel, then Ambling
is required. And this Motion is contrary to Trotting, for now both the Feet on
one side must move equally together, that is, the far sore-Leg, and the far
hinder-Leg, and the near fore-Leg, and the near hinder-Leg. And this Motion
must go just, large, smooth and nimble; for to tread false, takes away all
ease; to tread short, rids no Ground; to tread rough, shows rouling; and to
tread un-nimbly shows a false Pace that never continues, as also Lameness.

Racking.
If you Elect for Buck-Hunting, Galloping on the Highway Post, Hackney, or the
like, then a racking Pace is required: and this Motion is the same that Ambling
is, only it is in a swifter time, and a shorter tread; and though it rid not so
much ground, yet it is a little more easy.

Galloping.
Now to all these Paces must be joined a good Gallop, which naturally every
Trotting and Racking Horse has; the Ambler is a little unapt thereunto,
because the Motions are both one, so that being put to a greater swiftness of
Pace then formerly he has been acquainted withal, he handles his Legs
confusedly, and out of order, and being trained gently, and made to understand
the Motion, he will as well undertake it as any Trotting Horse whatsoever. Now
in a good Gallop you are to observe these Virtues. First, that the Horse which
takes up his Feet nimbly from the Ground, but does not raise them high, that
neither rouleth nor beats himself, that stretches out his Forelegs, follows
nimbly with his hinder, and neither cuteth under his Knee, (which is called the
swift cut) nor crosses, nor claps one Foot on another, and ever leads with
his far fore-Foot, and not with the near, he is said ever to Gallop comely and
most true, and he is the fittest for speed, or any swift Employment. If he
Gallop round, and raise his fore-Feet, he is then said to Gallop strongly, but
not swiftly, and is fittest for the great Saddle, the Wars and strong
Encounters; If he Gallop slow, yet sure he will serve for the Highway, but if
he labor his Feet confusedly, and Gallop painfully, then is he good for no
Galloping Service; besides, it shows some hidden Lameness.

His Stature.
Lastly, touching his Stature, it must be referred to the end for which you
buy, ever observing that the biggest and strongest are fittest for strong
occasions, and great Burdens, strong Draughts, and double Carriage, the middle
Size for Pleasure and general Emploiments; and the least for Ease,
Street-Walks, and Summer-Hackney.

The particular Rule.
Now touching the particular Rule of Election, it is contained in the discovery
of natural deformities, accidental outward Sorrances, or inward hidden
Mischiefs, which are so many and so infinite, that it is a World of Work to
explain them, yet for satisfaction sake, I will in as methodical manner as I
can, show what you are to observe in this occasion.

How to stand to View.
When a Horse is brought unto you to buy (being satisfied for his Breed, his
Pace, Color and Stature,) then see him stand naked before you, and placing
your self before his Face, take a strict View of his Countenance, and the
cheerfulness thereof; for it is an excellent Glass wherein to behold his
Goodness and best Perfections. As thus,

His Ears.
If his Ears be small, thin, sharp, short, pricked and moving; or if they be
long, yet well set on, and well carried, it is a Mark of Beauty, Goodness and
Mettle: but if they be thick, laved or lolling, wide set and unmoving, then are
they signs of dullness, doggedness and evil Nature.

His Face.
If his Face be lean, his Forehead swelling outward, the Mark or Feather in his
Face set high, as above his Eyes, or at the top of his Eyes, if he have a white
Star, or white Ratch of an indifferent Size, and even placed, or a white Snip
on his Nose or Lip; all are Marks of Beauty and Goodness. But if his Face be
Fat, Cloudy or Skouling, his Forehead flat as a Trencher, (which we call
Mare-faced) for the Mark in his Forehead stand low, as under his Eyes; If his
Star or Ratch stand awry, or in an evil posture, or instead of a Snip, his Nose
be raw and un-hairy, or his Face generally bald, all are signs of deformity.

His Eyes.
If his Eyes be round, big, black, shining, starting or staring from his Head,
if the black of the Eye fill the Pit or outward Circumference, so that in the
moving, none (or very little) of the White appears, all are signs of Beauty,
Goodness, and Material; but if his Eyes be uneven, and of a wrinkled
proportion, if they be little (which we call Pig-Eyed) both are uncomely signs
of Weakness; if they be red and fiery, take heed of Moon-Eyes, which is next
door to Blindness; if white and walled, it shows a weak Sight and unnecessary
starting or finding of Buggards; if with white Specks, take heed of the Pearl,
Pin and Web; if they water or show bloody, it shows bruises; and if any Matter,
they show old over-Riding, festered Rheums, or violent strains. If they look
dead or dull, or are hollow, or much sunk, take heed of Blindness at the best.
The Best is of an old decrepit Generation: if the Black fill not the Pit, but
the white is always appearing, or if in moving, the White and Black be seen in
equal quantity, it is a sign of weakness and a dogged disposition.

His Cheeks and Chaps.
If in handling his Cheeks or Chaps, you find the Bones lean and thin, the
space wide between them, the Thropple or Windpipe big as you can Gripe, and
the void place without Knots or Kernels; and generally the Jaws so great, that
the Neck seems to couch within them, they are excellent Signs of great Wind,
Courage and Soundness of Head and Body. But if the Chaps be sat and thick, the
space between them closed up with gross Substance, and the Thropple little, all
are Signs of short Wind, and much inward foulness. If the void place be full
of Knots and Kernels, take heed of the Strangle or Glaunders, at the best, the
Horse is not without a foul Cold. If his Jaws be so straight that his Neck
swells above them, if it be no more then natural, it is only an uncomely Sign
of short Wind, and Pursiness or Grossness; but if the Swelling be long, and
close by his Chaps like a Whet-stone, then take heed of the Vives, or some
other unnatural Impostume.

His Nostrils and Muzzle.
If his Nostrils be open, dry, wide and large; so as upon any straining the
inward redness is discovered, and if his Muzzle be small, his Mouth deep, and
his Lips equally Meeting, then all are good Signs of Wind, Health and Courage.
But if his Nostrils be straight, his Wind is little; if his Muzzel is gross,
his Spirit i^ dull; if his Mouth be shallow, he will never carry a Bit well;
and if his upper Lip will not reach his nether, old Age or Infirmity has
Marked him for Carrion. If his Nose be moist and dropping, if it be clear
water, it is a Cold; if soul Matter, then beware of Glaunders: if both Nostrils
run, it is hurtful; but if one, then most dangerous.

His Teeth.
Touching his Teeth and their Virtues, they are set down in a particular
Chapter; only remember, you never buy an Horse that wants any, for as good
lose all almost as one.

His Breast.
From his Head look down to his Breast, and see that it be broad, outswelling,
and Adorned with many Features; for that shows strength and durance. The little
Breast is uncomely, and shows weakness, the narrow Breast is apt to stumble,
fall and enterfere before; the Breast that is hidden Inward, and wants the
Beauty and division of many Feathers, shows a weak Armed Heart, and a Breast
that is unwilling and unfit for any violent toil or strong labor.

His Fore-Thighs.
Next look down from his Elbow to his Knees, and see that those Fore-Things be
rush-grown, well horned within, Sinewed, Fleshy, and outswelling, for they are
good signs of strength, the contrary shows weakness, and are unnatural.

His Knees.
Then look on his Knees, and see that they carry a Proportion, be lean, Sinewy
and close Knit, for they are good and comely; but if one be bigger and rounder
then another, the Horse has received Mischief; if they be gross, the Horse is
Gouty; if they have Scars, or Hair-broken, it is a true mark of a stumbling
Jade, and a perpetual Faller.

His Legs.
From his Knees, look down to his Legs, to his Pasterns, and if you find them
lean, flat and sinewy, and the Inward Bought of his Knee without Seames, or
Hair-broken, then he shows good Shape and Soundness; But if on the inside of
the Leg you find hard Knots, they are Splinters; if on the outside, they are
Screws or Excressions; if under his Knees be Scabs on the inside, it is the
swift cut, and he will ill endure Galloping; if above his Pasterns on the
inside you find Scabs, it shows enterfering; but if the Scabs be generally
over his Legs, it is either extreme soul keeping, or else a Spice of the
Maunge; if his Flesh be fat, round and fleshy, he will never endure labor; and
if on the Inward Bought of his Knees you find Seams, Scabs or Hair-broken, it
shows a Melander, which is a Cancerous Ulcer.

His Pasterns.
Look then on his Pastern-Joynt and his Pastern, the first must be clear and
well Knit together, the other must be short, strong and upright standing; for
if the first be big or swelled, take heed of Sinew-strains and Gourdings: if
the other be long, weak or bending, the Limbs will be hardly able to carry the
Body without tyring.

His Hoofs.
For the Hoofs in general, they should be black, smooth, tough, rather a little
long then round, deep, hollow and full of Sounding: for white Hoofs are tender,
and carry a Shoo ill; a rough, gross Seamed Hoof, shows old Age or
over-Heating. A brittle Hoof will carry no Shoo at all; an extraordinary round
Hoof is ill for foul ways, and deep Hunting. A flat Hoof that is pumissed,
shows Foundring; and a Hoof that is empty, and hollow sounding, shows a decayed
Inward-part, by reason of some wound or dry Founder. As for the Crown of the
Hoof, if the Hair lie smooth and close, and the Flesh flat and even, then all
is perfect; but if the Hair be Staring, the Skin scabbed, and the Flesh rising,
then look for a Ringbone, or a Crown-scab, or a Quitter-bone.

The Setting on of his Head, his Crest and Mane.
After this, stand by his side, and first look to the setting on of his Head,
and see that it stand neither too high, nor too low, but in a direct line; that
his Neck be small at the setting on of his Head, and Long, growing deeper to
the Shoulders, with an high, strong and thin Mane, long, soft, and somewhat
curling, for these are beautiful Characters: whereas to have the Head ill set
on, is the greatest deformity; to have any bigness or swelling in the Nape of
the Neck, shows the Pole-evil, or beginning of a Fistula; to have a short thick
Neck like a Bull, to have it falling at the Withers, to have a low, weak, a
thick or falling Crest, shows want both of strength and Mettle; to have much
Hair on the Mane, shows intolerable dullness; to have it too thin, shows fury;
and to have none or shed, shows the Worm in the Mane, the Itch, or else plain
Maunginess.

His Back, Ribs, Fillets, Belly and Stones.
Look on the Chine of his Back, that it be broad, even and straight, his Ribs
well compassed and bending Outward, his Fillets upright, strong and short, and
not above a handful between his last Rib and his Huckle-bone, let his Belly be
well let down, yet hidden within his Ribs, and let his Stones be well trussed
up to his Body, for all these are Marks of Health and good Perfection; whereas
to have his Chine narrow, he will never carry a Saddle without wounding, and to
have it bending or Saddle-backed, shows weakness.

To have his Ribs flat, there is not liberty for Wind.

To have his Fillets hanging, long or weak, he will never climb an Hill nor
carry a Burden. And to have his Belly clung up or gaunt, or his Stones hanging
down, loose or aside, they are both Signs of Sickness, Tenderness, Foundering
in the Body, and unaptness for labor.

His Buttocks.
Then look upon his Buttocks, and see that they be round, plump, full, and in
an even level with his Body: or if long, that it be well raised behind, and
spread forth at the setting on of the Tail, for these are comely and beautiful.
The narrow Pin-buttock, the Hog or Swine-Rump, and the falling and down-let
Buttock are full of Deformity, and show both an Injury in Nature, and that they
are neither sit or becoming for Pad, Foot-Cloth or Pillion.

His Hinder-Thighs.
Then look to his Hinder-Thighs or Gaskings, if they be well let down even to
the middle Joint, thick, brawny, full and Swelling; for that is a great
Argument of Strength and Goodness, whereas the lank slender Thighs show
disability and weakness.

His Cambrels.
Then look upon the middle Joint behind, and if it be nothing but Skin and
Bone, Veins and Sinews, and rather a little bending then too straight, then it
is perfect as it should be. But if it has Chaps or Sores on the Inward Bought
or bending, then that is a Sellander. If the Joint be swelled generally all
over, then he has got a Blow or Bruise, if the Swelling be particular, as in
the Pit or hollow Part, or on the inside, and the Vein full and proud; if the
Swelling be soft, it is a Blood-spaven; if hard, a Bone-spaven; but if the
Swelling be just behind, before the Knuckle, then it is a Curb.

Hinder-Legs.
Then look to his hinder-Legs, if they be lean, clean, flat and Sinewy, then
all is well; but if they be fat they will not endure labor. If they be
Swelled, the Grease is molten in them. If he be Scabbed above the Pasterns, he
has the Scratches; if he have Chaps under his Pasterns, he has Rains, and
none of these but aro noisome.

His Tail.
Lastly, for the setting on of his Tail where there is a good Buttock, the Tail
can never stand ill; and where there is an evil Buttock, there the Tail can
never stand well; for it ought to stand broad, high, flat, and Couched a little
inward. Thus I have showed you the true Shapes and true Deformities, you may in
your Choice please your own Fancies.

An uncontrollable Way to know the Age of an Horse.
There are seven outward Characters, by which to know the Age of every Horse;
As namely, his Teeth, his Hoofs, his Tail, his Eyes, his Skin, his Hair, and
the Bars in his Mouth.

His Teeth.
If you would know his Age by his Teeth, you must understand that an Horse has
in his Head just forty Teeth, that is to say, six great Wong Teeth above, and
six below on one side, and as many on the other, which makes twenty four; And
are called his Grinders; then six above and six below, in the forepart of his
Mouth, which are called Gatherers, and make thirty six. Then four Tushes, one
above and one below on one side, and are called the Bit Teech, which make just
forty.

Now the first year he has his Foals Teeth, which are only Grinders and
Gatherers, but no Tushes, and they be small, white and bright to look on.

The second year he changes the four fore-most Teeth in his Head, that is, two
above, and two below in the midst of the Rows of the Gatherers, and they are
browner and bigger then the other.

The third year he changes the Teeth next unto them, and leaves no apparent
Foals Teeth before, but two above, and two below of each side, which are all
bright and small.

The fourth year he changes the Teeth next unto them, and leaves no more
Foals Teeth before, but one of each side, both above and below.

The fifth year his sore-most Teeth will be all changed; but then he has his
Tushes on each-side complete, and the last Foals Teeth which he cast, those
which come up in their place will be hollow, and have a little Black speck in
the midst, which is called the Mark in the Horses Mouth, and continues till he
be past eight years old.

The sixth year he puts up his new Tushes, near about which you shall see
growing a little of new and young Flesh, at the bottom of the Tush: besides,
the Tush will be white, small, short and sharp.

The seventh year all his Teeth will have their perfect Growth, and the Mark in
his Mouth will be plainly seen.

The eighth year all his Teeth will be full, smooth and plain, the black speck
or mark being no more but discerned, and his Tushes will be more yellow then
ordinary.

The ninth year his foremost Teeth will be longer, broader, yellower and fouler
then at younger years, the mark gone, and his Tushes will be bluntish.

The tenth year, the inside of his upper Tushes will be no holes at all to be
felt with your Fingers ends, which till that Age you shall ever feel; besides,
the Temples of his Head will begin to be crooked and hollow.

The eleventh year his Teeth will be exceeding long, very yellow, black and
foul, only he may then cut even, and his Teeth will stand directly opposite one
to another.

The twelfth year his Teeth will be long, yellow, black and foul, but then his
upper Teeth will hang over his nether.

The thirteenth year his Tushes will be worn somewhat close to his Chaps, (if
he be a much ridden Horse) otherwise they will be black, foul and long, like
the Tushes of a Boar.

His Mouth.
See that he does not over-hang his upper Teeth over his nether, for though it
be the Mark of an old Horse, yet sometimes a young Horse has that Infirmity.
See likewise that he is not too deep burnt of the Lampas, and that his Flesh
lie smooth with his Bars, for if it be too deep burnt, his Hay and Provender
will stick therein, which will be very troublesome to the Horse.

His Hoofs.
If his Hoofs be rugged, and as it were Seamed one Seam over another, and many
Seams; if they be dry, full and crusty, or crumbling, it is a sign of very old
Age; and on the contrary part, a smooth, moist, hollow and well-sounding Hoof,
is a sign of young years.

His Tail.
If you take your Horse with your Finger and your Thumb by the Stern of the
Tail, close at the setting on by the Buttock, feeling there hard, and if you
feel of each side of the Tail a Joint stick out more then any other, by the
bigness of an Hazel-nut, then you may presume the Horse is under two years old;
but if his Joints be all plain, and no such thing to be felt, then he is above
ten, and it may be thirteen.

His Eyes.
If his Eyes be round, full, staring or starting from his Head, if the Pits
over them be filled, smooth and even with his Temples, and no wrinkles, either
about his Brow, or under his Eyes, then he is young, if otherwise you see the
contrary Characters, it is a sign of old Age.

His Skin.
If you take his Skin in any part of his Body, between your Finger and your
Thumb, and pull it from his Flesh, then letting it go again, if it suddenly
return to the place from whence it came, and be smooth and plain without
wrinkle, then he is young and full of strength; but if it stand, and not return
instantly to its former place, then he is very old and wasted.

His Hair.
If an Horse that is of any dark Color, shall grow grissle only about his
Eyebrows, or underneath his Mane; or any Horse of a whitish Color shall grow
Meannelled with either black or red Meannels universally over his Body, then
both are Signs of old Age.

His Bars.
Lastly, if the Bars in his Mouth be great, deep, and handle rough and hard,
then is the Horse old; but if they be soft, shallow, and handle gently and
tenderly, then is he young, and in good ability of Body.

And thus much be spoken touching the Office of the Buyer.

The perfect Shape of a Horse altogether.
First, there is required that the Hoof be black, smooth, dry, large, round and
hollow; the Pasterns straight and upright, Fet-locks short, the Legs straight
and flat, called also Lath-legged, the Knees bony, lean and round, the Neck
long, high reared, and great toward the Breast, the Breast large and round,
the Ears small, sharp, long and upright, the Forehead lean and large, the Eyes
great, full and black, the Brows well filled, and shooting outward, the Jaws
wide, slender and lean, the Nostrils wide and open, the Mouth great, the Head
long and lean, like to a Sheep, the Mane thin and large, the Withers sharp and
pointed, the Back short, even, plain and double Chined, the Sides and Ribs
deep, large and bearing out like the Cover of a Trunk, and close shut at the
Huckle-bone, the Belly long and great, but hid under the Ribs, the Flanks full,
yet gaunt, the Rump round, plain and broad, with a large space betwixt the
Buttocks, the Thighs long and large, with well-fashioned bones, and those
fleshy, the Hams dry and straight, the Trunchion small, long, well set on, and
well couched, the Train long, not too thick, and falling to the Ground, the
Yard and Stones small; And lastly, the Horse to be well-risen before. And to
conclude, the perfect Shape of a Horse, according as a famous Horseman has
described it, is in a few words, thus, viz. A broad Forehead, a great Eye, a
lean Head, thin, slender, lean, wide Jaws, a long high reared Neck, reared
Withers, abroad deep Chest and Body, upright Pasterns, and narrow Hoof; And
this is the common, allowed and approved Shape of a perfect Horse, so that if
any of those things be deficient in him, he cannot be said to be a Horse of a
perfect Shape. Wherefore I conclude, that if a Horse be of a good Color, well
Marked, and rightly Shaped, and right also by Sire and Mare, it will be seldom
seen that he would prove ill, unless his Nature be alienated and marred, either
in the Backing and Riding, or else that he be otherwise wronged, by the means
of an unskilful Groom. But I may in this Point be taxed to hold a Paradox;

which helps Farcins, Yellows, Stavers, Scabs, Mainges, Agues, Fevers,
Colds, Surseits, Glanders, or any other Malady, which may be any ways noxious
to the inward part of the Body. And it also preventeth sudden Sickness, if you
do suspect it. Fifthly, the opening of the two Plate or Breast-Veins do help
the Anticor, Sickness of the Heart, Morfoundring, which is the Foundring in the
Body by over-riding, whereby the Grease of the Horse is molten; it also
preventeth Diseases in the Liver, Lungs, and inward parts grieved; and
sometimes Hurts in the Shoulder, which causes Lameness before. Sixthly, we use
to touch the two Thigh-Veins before, which helpeth*Foundring in the fore-Feet,
Mallenders, Splent, Screw, Ring-bone, and such like infirmities in the
fore-Foot, and such other higher Parts. Seventhly, we use to take Blood from
the four Shackle-Veins before, and this is very good for the Crow-scab,
Ring-bone and such like Diseases. Eighthly, we use to strike the two
Spur-Veins, which Cures the Farcin in the Sides, Morfoundring, swelling under
the Belly, which is a Disease called the Feltrick, and the like. Ninthly, we
prick the two Toe-Veins, which do help Frettizing, Foundering, Hoofbound,
beating of the Horses Feet by Riding upon hard and stony ways, and the like.
Tenthly, we open the two Thigh-Veins behind, and this does help the Grief of
the Kidneys, swelling in the Hinder-Legs, Foundring, Sellenders, Scratches,
Kybes, etc. And it also helps Diseases in and about the Belly, as Pissing of
blood, Pissing often after great and extraordinary hard labor, and the weakness
of the Reins, the Back, Belly, Guts, or any other of the inward Parts, the
Curb, Spaven, and such Diseases which come of Rankness of Blood. Eleventhly, we
sometimes do open the four Shackle-Veins behind, and this is very good against
Founderings, and other pains in and about the Feet. Twelfthly, we let Blood in
the two Flank or Hanch-Veins, and this is most probable for all kind of
Fevers, the Stones, Poverty and the Felter-worm. Thirteenthly, we draw Blood
from the two Tail-Veins, which Cures the Mange in the Tail, falling of the
Hair, or Itch in the Tail. And these are for the most part all the Veins that
are usually opened. So that the full sum or number of Veins which Farriers
commonly open are thirty. Other Veins there are which are of a smaller
proportion, and therefore not fit to be opened, I will not say that these Veins
so opened does Cure the Diseases absolutely; but it does sometimes assuage the
Malignancy of the Malady, sometimes it preventeth Diseases, and sometimes again
it prepares the Body, the better to receive such Physical Drinks which do
inwardly Cure them, and such Salves, Oils, Unguents, which do dry and heal up
outward Infirmities, etc.

How many Bones a Horse has, and where they are Situated.
All the Bones which every Horse has, whereby to make up an Organical Body are
these, viz. He has in his Head thirty nine or forty Teeth; The Bones in his
Head do Comprehend the Crocks and Handles of the Scull, albeit they be composed
of parts and parcels of other Bones, also the two flat Handles, which from the
Pallat and the Fork or Throat has five; the Chine has fifty two, the Breast
one, the Ribs has thirty six, the Forelegs and fore-Feet has forty four,
and the hinder-Legs and Feet forty, so as the whole structure of the Body of a
Horse, whereby to perfect a full Building of Bones, consists of about two
hundred fifty seven, or two hundred fifty nine, if they be rightly computed;
which do represent themselves altogether at what time the perfect Anatomy of a
Horse is laid open.

Of the Elements.
The Elements are four, and they give Life and Nutriment unto Man, and all
other living Creatures; They are these, Fire, Air, Water, and Earth.

Their Nature.
The Nature of Fire is to be hot and dry, Air to be hot and moist, Water to be
cold and moist, and Earth to be cold and dry.

Signs of the Zodiac
Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius
Capricornus, Aquarius, Pisces; These do all Govern the twelve Months of the
year, and are placed above the Zodiac.

Names of the Planets.
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercury and Lun^a.

The Government of the Signs.
Aries governs the Head, Taurus the Neck, Gemini the Shoulders and Arms,
Cancer the Stomach and Breast, Leo the Heart, Virgo the Belly and Guts, Libra
the Reins and Buttocks, Scorpio the Privy Parts, Sagittarius the Thighs,
Capricornus the Knees, Aquarius the Legs, and Pisces the Feet.

The best time to let a Horse Blood in.
If there be no extraordinary cause, as in Case of desperate Sickness, or so;
then Jan. the third and fifteenth, Feb. the fourth and ninth, Mar. the
seventeenth and eighteenth, April the tenth and sixteenth, May the first and
thirteenth, June the fifteenth and twentieth. But for July and August, by
reason that the Canicular days be then predominant, Blood-letting is not so
good, but only in urgent Case of Necessity. In September. the eleventh and twenty
eighth. October. the eighth and twenty third. November. the fifth and

Seeds.
Gather Seeds and Fruits when they be fully ripe, and they also last but one
whole year.

Rind or Bark.
Gather the Rind or Bark of any Simple when the Herb is ripe, dry them, and
they will last many years.

The Office of the Farrier.
What Points Consist the Office of the Farrier.
IT Consists in four things, viz. Science, Experience, Knowledge and Handy
Work; But I shall let pass the first three, and speak to Handiwork, and that
is, To Heat an Iron well, to Turn a Shoo well, to make and Point a Nail well,
to Pare the Hoof well, to Cauterize well, to let Blood well, to be light and
well-Handied, Bold and Hardy, and Dressing of a Horse well of such Accidents as
may happen unto him.

The Principal Members of a Horse.
Some hold that there be four, and make the Stones or Gignitors one; but I say
there are but three, The Liver, the Heart and The Brain; and if he be offended
in any of these he will die; but if any other Member besides these be hurt, he
may live; and therefore the Stones or Gignitors cannot be one of the Principal
Members, for you cannot touch any of those three, but you kill him outright,
or desperately endanger him. Now the Stones may receive hurt, and if I despair
of Curing them, I can cut them out, without peril of his life.

Of the Sinews, and of the number of them.
There are two Sinews, or Tendons, which are white, and begin at the end of the
Nose, and extend themselves along the Neck, and along the Back, and make their
extent to the four Legs, and take their ligaments in the fore-Feet.

There are in every Horse twenty nine or thirty, great and small.

The two great Sinews which I named before.

It. Two Branches which are main Sinews that proceed from the Brain, and run
down the Cheeks to the Teeth.

It. There are from the Shoulders to the first Joint of the Arms, or Forelegs
downwards, two great Sinews.

It. From the Knees to the Pasterns are four great Sinews, with the same number
in the hinder-part.

It. In the forepart of the Breast, and above it, as well within as without,
are ten Sinews, some greater and some smaller.

It. From the Reins of the Back to the Stones are four great Sinews. Lastly,
one great main Sinew which runs along to the end of the Tail. So as the full
number of the Sinews are twenty nine, or thirty, which are to be discerned. But
to speak properly, a Horse has but one only Vein, which is that which we call
the Median, or Lives Vein, which is in the Liver, being the true Fountain,
Scource and great Tun, from whence the Canes, Conduit-pipes and little Veins,
(as the smaller Rivers) do separate themselves, which do run through all the
Parts and Members of the whole Body. Those Veins that do ascend to the Head and
Body, are called Veins ascendent, and those which do run low as to the Legs,
and lower Members, are called hollow or descendent Veins.

Of the Vital Blood.
Those are Veins which are Vessels of quick or running Blood, and is that, that
when the Creature sleeps, his Blood is in continual agitation, and never
cease.

Of the Number of the Veins that you are to take Blood from.
In the Neck, in the Weeping-Veins, under the Ears, and in six other places, of
and about the Head; as in the Pallate-Veins, in the Tongue, in the Flank-Veins,
in the Breast and Spur-Veins; In the four Members, to wit, the Legs, Thighs,
Pasterns and Feet; also in sundry other Places, according as necessity shall
require it, and in places which may the better kill the Ma^ady of the said
Horse.

For what use you open the Veins.
To open the two Temple-Veins eases the pain in the Head, coming of Colds,
Rheums, Fevers, Yellows and Stavers, Drowsiness, Frenzy, the sleepy Evil,
falling Evil, or any grief in or about the Eyes or Brain. Secondly, we open the
two Eyes or Weeping-Veins, being most sovereign for such Diseases whereunto the
Eyes are subject; as Watery or Weeping Eyes, Blood-shotten, Pin and Web, Haw,
or the like. Thirdly, we open the two Pallat-Veins in the Mouth, and those do
Cure the Lampass, and any inward Sickness in the Body; as the Yellows, Stavers,
Anticor, Surfeits, Drowsiness, Tiredness, or weariness of the Body; or if he
has any Malady in the Throat, as the Strangle, Quinzy, Kernels, Pustils,
either within or without; it many times helps Inflammations, Glanders, or the
like; For the eating or swallowing of his own Blood, is most wholesome and
Sovereign in such Cases. Fourthly, we do usually open the two Neck-Veins,

for some may Object unto me, that many times Horses, who are of the best
Color, best Marks and truest Shapes, do nevertheless prove Arrant ^ades. I
answer, I acknowledge all this to be true, for I have known Horses, who upon
their first View, have been in extrinsecal show so hopeful, as that they have
promised what a man could expect from them, which notwithstanding when they
have come to the Test, they have been a Scandal to their Sex; but this is not a
thing frequent, for in every one of these who have thus miscarried, you shall
have twenty prove right and answerable to your Minds.

Rules to be Observed of putting a Horse to Grass, and of taking of him up
again.
Before you put your Stable-Horse to Grass, eight or nine days before, take
Blood from him, the next day after give him the drink of Diapen^e, and a day or
two after his Drink abate of his Clothes by degrees, before you turn him forth,
lest by doing them on the sudden he take more cold, and after his Clothes are
taken off, Curry him not at all, but let him stand in his dust, for that will
keep him warm. Neither would I have you put him forth till the midst of May, at
the soonest, for till that time Grass will not have Bite enough, (and let the
day wherein you turn him forth be a warm Sunshine day, and about the hour of
ten) for Horses pampered in warm Stables, and kept close, will be subject to
take cold.

Taking of him up.
Secondly, let him be taken up from Grass very dry, or else he will be subject
to be Scabby, and that not later then St. Bartholomew's day, which is the
twenty fourth of August, for then the Season does begin to let fall cold dews,
which causes much harm to your Horse, and then begins the Heart of Grass to
^ail, so as the Grass which he then feeds upon breeds no good Nutriment,
but gross, Phl^gmatick and cold Humors which putrisieth and corrupts the
Blood, and take him up very quietly for fear of melting his Grease, for his Fat
gotten at Grass is very tender, so that every little Motion dissolveth the
same, whereby the Blood may be enslamed, and so be in danger of Sickness, if
not of death. A day or two after you have him in the Stable, let him be shod,
let Blood and drencht, as before is showed you, for this preventeth Yellows,
Stavers and such like Diseases, which the Gall and Spleen occasioneth, which
the Heart and strength of Grass, (through the Rankness of Blood) does engender
in his Body.

But if you intend to be curious after you have taken him into the Stable,
before you have either Blooded or Drencht him, you may clean him in this manner.

Of Cleansing or making a Horse clean.
First, therefore if it be a hot Sun-shiny day, take him out of the Stable into
a place convenient, and there trim him, then take ordinary soft washing Soap*
and anoint his Head and every part of him all over therewith, and to have a care
that none of it get into his Ears or Eyes, then wash him very well with warm
water all over, then wipe him with a warm Linen Cloth, and after rub him dry
with woollen Clothes, then Soap him all over again, especially his Mane and
Tail, and wash him very clean with Buck-lee, with a Wisp or Woollen Cloth, and
when you have sufficiently cleansed him, dry him as you did before, and so lead
him into the Stable, and Cloth him up with a clean, thin, soft Cloth. And by
this kind of trimming and cleansing him, you may so alter him, that the Owner
can scarce know him.

General Notes concerning some Simples.
All manner of Marrows and Piths, of what kind soever they be must be kept by
themselves in a dry cool place, and preserved from all Filth or Uncleanness,
and from the annoyance either of Wind or Fire, and so they will last full out a
whole year.

Syrups, Powders, Pills, Electuaries and Ointments.
You shall keep no Syrops, no sweet Electuaries, nor Pills, nor Powders, nor
Conserves of Flowers, nor any Ointments, Sewets or Emplaisters, or Conserve of
Fruits or Roots, will last fully out two years.

Oils.
Of Oils, some will last long, some must be new made: Oils extracted out of
Wood or Metals will last long.

Roots.
Gather Roots in Autumn, but take the small Sprigs from them, and make them
clean and dry.

Dry small Roots in the Shade and Wind, and great ones either in the Wind, or
Sun, or by the Fire; Lay them in a dry place toward the South, and they will
keep long, provided that neither Sun nor Moisture do injure them.

Herbs.
Gather all manner of Herbs when they do most ^lourish, and dry them in the
Shade, except they be very moist and apt to putrify, they last for the most
part a whole year.

sixteenth, Dec^mb. the fourteenth and twenty sixth. And these days we hold to
be the very best, unless dangerous and sudden Sickness do cause us to alter the
same, for in Cases of Necessity no days are to be regarded or observed.

More Observations of Blood-letting you may find hereafter.

Of the four Humors. Blood, Choler, Phlegm and Melancholy.
Four Humors also there are, which be as it were four Children to the four
Elements already spoken of: And these are, Blood, Phlegm, Choler and
Melancholy, without which a natural Body cannot be made; for Blood naturally
(if it be perfect) is hot and moist, but takes most from Heat, and therefore
is subordinate to Air; Phlegm is cold and moist, but the Principality thereof
is Coldness, and therefore has reference to Water: Choler is hot and dry, but
his chiefest Nature is Heat, and therefore is Governed by the Element of Fire:
Melancholy is cold and dry, but his chiefest condition is Dryness, and
therefore subjects it self to the Element of Earth. Now the Fountain of Blood
is the Liver, which dispersing it self by the help of the Veins into all the
parts of the Body, nourishes and preserves the same. Phlegm preoccupateth the
Brain, being a cold and spungy substance, and the Seat of the sensible Soul.
Choler inhabiteth the Liver, which being hot and dry, makes a pleasing Harmony
with the Blood. Melancholy resideth in the Spleen, which is the Receptacle and
discharge of the Excrements of the Liver, from whence we may Collect, that it
has its proper use and end: As for demonstration, Blood principally nourishes
the Body, Phlegm occasioneth Motion of the Joints and Members, Choler exciteth
and provokes the Belly to avoid its Excrements; And lastly, Melancholy
disposes the Body to an Appetite. Whereupon all the Learned Philosophers do
with one unanimous Assent agree in this, That in every Natural Body there are
four Principal Instrumental Members, from which all the Parts of an Organi^al
Body are said to be Framed, and these are the Brain, the Heart, the Liver, and
the Stones or Gignitors, and each one of these do Perform its true Function to
all the particular Members of the Body; for the Sinews do receive their
Sustentation from the Brain, and these are called Animal spirits; the Art^ries
from the Heart, which are Vital spirits; the Veins from the Liver, which are
Natural Parts; and the Seed-Vessels from the Stones or Gignitors, as the Place
of Generation.

Of a Horses Complexion, which is the most necessary Faces that a Farrier can
judge of his Infirmities.
To speak of the Complexions of a Horse in a particular manner, which is one of
the most necessary Faces that a Farrier can behold, both for the judging of
Horses Infirmities, and also for the true Compounding of his Medicines for
every disease; And therefore by the Color of the Horse you are to judge his
Complexion. For look which of the Elements is most Predominate in him, from
that Element you may draw his Complexion; as thus, If he participate more of
the Fire, then of any of the other Elements, then we hold him to be a Choleric
Horse, and his Color is either a bright Sorrel, a Coal black without any
white, or an Iron Gray unchangeable, that is, such a Crey as neither will ever
turn a Daple-Grey, a White or a Flea-bitten, and these Horses are of Nature
light, hot, fiery, and seldom of any great strength. These Horses are most
subject to Pestilent Fevers, Yellows and Inflammation of the Liver. Therefore
every Farrier should be careful in his Composing of any Medicine for such a
Horse, to purge Choler, yet very moderately, and not with any extraordinary
strength in the Potion or Drench, because the Horse being in his best strength,
not reputed strong, should you apply any violent thing to him, that little
strength being abated, there were great danger in confounding the whole Body.
If the Horse participate more of the Air then of the other Elements, then is he
of a Sanguine Complexion, and his Color is either a bright Bay, or a dark Bay,
which has neither scouling Countenance, Myly Mouth, no^ white Flank; Or a
white Flea*bitten, White Lyard like Silver, or black with a white Star, white
rash or white Foot. These Horses are of Nature pleasant, nimble, free and of
good strength. The Disease, to them most incident, is Consumption of the Liver,
Leprosy, Glanders, or any disease that is infectious; They are of a good
strong Constitution, and may endure strength in their Medicines, especially any
thing that cools the Blood.

If the Horse participate more of the Water then of the other Elements, then is
he of a Phlegmatic Complexion, and his Color is either Milk white, a yellow
dun Kite glewed, or a Pyde-ball, in whom there is an equal Mixture of Colors.
Otherwise, if the Bay, the Black or the Dun exceed the White, he is said to be
of that Complexion of which the Color is greatest. These Horses are of Nature
slow, and apt to lose Flesh. The Diseases which are most incident unto them,
are Colds, Headache, Rheums, Staggers, and such like. They are able to endure
the reasonable strength of any Medicine, because of the abundance of Phlegm
which is in them, suffices both Nature, and the Potion to work upon. All cold
Simples are to them exceeding hurtful, so are also they which are violently hot
in the third degree; The first, because it binds too soon; The latter,
because it disperses too suddenly, therefore Simples of a moderate Mean are
best.

If the Horse participate of the Earth more then of the other Elements, then is
he of a Melancholy Complexion; And his Color is a Mousedun, Russet, Chestnut,
Ashie Gray, dark Bay, having long white Hai^, like Goats Hair, growing on his
Legs; These Horses are of Nature heavy and faint-hearted. The Diseases to them
most incident, are Inflammations in the Spleen, Frenzy, Dropsey, and such
like; They are commonly of better strength then they appear by their Actions,
and are able to endure the strength of any reasonable Medicine; All cicatrizing
and dry Simples are hurtful unto them, the cold and moist are the most
profitable. Having thus showed you these four Complexions, Choleric Sanguine,
Phlegmatic and Melancholy, together with their qualities and strengths; You
shall understand now, that amongst Farriers there is another Complexion, or
fifth Constitution, which is called the Composition, or Mixture of Complexions;
that is, when a Horse does participate of all the four Elements equally, and in
due proportion, and this is the best Complexion, and the Horse that is of this
Complexion is ever one of these Colors; that is to say, of a fair brown Bay,
dabled, or not dabled, a Dable Gray, a Black full of Silver Hair, or a fair
Roan red or black. And these Horses are of Nature most excellent, most
temperate, strongest, gentlest and most healthful, though they may have any
disease as the other has, yet are they naturally inclined to no disease. But
what infirmity soever falls unto them, is merely accidental, and not through
any overflow of natural distemperature. All Medicines must be compounded for
them according to the Nature of the Sickness, and the time of their
Languishment; for if the Sickness be young and new bred, then are they able to
receive any well Composed Receipt; but if it be old, and the inward Powers and
Faculties feebled, then you must be careful to help Nature, by adding to every
Medicine, of what Nature soever, some Simple of Comfort, that as ill Humors be
cleansed, so Strength may still be repaired and maintained. And thus much for
Complexions.

Twelve Causes of Health and long Life.
1. The First is Nature, good Digestion and good Nourishment.

2. The second is, Moderation in Feeding and Diet.

3. The third is, Moderate Labor.

4. The fourth is, moderate Use of Sleeping and Waking.

5. The fifth is, moderate spending upon Mares.

6. The sixth is, moderate Journeys.

7. The seventh is, wholesome Air.

8. The Eighth is, not to be exercised too soon after Grass.

9. The Ninth is, to be kept from raw and green Meats.

10. The tenth is, not to be suffered to eat or drink being hot.

11. The eleventh is, not to be neither washed nor walked at the end of his
Journey.

12. The twelfth is, to give him with his Provender such Powders and Simples as
are Prescribed you in all those Chapters, which are by me mentioned, but more
particularly in Page 2. And though he dislikes them at first, yet by mixing a
little and a little at a time, they will become natural to him.

Dangerous Sicness how it comes.
First, all Sickness comes either by Heats in over-violent exercise, as when
the Horse has his Grease moulten, the Heart overcharged, the vital Blood
forced from the inward Parts, and the large Pores and Orisices of the Heart are
so obstructed and stopped, that the Spirits cannot return back to their proper
places, so as the Organs of the Body cannot rejoice, but by this means the Body
must of necessity languish, founder and mortify.

Secondly, dangerous Sickness comes also by Colds, as by indiscreet and
negligent keeping, as well before as after long and violent exercise, and then
is the Head perplexed, the Eyes dulled and pained, the Roots of the Tongue
inflamed and fwelled, the Lungs with Rheums tickled and offended, occasioning
strong and laborious Coughing, and the Nostrils often Distilling, and pouring
^orth filthy and corrupt matter.

Thirdly, dangerous Sickness comes also by Surfeit of Food, either by eating
too much or too little of what is good, or also of what is not wholesome; so as
the first kills, or at least debilitateth the Stomach, oppresses the Heart,
and s^ndeth up those evil Fumes into the Head, by which are engendered the
Stavers, Frenzies, and other mortal Diseases* The second putri^ies the Blood,
and converts all its Nutriment into corruption, from whence proceeds the
Yellows, Farcins, Fevers, Mainges, and other such like Pestilent, Leprous and
Lothsom Diseases, which suffocating the Heart, and clogging the Stomach,
dilates and spreads it self universally over the whole Body, leaving no Member
free, and confounds every Faculty and Member thereof.

Fourthly and lastly, dangerous Sickness come also by Accidents, as when a
Horse receives some deep or perilous wound or Hurt, either in his Body, or
elsewhere, in some vital or dangerous part, by means whereof Nature is so far
offended, as that incontinently a general Sickness seizes upon him, which if
not prevented, Death immediately ensues.

Signs to Know these dangerous Sicknesses.
If his Sickness proceed from the first, which are Heat, then are the Signs
these, viz. The Heaviness of his Countenance, Swellings of his Limbs,
especially of his hinder-Legs, Scouring and Looseness of his Body, in the
beginning of his Sickness, short and hot Breath, a Loathing and forsaking of
his Meat.

If from the second, viz. Cold; then the Signs are, A dejected Countenance,
Dullness or Sleepiness of the Eyes, Pustels or hard Knots under the Caul, yea,
and many times ins^amed Kernels and Swellings so high as to the very Roots of
the Ears, a rotten* moist, inward and hollow Cough, he many times Chewing
betwixt his Teeth, some loose, filthy and phlegmatic matter, immediately after
his Coughing, which in some Cases is not an evil Sign* by reason that thereby
the Cold rotteth and goes away; Whereas on the contrary side, for a Horse to
Cough clear and dry, does demonstrate a dry Cough, which has long time lurked
in his Body, which is difficult to Cure, which will so discover it self at
last, that his Belly will shrink up, and when he drinks Water will come forth
of his Nose, and his Eyes will be either watery or mattery, and run
continually, through pain he has in his Head, procured by means of his Cold,
and his Hair will be rough and staring, etc.

If from the Third, which is Surfeit, then the Signs of his Sickness are
these, A dullness of the Head, Eyes and Countenance, and that so violent, that
he will not be able to lift up his Head from the Manager; A dull and dead Eye,
and sunk into his Head, his Ears pricked upright, and the Tops of them cold, as
also his upper Lips and his Sheath, his Pace reeling and staggering, and if he
be too far gone he will be Mad, which you may know by his biting the Rack and
Manger, or any Body that shall come nigh him; and sometimes biting of himself,
and beating his Head against the wall, etc. But if the Malady be not got into
the Brain, then you shall find by the yellowness of his Eyes, Lips and Tongue,
that it is turned to the Yellows, which will so infect his Blood all over, that
if not prevented suddenly he will soon come to the Dogs.

Accidental.
The sourth and last Ground of his Sickness is, if it proceed from Accidental
means, the Signs then are a perplexed and troubled Body, sweating at the Roots
of his Ears, Flanks, behind the Shoulders, against the Heart, sometimes
trembling all over his Body, and sometimes glowing and burning in his Vital
Parts, as in the Temples of his Head, against his Heart, on the inside of his
Forelegs, and on the inside of his hinder-Legs; his Mouth will be dry and hot,
his Tongue will be subject to be inflamed and furied, he will have a Loathing
against meat* and a great drought to thirst, and drink cold Water, and to keep
his Mouth in the same when he has done drinking.

To Cure Sickness before it comes, and to prevent it when it comes.
First, when you find it come, to let him Blood, and for three Mornings
together to give him the drink of Diapente, and keep him warm, and let him fast
three hours after it, and then give him a Mash, and Hay after that. But in
case Diapente is not to be had, then take Celand^ne half a handful, as well
Roots as Leaves, well washed and picked, Wormwood and Rue of each half a
handful, boil them in a Bottle of Ale or Beer to a quart, and strain it well,
and put it into half a pound of sweet Butter, and two or three spoonfuls of
Treacle, and give it him lukewarm.

But secondly, to prevent it before it comes, is when you turn him to Grass, to
let him Blood likewise, and to give him the next day the Drink of Diapente, and
so to abate his Clothes (if he has any) to harden him before you turn him to
Grass, to prevent his taking of Cold.

The Drink of Diapente.
Take of Gentian, of Aristolochia rotunda, of Bay Berries, of Myrrh, and of the
Shavings of ^vory, of each a like quantity, and let them be Pounded severally,
and finely Searced, and after weighed, so as the quantity may be just and even,
not any one less or more then another, and after you have mixed them very well
together, put them into a Gally-pot, close stopped, as that no Air get into it,
and so keep it for your use.

How to use it.
If you Drench him for a Cold or Glanders, give it him in Muscadine, if for
other Maladies, then in sweet Sack, and the quantity must be a Pint and an
half. But if you cannot get either Sack or Muscadine, then give it in strong
Ale or Beer; the quantity of this Powder of Diapente must be two or three
spoonfuls, unless to a small, sick and feeble Horse, then according to your own
Judgment, as you shall think requisite. The word Diapente is as much as to say
Composition of five Simples.

The Virtues of Diapente.
It is the most Sovereign thing which can be given to a Horse by way of Drench,
to Cure him of very many Diseases. It is good against all infectious Maladies,
as Fevers of what Nature soever, all sorts of Pesti^encies, or contagious
Colds, Coughs wet or dry, Glanders, Surfeits, inflammations in the Blood or
Liver, Frenzies, Yellows; it purisieth, refineth and purges the Blood from all
infection and Corruption; it eases the overflowing of the Gall, and the
working of the Spleen; In a word, it Cures whatsoever Diseases the Body of an
Horse may be inwardly inclined unto.

The making of the true Diahexaple.
Take the Roots of round Aristolochia, wash them small, scrape them, and make
them as clear as may be, then take Juniper Berries unexcorticated, and
Bay Berries excorticated; take the purest and best drops of Myrrh, and the
finest shavings of Ivory, of each an equal quantity, beat all but the Myrrh
together, and Searce them fine. Lastly, beat the Myrrh and searce it also, then
mix them altogether, press it hard into a Gallypot, and keep it for your use.

The Virtues of Diahexaple.
This Powder or indeed Mithridate, is most Excellent and Sovereign against all
manner of Poison, either inward or outward, it Cures the biting of venomous
Beasts, and helps short wind and pursiness.

It Mundisieth, Cleanses, Suppleth, and makes thin all gross Humors, it
heals all diseases of the Liver and Stomach, helps Digestion, and being given
in a Pint of Sack, it Cures all Colds; it is good against Consumptions, breaks
Phlegm, helps Staggers and all diseases of the Head. Gerrard.

It Recovers Tiring and Weariedness, and takes away Cramps and Convulsions,
dries up the Scurvey, breaks the Stone, opens all inward Obstructions, and
helps the Yellows, the Gargil and the Dropsey. Diascordies.

It Cures all Diseases of the Lungs, as Glanders and Rottenness, gives ease to
all Gripings and windiness of the Belly, provokes Urine, takes away Infection,
and kills Worms.

A Drink to open an Horses Body, and to Cleanse it.
Take a Quart of New Milk, Sallet-Oyl, Honey, of each half a Pint, an Ounce of
London. Treacle, and the Yolks of six Eggs, beat altogether, then put to it
Licoras, Sugar Candy, Anniseeds, (all in Powder) of each an Ounce, and infuse
altogether, and so give it him, ride him after it, set him up warm, and let him
fast two hours or more.

How to make Diatessaron, Mithridates or Horse-Treacle.
Take of the Powder of Diapente, two Ounces, and put it into a clean
Stone-Mortar, and put thereto clarified or Life-Honey the like quantity; Let
the Mortar be hot before you put them in, then with a Pestle of Wood work it
till it come to a Treacle, then take it forth, and keep it in a Gallypot close
stopped for your use.

How to use it.
Take half an Ounce of this Confection, and dissolve it in a Pint and an half
of Muscadine, or sweet Sack, and give it him Blood-warm, and as you see
occasion, you may add to it of London-Treacle an Ounce.

The Virtues of it.
It is good for all Poisons and infectious Diseases, and drives sorth all
manner of Sickness from the Heart, and is good for all sorts of Fevers, and
all other desperate and dangerous Sickness, taking first Blood from him if
there be cause.

How to make the Electuary of Diatessaron.

Take Gentian, Bay Berries, Aristolochia rotunda, or Birth-wort, of each two
Ounces, all beaten to very fine powder; Put them into a Stone-Mortar, (as you
did the other) with two pounds of clarified Honey, and work them together till
they come to a Treacle, and when you have done, put it up into a Gally-pot, and
keep it for your use close stopped, use it as you do the other.

The Virtues of it.
It resists Pestilence and Poison, and Cures the Biting of any venomous Beast;
It is good for the Falling Sickness, Convulsions, and all cold Distempers of
the Brain; As also for Colds and Coughs wet or dry, Surfeits, Glaunders,
Inflammation of the Blood and Liver, Yellows, and many other Diseases which a
Horses Body is inclineable unto.

A Drink given when you neither have Diahexaple, Diapente or Diatessaron.
Take of Tarr two Ounces, of Honey an Ounce, black Soap two drams, and bay Salt
a handful, incorporate them well together, then take two Egg-shells, the Crowns
only being broken, so as you may get forth the Meat, and fill them full with
this Medicine, and put them down his Throat, and walk or ride him gently up and
down a quarter of an hour or more, warm Clothed; that done, set him up warm,
and Litter him well, and let his Drink be either Mashes or white Water for four
or five days after, and let him fast three hours after his Medicine, and let
his Hay and Provender be sweet and good.

Signs of all Sickness in General.
If you find in your Horse heaviness of Countenance, extreme Looseness, or
extreme Costiveness, shortness of Breath, Loathing of Meat, dull and imperfect
Eyes, rotten or dry Cough, staring Hair, or Hair unnaturally discolored, a
staggering Pace, frantic Behavior, yellowness of the Eyes, of Skin, faint or
cold Sweat, extraordinary lying down, or beating or looking back at his Body,
alteration of qualities or gestures, not casting of the Coat, Leanness,
H^de-bound and the like. All these are apparent Signs of distemperature and
Sickness.

The Diseases of a Horse is Known by the Signs he makes.
If he be slower in Pace then he use to be, if his Ears hang down more then
they are wont, if his Flank be more then usually hollow, if he burn between his
Ears, or about his Pasterns, if in Travel his Stomach fail him, or his Mouth,
that in his Labor do use to foam, become dry, all these are Signs of Sickness.

By Hanging of his Head.
If he hang down his Head, which was wont to be of a cheerful Countenance, it
is a Sign of a Fever, Headache, the Staggers or ^ore Eyes.

By the Turning of his Head backwards.
If he turn his Head backward to the place grieved, if it be to the right side,
it is a Sign of Obstructions in the Liver, but if he turn it down to his Belly,
it is a sign either of the Cholick, Bots or Worms.

By Water Running from his Mouth.
When Water runs from his Mouth, it is either a Sign of the Staggers or wet
Cough.

By his stinking Breath or stinking Matter from his Nostrils.
If his Breath stinks, or foul Matter issues from his Nostrils, it is a sign of
an Ulcer in the Nose or Head; but if the Matter be white, then it is a sign of
Glanders: If the Matter be black, then it is a sign of the Mourning of the
Chine, if there be any such disease. But if it be yellow, then it is the
Consumption of the Liver: but if he cast little Lumps out of his Mouth, then it
shows Consumption and Rottenness of the Lungs.

By his Breath and Body being hot.
If his Body and Breath be hot, it is a Sign of a Fever and Heat of the
Stomach, if therewithal he forsake his Meat, it is a Sign of the Inflammation
of the Liver, and either of dry or moist Yellows.

By his hollow Temples.
If his Temples be very hollow, it is a Sign of the Strangle or old Age.

By shortness of Breath.
Shortness of Breath, and beating of the Flank, is a sign either of a Fever or
the Strangle, but if the Passage of the Throat be stopped, it is a Sign the
Film of the Lungs are broken, and the Spleen troubled, or else broken-Winded.

By the Swelling about the Ears.
If there be any thing Swelling about the Ears, it is a Sign of the Poleevil:
Swelling under the Ears is a sign of the Vives; and Swelling in the Mouth, is
a sign either of a Canker, Flaps or La^pas.

By the Swelling under the Throat.
Swelling under the Throat is a sign of the Glanders, and Swelling about the
Tongue-Roots, a sign of the Strangle: but if there be about the Tongue-Roots
nothing but little small Knots, like Wax-kernels, then it is a sign but of a
Cold only.

By his Swelling about hi^ Body.
Swelling on the left Side, is a Sign of a Sick Spleen; Swelling in the Belly
and Legs, a Sign of the Dropsey; and Swelling in the Flank, of Cholick only.

By his offering to Cough.
To Couch, or to offer to Cough, it is a Sign either of the Glanders, or of a
wet or dry Cough, of a Consumption or Foundring of the Body.

By his Staggering.
Staggering is a Sign either of a Fever, of the Staggers, or of swaying in the
Neck: but if he stagger or roll behind only, then is it a Sign either of
Foundring of the Body, or of pain in the Kidneys.

By the Hollowness of his Back.
The Hollowness of a Horses Back is a Sign of a dry Malady, or the Dropsey.

By his Trembling.
Trembling is a Sign of a Fever, or Foundring in the Body: and here is to be
Noted, that if he trembles after he has drunk, he has during the time of his
Trembling a Fit of an Ague upon him, and after he has done Trembling he will
glow, and some Horses after their Burning will Sweat also.

By the Staring of his Hair.
Hair staring is a sign either of a Cold Stomach, or of Foundring in the Body,
but generally o^ a Cold, or want of Clothes.

By his Staling with Pain.
If he Stale with Pain, it is a Sign either of Foundering in the Body, the
Wind-cholick or the Stone; and if the Urine which comes from him be yellow, it
is a Sign of the Glanders; but if it be blackish and thick, it is a Sign of the
Pain in the Kidneys.

By his Leanness and Gauntness.
Leanness and Gauntness is a Sign of Hide-bound, or of the Consumption, of the
dry Malady, of Foundring in the Body, Inflammation of the Liver, the Yellows,
Cholick or Worms.

By his Looseness of Body.
Laxativeness or Looseness of Body is a Sign of a hot Liver.

By his Costiveness.
Costiveness in the Body is a Sign of dry Yellows, or Diseases of the Gall.

By his stinking Dung.
If his Dung stink, it is a sign of a hot Liver: if it have no smell, then of a
cold Liver; but if it be undigested, then either of a Consumption, or of a dry
Malady.

By his Lying.
If he desire to lie much on his left Side, then is he troubled with the
Spleen, if on the right, then it is a Sign of Heat of Liver; and if finding no
rest, it may be Bots, Worms, Cholick, or Griping in the Belly; if when he is
down he spreads himself abroad, it shows the Dropsey; if he groan when he is
down, it shows either a sick Spleen, moist Yellows, Cholick, Bots or Film
broken, if he be not able to rise when he is down, then either mortal Weakness,
Foundering in the Body or Legs.

By his striking at his Belly.
If he strike with his Foot at his Belly, it is a Sign of the Cholick: but if
when he strikes, he Fisk with his Tail also, then it is either Bots or rough
Worms.

By his being Scabby.
If he be Scabby and Ulcerous all over his Body, and about his Neck, it is a
Sign of the Mange; if it be an Ulcer full of Knots, creeping about the Veins,
it is the Farcy: if spreading abroad only in one place, it is a ^^nker: if the
Ulcer be hollow and crooked, it is a Fistula; but if it be a spungy Wart, full
of blood, it is then an Anbury.

By his Tongue.
If his Tongue hang out and is Swollen, it is a Sign of the Strangle.

By his eating and d inking much.
If he eat much and drink little, it is a Sign of a Cold Liver; but if he
desire to drink much and eat little, it is either a Sign of a Fever, rotten
Lungs, Heat in the Stomach, Heat in the Liver, or the dry Yellows.

By his Dung.
It is necessary to observe his Dung, for it is the best Tell-troth of his
inward Parts; and you must not judge it by a General Opinion, but by a private
discourse with your self how he has been fed, because Food is the only thing
that breeds alterations, -- as thus --

If he feed altogether upon Grass, his Dung has one Complexion, as green; if
upon Hay, then another, as a little more dark. If upon little Provender, then
inclining to yellow. But to avoid both curiosity and doubt, observe well the
Complexion of his Dung, when he is in best Health, and the best feeding, and as
you find it alter, so judge either of his Health or Sickness, as thus --

If his Dung be clear, crisp, and of a pale yellowish Complexion, hanging
together without separation, more then as the weight breaks it in falling,
being neither so thin nor so thick, but it will a little flat on the Ground;
and indeed, both in Savor and Substance, resembling a sound Man's Ordure, then
is he clean, well fed, and without Imperfection. If it be well Colored, yet
fall from him in round Knots or Pellets, so it be but the first and second
Dung, the rest good, as aforesaid, it matters not, for it only shows he did eat
Hay lately, and that will ever come away first. But if all his Dung be alike,
then it is a Sign of foul feeding, and he has either too much Hay, or eats too
much Litter, and too little Corn.

If his Dung be in round Pellets, and blackish, or brown, it shows inward Heat
in the Body.

If it be Greasy, it shows foulness, and that Grease is Molten, but cannot
come away. If he void Grease in gross Substance with his Dung, if it be white
and clear then it comes away kindly, and there is no danger: but if it be
yellow or putrified, then the Grease has long layn in his Body, and Sickness
will follow, if not prevented.

If his Dung be red and hard, then he has had too strong Heats, and
Costiveness will follow, if not prevented; if it be pale and loose, it shows
inward coldness of Body, or too much moist and corrupt feeding.

Signs from the Urine.
Though the Urine be not altogether so Material as the Dung, yet it has some
true Faces, as thus --

Pale Color.
That Urine that is of a pale yellowish Color, rather thick then thin, of a
strong smell and piercing condition, is an healthful, sound and good Urine; but
if it be of an high, red Complexion, either like Blood, or inclining to Blood,
then has he had either two sore Heats, been overridden, or ridden too early
after Winter-Grass.

High Complexion.
If the Urine be of an high Complexion, clear and transparent, like old March
Beer, then he is inflamed in his Body, and has taken some Surfeit.

White like Cream.
If it carry a white Cream on the top, it shows a weak Back or Consumption of
the Seed.

Green.
A green Urine shows Consumption of the Body.

Bloody streaks.
A Urine with bloody Streaks shows an Ulcer in the Kidneys, and a black, thick,
cloudy Urine shows Death and Mortality.

Of Sickness in general.
Whenever upon any occasion, you shall find your Horse droop in Countenance,
to rorsake his Meat, or to show any other apparent sign of Sickness, if they be
not great, you may forbear to let Blood, because where the Blood is spent, the
Spirits are spent also, and they are not easily recovered. But if the Signs be
great and dangerous, then by all means let Blood instantly, and for three
Mornings together, (the Horse being Fasting) give him half an Ounce of the
Powder (called by me) Diahexaple, and by the I^alians, R^gina Medicinae, the
Queen of Medicines, brewed either in a Pint of Muska^i^^ or (...) or a Pint of
the Syrup of Sugar, being two degrees above the ordinary Molosses, or for want
thereof Molosses will serve the turn, and where all are wanting, you may take
either a Pint of Dragon-water, or a quart of the sweetest and strongest
Al^wort, or in extremity, take a quart of strong Ale or Beer, but then warm it
a little before the Fire. This must be given with an Horn, and if he has
Ability of Body, ride him in some warm place after, and let him fast near two
hours after the Riding. At Noon give him a sweet Mash, Cleath very warm, and
let him touch no cold water. The making of the Diahexaple you may find in the
Table.

General Observations in the Physi king Horses.
Know then first, that whenever you give your Horse any inward Portion or
Glister, give it him no more then Milk-warm, for there is nothing more Mortal
to a Horse then the Scalding of his Stomach, for a Horse of all living
Creatures, can worse endure to receive inwardly hot things: Besides, let his
Drinks and inward Medicines be given him easily and gently, le^t in making too
much haste you suffocate him, which if it do, you must then let his Head loose,
and walk him up and down till the Passion be past. Now for the Administering of
Pills, ^alls, and such like Medicines, little Advice is required, if they be
not made too great, only if you take forth his Tongue first, and then put them
up into his Mouth upon the end of a stick, then let go his Tongue again, which
when he draws it into his Mouth, he must needs force the ^alls down his Throat.
You are to Administer your Physic ^ermore fasting, unless upon urgent
occasion, (as in case of sudden and dangerous Sickness) and the longer he be
kept Fasting from Meat and Drink, as well before he takes as Physic as after,
it will be the better, for by that means his Medicine will work the more kindly
in his Body; for he ought to be kept from eating and drinking, at least three
hours before and after.

Purging Balls how made and given.

Take an ounce, or an ounce and a half of Aloes Succotrina, more or less,
(according to the strength and Constitution of your Horse) powder it very well,
and mix it with a little fresh Butter; Then divide it into three equal parts,
and cover them all over with fresh Butter, to prevent the bitter taste of the
Aloes: Make them about the bigness of a large Wall-nut, shaped thick in the
middle, and sharp at both ends, and given him in the Morning fasting. If you
think them not stiff enough with Butter alone, you may mix some Bran with it,
and then they will be as stiff as Dough or Paste.

What Exercise is meet with Physic.
A little moderate Exercise is very necessary, whereby his Physic may work the
better, and the sooner, as to Trot him easily about, or to walk him up and down
under the Wind in the warm Sun about a quarter of an hour. Then bring him into
the Stable, and Cloth him up warm, and Litter him well, and let his keeper be
with him three or four hours, observing his Postures, and as occasion may
require, to help him with all things necessary for his use. No Creature has a
moister Body then a Horse.

Of Mixing your Simples.
If your Horses Sickness be a Fever, to mix always your Simples with warm
Water, with Honey, or with Oil; but if the Disease be Coughs, Rhenms, or any
thing that proceeds of cold Causes, then mix them with good Ale or Wine, but
if he be brought low with Sickness, then mix them with Milk and Eggs.

Observations upon Raking a Horse.
Observe whenever you Rake your Horse with your Hand, (which is to draw his
Ordure out of his Fundament, when he cannot dung, that you anoint your Hand
with Sallet Oil, or Butter, or Hog's Grease: the like you must ever do when you
put up any Suppository; but when you Administer any Glister, you shall then but
anoint the Glister-Pipe.

Observations upon Blood*letting.
Observe in Blood-letting, that you take not so much Blood from a Colt as an
old Horse, and but the fourth part from a yearling ^oal, you must likewise have
regard to his Age and strength, taking more or less, according to his Ability
of his Body. Lastly, letting of Blood is either to divert Sickness and preserve
Health, or to refresh and cool the Spirits, or to diminish Blood, or to p^rge
Grease and bad Humors. Before you let him blood, moderately cha^e or exercise
him, and let him rest a day before his blood-letting, and three days after, not
forgetting that April and October are the two principal Seasons for that
purpose, unless urgent occasion requires. He will bleed the better if you let
him drink before you blood him, conditionally you do not heat him.

When he is bleeding, put your Finger into his Mouth, and tickle him in the
Roof thereof, making him chaw and move his Chaps, and that will force it to
spin forth, which when he has bled enough, according to your Discretion, rub
the Horses Body all over therewith, but ^especially the Place where he is
blooded on, for the Ancient Farriers hold that it is endued with a certain
natural Virtue to comfort the weak and feeble Members of a Horse, and to dry up
all evil Humors. And Tie him up to the Rack for an hour or two, lest he bleed
afresh, for that will turn his Blood.

Signs to know when he wants Bleeding.
If he stand in need of Bleeding, his Eyes will look Red, and his Veins will
swell more then ordinary; also he will have a certain Itch about his Mane and
Tail, and still be continually rubbing them, and sometimes will shed some of
his Hair also, he will now and then pill about the Roots of his Ears, or in
those places where the Head-stall of the Bridle lies; His Urine will be red and
High-colored, and his Dung will be black and hard; Also if he has red
Inflammations, or little Bubbles on his Back, or does not digest his Meat well,
or if the Whites of his Eyes be yellow, or the inside of his Lips, either upper
or nether; Many other Signs there are of Bleeding, but let these suffice, etc.

Of Outward Sorrances what they are, and of General Observations in the Cure of
them.
Outward Sorrances, according to my meaning in this place, are taken two manner
of Ways, that is to say, either it is an evil state and composition of the
Body, which is to be discerned, either by the Shape, Number, Quality or sight
of the Member, evil affected and difeased: or else it is the Loosning and
Division of any Unity, which as it may chance diversely, so it has diverse Names
accordingly. For if such a Division or Loosing be in the Bone, then it is
called a Fracture; if it be in any Fleshy part, then it is called a Wound or an
Ulcer; if it be in the Veins, then a Rupture; if in the Sinews, then a
Convulsion or Cramp; and if it be in the Skin, then it is called an
Excortication: And of all these severally I intend to treat of in the Chapters
following. Now for as much as in this General Art of Chyrurgery, or Sorrance,
there are certain General Observations or Caveats to be held inviolate, I will
before I proceed any further, give you a little taste thereof.

Burning.
First, You shall therefore understand, that it is the duty of every good
Farrier, never to burn or Cauterize with hot Iron, or with Oil, or to make any
Incision with Knife, where there be either Veins, Sinews or Joints, but either
somewhat lower, or somewhat higher.

Corrasives.
It. You shall never apply to any Joint or Sinewy part, either Resalgar,
Arsnick, Mercury, Sublimate, nor any such violent Corrasive.

Cauterizing.
It. It is ever better to Lance with a hot Iron then a Cold, that is, it is
better to Cauterize then to Incise.

Blood.
It. Blood does ever produce white and thick Matter, Choler a waterish and thin
Matter, but not much, Salt Phlegm great abundance of Matter, and Melancholy
many dry Scabs.

Bleeding.
It. You must never let Blood, except it be either to divert Sickness, and
preserve Health, or to refresh and cool the Blood, or else to diminish Blood,
or to purge bad Humors.

It. When you let Blood, take but the fourth part from a Colt, which you take
from a grown Horse.

Swellings.
It. In all Imposthumes and swelling Sores, called Tumors, you must observe the
beginning of the Grief, the increase of the Grief, the perfection and state of
the Grief; And lastly, the declination and ending of the Grief.

It. In the beginning of every such swelling Impostumes, (if you cannot quite
destroy them) use Repercussive Medicines, if they be not near some principal
part of the Body; but then not for fear of endangering Life, and in
Augmentation; use mollifying Medicines, and suppling to Ripen them, and when
they are Ripe, Lance them, and let out the Corruption, or dry them up, and in
the declination of them, use cleansing and healing Medicines.

Hard and soft Swellings.
It. All Swellings are either hard or soft, the hard will commonly corrode, the
soft will continue long.

It. If you thrust your Finger upon any Swelling upon a Horses Legs, then if it
presently rise again and fill, then is the Hurt new and recoverable, but if the
Dent do remain and continue still behind, then is it an old Hurt, and comes of
cold Humors, and asks great Art In healing.

Sores.
When Sores begin to Matter, then they heal, but if the Putrefaction be great,
then beware they rot not inwardly.

Cauterizing.
All Cauterizing or Burning, with hot Irons, straineth things enlarged, dries
up what is too much moistened, dissolveth things gathered together or hardened,
draws back things which are dispersed, and helps old Griefs; for it
repineth, dissolveth, and makes them to run and issue forth Matter, as you may
find more at large hereafter.

Burning.
It. You must sometimes burn under the Sore, to divert Humors, and sometimes
above, to defend and withhold Humors.

It. It is ever better to burn with Copper then with Iron, because Iron is of a
malignant Nature, Steel is of an indifferent Virtue betwixt both.

Actual and Potential Burning, what it is.
It. All Actual Burnings is to burn with Instruments, and Potential Burning is
to burn with Medicines, as are Causticks and Corrasives.

Of blowing Powder into a Horses Eyes.
It. If you blow Powder into a Horses Eyes often, it will make him blind.

Of taking up of V^ins.
It. By no means take up any Veins in the Forelegs, unless great extremity
compel you: for there is nothing will sooner make a Horse stiff and Lame. Many
other Observations there are, which because they are not so general as these
be, I think it meet to omit.

Five things a Parrier ought Principally to know.
1. First, what Diseases a Horse is inclineable to.

2. Secondly, What be the Causes of every disease in particular.

3. Thirdly, How, and by what ways and means these Diseases do accrue.

4. Fourthly, The Signs how to distinguish and know them.

5. And Lastly, the means and manner how to Cure them.

Of Glisters and their Uses.
The Nature and Property of Glisters are diverse, therefore every Farrier ought
to know to what end they serve, and which has Drugs or Simples, they ought to
be compounded, for every Glister is to be made according to the Disease. Now
some are to ease Griefs, and to allay the sharpness of the Humors, some to
Bind, some to Loosen, and some to purge, and some to heal Ulcers. These
Glisters by cleansing the Guts, refresh the Vital Parts, and prepare the Body,
(if the Body be not at that time Soluble) to make the Purgation work the
better, which if you give your Medicine without giving a Glister before it, you
may stir up and provoke the peccant Humors, which by reason they cannot find
present way sorth, being hindered by Oppilations in the Guts, through
Costiveness and Ventosity, and other Impediments, do attempt to make their
Passage a contrary way, which cannot be done but with great hazard to the life
of the poor Beast.

Now for the Composition of Glisters, you shall understand that they be made of
four things, that is, of Decoctions, of Drugs, of Oil, of such like Unctuous
Matter, as Butter, or soft Grease, and fourthly, of diverse Salts to provoke the
Virtue expulsive. A Decoction is a Broth made of certain Herbs, as Mallows,
Marsh-Mallowes, Pell^ory, Camomile, and sometimes of white Lilly Ro^ts, and
other such like things, which we do boil in Water to a third part, and
sometimes we use in stead of Herbs and Water, to take the Fat of Beef-broth, of
a Sheeps-Head, Milk, Whey, and some such kind of Liquor, mingled sometimes
either with Honey or Sugar, according to the quality of the disease; the
Glister being either Lenitive, that is to say, casing of Pain; or Glutinative,
which is, joining of things together; or else Abstersive, which is wiping away
or cleansing of ^ilthy Matter. You ought to Administer according to the Age,
Strength, Greatness and Corpulency of the Horse; for if he be a Horse of a
strong and able Body, of large growth and stature, fat and lusty, we use to put
into the Glister of the Decoction three Pints; but if he be of a small growth,
weak, sick, feeble or lean, then we do put in a quart of the same at most. Of
Oil we use to put in half a Pint, of Salt two or three drams at most, and
sometimes we put Verjuice, sometimes Honey, as we find cause; Drugs we use,
are Seen, Cassia, Agari^k, Anniseeds, Oil of Dill, Oil of Camomile, Oil of
Violets, Sugar Candy, etc. You ought not to exceed the quantity of three Ounces
in one Glister at the most, neither must you exceed of Butter four Ounces, and
let it not be above lukewarm when you give it him, let him be somewhat empty,
and let him be Raked before you Administer it, give it him in a Glister-Pipe
made for that purpose. Which ought to be twelve Inches in the Shank, which must
be put home; and having the Confection within the Bladder, wring it with a very
good strength into his Body, then draw out the Pipe by degrees cut of his Body,
and not all at once, and clap his Tail close to his Tuel, and so hold it with
your Hand close about half an hour at the least, to the end it may work in his
Belly the better.

A Glister for a Horse that is very Costive of Body, and cannot Dung.
Take the Fat of Beef-broth a Pint and an half, of English Honey half a Pint,
adding thereto of white Salt two drams, mix them well together, and Administer
it Blood-warm, and clap his Tail close to his Tuel, and there hold it for half
an hour at least, and if then it will not work as I am confident it will, let
him Trot about easily about half an hour, and set him up warm Clothed and
Littered, and let him stand upon his Trench four or five hours, during which
time he will purge kindly, then unbit him and give him sweet Hay, and an hour
after he has eaten give him a Mash of Malt, and an hour after that, white
Water, and let him drink no cold Water in a day or two after.

The Virtues of it.
The Nature of this Glister is, to open and loosen the Body, to bring away with
it all offensive Humors, to remove Obstructions engendered in the Body by means
of excessive Heat; it cleanses the Guts, and slicketh away all slimy Substance
which is residing in the Guts. The Horse that received this Glister was a small
Seotch Nag, and was grown weak and poor, and low of his Flesh, but if he had
been a great, large, fat, healthy or Corpulent Horse, you might have made it
stronger.

Another Laxative Glister.
Take the Decoction of Mallows, and mix therewith fresh Butter four Ounces, or
Sallet-Oyl half a Pint, and so lukewarm Administer it, and order him as you
did before.

The Nature of it.
This is of all the Glisters the most gentle, and is very Lenitive and a great
Easer of pain, it is good for a Horse that is taken with any Contraction or
Convulsion, and generally for any Costiveness in a Horse whatsoever, proceeding
from any Surfeits or Sickness.

Another Glister Laxative.
Take Pellitory two Handfuls, or for want thereof, Melilot two Handfuls, or if
you cannot get any of them, then two Handfuls of Camomile, but Pellitory is the
best, boil it to a Decoction, and add to it of Verjuice and Salter-Oyl, of each
half a Pint, of Honey four Ounces, of Cassia two Ounces, mix altogether, and
apply it Blood-warm Glister-wise.

The Virtues of it.
It will open the Body and Guts of the Horse very well, it will take from him
all noxious and offensive Humors; it will carry away all spungy Matter; it
will allay the sharpness of Humors; it will cleanse old Ulcers; it will
refresh and comfort the Vital Parts. But if you find you have given him too
great a quantity, so that he Purges or Scoureth too much, then you may give
him this Glister Restringent.

A Restringent Glister.
Take the aforesaid Decoction one Pint, and as much of Cows Milk (as it comes
warm from her) and put to it the Yolks of three New laid Eggs, well beaten and
mixed with the said Liquor, and give it him Blood-warm. This is only to be
applied to a Horse that is very Laxative, or that does empty himself too much.

A Glister for a fat Horse that cannot be kept clean.
Take Mallows three Handfuls, Marsh-mallow Roots cleansed and bruised, and
Violet leaves, of each two Handfuls, Flax-seed three spoonfuls, as many of the
Cloves of white Lilly Roots as you can hold in your hand: Boil all these in
fair water from a Gallon to a quart, and strain it, and put thereto of Seen one
Ounce, which must be infused or steeped in the Liquor three hours, standing
upon the hot Embers, then put to it of Sallet Oil, half a Pint, and being
Blood-warm Administer it.

A Glister in Case of desperate Sickness.
Take of the Oil of Dill, Oil of Camomile, Oil of Violets, of Cassia, of each
half an Ounce, and of brown Sugar Candy in powder, three Ounces, then take half
a Handful of Mallow-leaves, boil them to a Decoction in fair Water, then strain
it, and put to it all the forenamed Ingredients, and Administer it Blood-warm.
This helps all Fevers, it is good against the Pestilence, and all
Languishing Diseases, most excellent against Surfeits, either by Provender or
otherwise, and it will occasion great strength in a short time, if it be
rightly made, and carefully given.

A Glister for the Pestilence and all Fevers.
Take the Pulpe of Colloquintida, half an Ounce (I mean the Seeds and Skin
taken away) of Dragantium three quarters of an Ounce, of Centaury and of
Wormwood, of each half a Handful, of Castoreum a quarter of an Ounce, boil all
these in three quarts of water to a quart, then strain it, and dissolve into
the Broth, of Gerologundinum three Ounces, and of white Salt three Drams, of
Sallet-Oyl half a Pint, and Blood-warm Administer it.

A Glister for the Cholick.
Take Salt water, or new made Brine two Pints, dissolve therein a pretty
quantity of Soap, and so Blood-warm Administer it.

Virtues.
This is very good for the Cholick, or any Sickness or Griping in the Guts or
Belly. And let this suffice for Glisters.

Advice given upon giving Glisters.
1. Before you Administer any Glister, be sure to Rake him.

2. When you put in the Glister-Pipe, apoint it first with Butter or
Sallet-Oyl, and that you put it in and out gently, and by degrees, you must
anoint likewise the Hand and Arm.

3. Let him keep it above half an hour, by holding his Tuel close to his
Fundament.

4. That you do Administer it but Blood-warm.

5. That you squeeze and press between your Hands the Bladder strongly.

6. And lastly, that you let him not drink any cold water in a day or two
after, but let it either be a sweet Mash, or else white Water.


What things are put into a Laxative Glister.
Pellitory, Melil^^e, Camomile, (but Pellutory is the best,) and of this would
I make a Decoction, and to this Decoction would I put Sallet-Oyl, Honey, Aloes
and Verjuice of the Crab, Brank-urfine, Mallows or Marshmallows, Fennel Roots,
Parsley Roots, Jack by the Hedge.

The Nature of the Principal Drugs.
Agarick purges the Brain, Alloes the Breast and Body, Rhubarb purges the
evil water, and it opens the Liver, and helps Obstructions and Opilations,
Aristolochia rotunda mollifieth the Breast, Liver and Lungs, and Ba^^^aury or
Bay Berries do mortisie the peccant humors which do engender in the Breast or
Entrails, near about the Heart; and Saffron (if it be discreetly given) does
marvellously comfort and enlighten the Heart.

What the true Nature of Rubarb it.
Rubarb has two contrary Natures, for if you either scrape, grate or cut it,
then it is a Loosner, for it dissolveth and opens the Liver, and expels
the Obstructions thereof; it expulseth all bad Humors in and about the Heart,
Liver and Spleen; it cleanses the Body, and sends away the peccant Humors
among the Excrements, and all such things as may annoy or offend the Entrails.
But if you shall pound or beat it in a Mortar, or otherwise, the spirit whereof
being a subtle Body, will Transire and fly away, whereby the Operation thereof
will be to bind, and be no way profitable.

The Nature of a Suppository.
The Nature of Suppositories are to help a Horse that cannot well empty
himself, for a Suppository causes him to discharge himself of many superfluous
and evil Humors, which do disturb, annoy and distemper his Bod^ with their
peccant qualities and conditions, for they breed bad (...) which oft-times good
Diet cannot amend, and therefore must be sent away by Purgation, that is to
say, by Suppository, or Glister, or Portion, A Suppository is but a Preparative
to a Glister or Portion, and is of all other things the gentlest you can use;
it will Loosen the Guts, which may be bound and clogged with dry, hot and hard
Excrements, which a Glister will not so well do.

The first Suppository.
Take a Candle of four or five in the pound, and cut off three Inches at the
smaller end, and anoint the biggest part of it either with Sallet-Oyl or fresh
Butter, and so put it into his Fundament, then with your Hand hold his Tail to
his Tuel about half an hour, by which time the Suppository will be dissolved,
then take his Back and Trot him up and down till he do begin to empty and purge
himself, for by this means it will work the better and more kindly. This is she
most gentle of all Suppositories that can be given. This dissolveth all hard,
dry and hot Excrements, and sends them forth, and besides, it suppleth the
Guts. Another, if you find him so weak, that you dare not without the peril of
his life, administer unto him any Portion, or Purging Medicine, then give him
this Suppository.

The second Suppository.
Take of Common Honey six Ounces, of Salt-Niter one Ounce and a half, of
Wheat Flour, and of Anniseeds in fine Powder, of each an Ounce, boil all these
to a stiff thickness, and so make it into Suppositories, then take one of them
and anoint it all over with Sallet-Oyl, and your Hand also, and so put it up
into his Fundament the length of your Hand, then Tie his Tail betwixt his Legs,
by fastening it to his Girts, and let it remain so half an hour, then ride and
order him as before. This is good in case of Surfeits or inward Sickness.

Suppository the third.
Take a piece of Castle-Sope, and paring it, bring it into the fashion of a
Suppository; and apply it, and order him as before is taught you. This is
special good to purge Phlegm.

Suppository the fourth.
Take so much Saven as will suffice, and stamp it to a Mash, and stamp with it
Stavesakar and Salt, of each two ounces; boil these in common Honey so much as
will suffice, till it be thick, and so make it up into Suppositories, and
administer one of them as you did before, and order him ^o likewise. This
purges Choler.

Suppository the Fifth.
Take an angry red Onion, and Pill it, and Jag it Cross-ways with your Knife,
and so administer it, and order him as before. This purges Melancholy.

Suppository the Sixth.
Take common Honey a pint, and boil it till it be thick, and make it up into
Suppositories as it cools, and administer it, and order him as before
prescribed. This purges ill Humors, it cools and comfort the Body very
much, and causes a good Appetite to Meat.

Observations to be observed in Giving of Suppositories, Glisters or Portions.
First, you must do it in a Morning Fasting, unless Necessity urges the
contrary.

Secondly, you must not at those times suffer him to drink any cold water, no,
not with exercise, but either sweet Mashes, or white water.

Thirdly, It is very needful, that before you administer either of them, to
Rake him. And

Fourthly, That he be after kept warm.

Of Purgations and their Uses.
Purgation is an emptying and voiding of superfluous Humors, which do cumber,
pester and disturb the Body with their peccant condition; which ill Humors do
breed bad Nutriment, which when it will not be concocted and amended, either by
fair means or by the help of Nature, then it must be compelled, forced and
driven away by Purgation, Vomit, Glister or Suppository; but to speak only of
Purgations, Purging of Horses are either by Pills, or Portions; Pills are any
solid or substantial stuff fixed together in one Body, and being made into
round Balls are cast down the Horses Throat. A Portion is when you give him any
liquid purging Matter to drink, whether it be Purging Powders dissolved in Wine
or Ale; or that if it be any other liquid stuff. Now Pills purge and make clean
the Head and Brain, bringing Phlegm and other gross Humors down into the
Excrements. And Potions cleanse the Stomach, Guts, and every other inward
Member,

What a skilful Farrier ought to know before he goes about to Purge a Horse,
he ought to consider the Nature of the Simples.
Now the Art of the true Farrier is in choosing of the Simples, whereof these
Pills or Portions are to be compounded, and in skilfully applying the same.
First, then he ought to know what ill Humors he is oppressed with, as whether it
proceed from Choler, Phlegm and Melancholy, and where they do most abound, and
then what Simples are best to purge those Humors, and with what quality or
temperament they are endued, for some Simples are most violent and next Cousins
to strong Poisons, as Scamony or Colloquintida: some again are gentle, as
Manna, Cassia, Whey, Prunes, and such like; and some are neither too violent
nor too gentle, but of a Mean, as Rubarh, Agarick, Seen and Aloes.

The Nature of the Disease, the Strength of the Horse, and the Climate he was
bred in.
You ought to consider the Nature of the Disease, the Strength of the Horse,
and with them join the Nature, Strength and Quantity of the Medicine, he must
consider likewise the Climate wherein he was bred; And you are to make a
difference between delicate and tender Horses, and strong and sturdy Horses,
and in such Cases the quality and quantity is to be looked into of every
Simple. The Climate likewise is to be respected, whether it be too hot or too
cold, and you are not to administer as hot Simples in the Summer as in the
Winter, nor so cold things in the Winter as in the Summer, you ought to have
respect to the day, and to choose that always that is most temperate, for too
much Heat makes a Horse faint, and too much cold spoils the working of the
Medicine.

When he is to have his Portion.
Give him his Portion in the Morning, after he has fasted from Meat and Drink
all the Night before.

To Ride him after it.
After he has received his Portion, ride him gently after it, about an hour,
and set him up, and let him stand on the Bit two hours after it, well Littered
and Clothed. If he be sick, let him lie down, but if that will do him no good,
and that you find him so sick that you fear his life, then give him a quart of
warm Milk with a little Saffron in it, and he will do well, and give him no
other Meat then a Math of Malt and white water to drink till his Medicine has
done working.

How to make a Mash.
Take half a Peck of Ground Malt and put it into a Pale, then put in as much
scalding hot Water as will wet it very well, then stir it about half an hour,
till tasting the Water you find it as sweet as Honey, then being lukewarm
give it to the Horse to drink. This Mash is only to be used after you have
given him a Purge to make it work the better, or after hard labor, or instead
of drink in the time of any great Sickness.

Now to come to particular Receipts and Medicines themselves; and though the
Ancient Farriers do make but two kinds, that isto say, Pills and Purgations;
yet I divide them into three, that is to say, Scourings, Pills and Purgations.

What Scourings are.
Scourings are those wholesome, Natural and gentle purging Medicines, which
stirring up no great Flux of Humors, do only keep the Body clean from such
Evils as would arise and grow, being every way as wholesome in Health as in
Sickness, and may most properly be termed Preparatives, or Preparers of the
Body to entertain more stronger Medicines.

Scouring by Grass.
To speak of the most gentle and natural Scouring, which is Grass, which you
are to give but for fifteen days together, and no more, for after that it
Fatteth, the best Scouring Grass is a new Mown Meadow, for that will Rake his
Guts very well, nor will he in such a place gather Flesh; but if you intend to
Fat him, you are to take him out from thence, and put him into some other
Pasture, where the Sith has not been. And this manner of Scouring will cause
him to empty himself well of all his evil Hamours and Surseits, ease his Limbs
mavelous well, do his Legs and Feet very much good, refine his corrupt Blood,
and make him agile and full of Spirit. Next unto Grass is Sorrage, which is
only the Blades of green Corn, as Wheat, Rye, Barley, and such like, being
given him seven days and no more, which cleanses and cools the Body very
much, so does the leaves of Sallows, and of the Elm-green Thistles, likewise
being cut up and given him for about five days is a good Scourer. And the last
of these gentle Scourings is the Mash of Malt as ascresaid; but as you are
prescribed there to make it of a quarter of a Peck of Malt, you are to take a
larger here (if you use it for a Scouring) a Peck of Malt, and put to it a
handful or more of beaten Hemp Seed.

A Scouring to be given after a Sweat.

Take half an Ounce of Rozin of Jallop in Powder, half an Ounce of Cream of
Tartar powdered, and half an Ounce of Licorish in Powder, make these up into
Balls with fresh Butter, about the bigness of a small Wall-nut, and give him
four or five at a time, in a Horn-full of Beer, one after another.

Scourings of a little stronger Nature are these.
To Mix with his Oats a Handful or two of Hemp Seed, or to take a Handful of
the Powder of dried Box-leaves, and as much of Brimstone, and mix it amongst
his Provender. These are to be used after Labor when he has Sweat much.

They Purge the Head and Stomach.
These two Scourings work upon no Matter but what Nature will excel, they purge
the Head, Stomach and Intrails, they kill all kind of Worms, and dry up
Phlegm.

Scourings of a stronger Nature.
Take of Sallet-Oyl half a Pint, of New Milk from the Cow a Pint, brew it
together, and give it him lukewarm, or else take a Pint of Muscadine, and half
a Pint of Sallet-Oyl, and give it him to drink, or the same quantity of Oil and
sack mixed together, and give it him lukewarm.

Their Virtues.
These Scourings cleanse the Head, Body and Guts, from all Phlegm or Molten
Grease, which any violent labor has dissolved, they are exceeding good for
any manner of Cold, or stopping of the Wind-pipes, and if you add to them good
store of Sugar Candy it will be the better.

How to Order a Horse before you give him Physic.
In Winter if his Body be purged, it must be prepared by Blood-letting with
Artificial Diet; you are to keep him a day or two without Hay, Straw, or such
like hard Meats, which will hinder the Working of the Physic, and he must be
kept for a time from all manner of Meat, because Emptiness is a great help to
Physical Operation, otherwise it may happen to do more hurt then good. Two or
three days before you purge him, let his Meat be either Wheat or Rye-Bran,
prepared like as has been taught you, or else good Bread made on purpose with
Beans, Pease, and some Rye in it. Or else good sweet Oats clean Sifted, and let
his Drink be white Water only. And that Morning you intend to give him his
Purge, let him be Fasting from either Meat or Drink.

The easiest sort of Pills.
The easiest Pills are these, either take twenty Cloves of Garlic clean pill'd
and bruised, then a quarter of a pound of sweet Butter, and so roll up the
Garlic in four or five Balls, as big as two Wall-Nuts a piece, and throw them
down his Throat one after another; or else take a quarter of a pound of Butter,
and as much red Saunders, beat them very well together in a Mortar, and make
them up in Balls, and give him them as you did the other; or else take a
handful of Rosemary-leaves chopped very small, and mix them with a quarter of a
pound of Butter, and make it into round Balls as the other, and give them the
Horse; or else take five green Figs and put them down his Throat.

The strongest sort of Pill.
Take one pound of Lard laid in water two hours, and take nothing but two
Ounces of the clean Fat thereof, and stamp it in a Mortar, and put thereto of
Licorish, of Anniseeds, and of Fennegreek beaten to powder, of each one Ounce,
of Alloes beaten into powder one Ounce, of Agarick half an Ounce, knead them
altogether into Paste, and make three or four Balls of them, and give them the
Horse.

This Pill is not to be given but to a Horse of great Stature, and strong in
Health of Body.

Purg t^ns that are the strongest C^rs^rs.
1. Take Myrrh and mix it with a Pint of White Wind and it will purge all
Sickness that proceeds of (...) the Signs whereof his Belly will swell, be
very hot, neither dang nor break Wind. Or

2. Take a Pint of Wine, and bea^ a raw Egg therein, and add to it a quarter of
an Ounce of (...) and half an Ounce of Myrrh beaten to powder, and give it him
lukewarm, and it will purge all inward Discases proceeding of (...) Or

3. Two spoonfuls of the powder of Dia^ente given with half a Pint of Swines
Grease, purges all Diseases proceeding of (...) Or

4. Take as much black Soap as the bigness of a Wall-nut, a quart of new Milk,
and a quarter of a Pint of Sallet-Oyl, and give it him lukewarm, and it
purges all cold Infirmiteis, but it will make him exceeding Sick. Or

5. Take the Guts of a Tench or Barbel cut into small pieces, and give it him
in a quart of White Wind, and it will purge him from all Costiveness and pain
in the Guts. Or

6. Rye being boiled so that it burst not, and dried again, and given him in
stead of Provender, purges and kills all manner of Worms. Or


7. Take of Alocs Sacco^rina one ounce, two drams of Rozin of Jellop, Gentian,
Aristolochia and Elecampane, of each a dram, mix them well in a quart of Ale,
and two Ounces of Butter, with two Eggs whites, and all well beaten; shake in
the Aloes last, when it is a little warm, and give it him. Or

8. Take of Radish Roots one Ounce, of the Root called Panax, and Scamony, of
each half an Ounce, beaten altogether, and boiled in a quart of Honey, and give
him two spoon^nls of it to drink in a quart of Ale warm, and this will purge
all gross Humors whatsoever. Or

9. Take Elecampane Roots boiled in Milk till they be soft, and add them to
half a pint of Sallet-Oyl, and give it him lukewarm, and this will purge and
cleanse any kind of Glaunders. Or

10. Take of sweet Soap a quarter of a pound, made up into Balls, and give them
the Horse, and it will purge all Humors whatsoever, both viclently and most
abundantly. Or

11. Take of White Wind a pint, or for want of that, a quart of New Ale, so
much of the powder (...) of the best and choicest, as you may take up upon a
shilling at four times, give it him warm. This will purge away his filth and
^lime, and carry away his peccant Humors which S^^ feits has engendered. Or


12. Take an Ounce or better of the best Aloes, and after you have beaten it to
very fine powder, then work it up with a little sweet Butter, and then divide
it into three parts, and cover them all over with clear Butter, as big as a
small wash-Ball, and give them in a Morning Fasting upon the point of a Stick,
and give him a Horn-full of warm Beer after them, and Ride him after them, and
set him up warm. Prob ^um est. Or

13. Take of the strongest Ale-wort one quart, of ordinary Honey a quarter of a
Pint, of London-Trea^le two Ounces, mix and brew altogether well, and so give
it him Blood-warm, and keep him upon the Trench warm Clothed and well Littered
six hours after, and let his Drink be white water or a sweet Mash: This both
purges and comfort, put into his Drink, either the powder of Brimstone, or
of Fenegreek or Turmerick, or (...) one or more together, according as he will
be brought to like, which being well mixed, put into his Drink one spoonful at
once. Or

14. Take of ordinary Honey, and mingle it with his Oats, which must be mixed
by rubbing the Oats and Honey betwixt the Hands; let him eat his Oats thus
mingled till you find him quite Cured; which will be when he has quite done
Running at the Nose. This is one of the best and most certain Cordials that I
know, for this disperseth all Phlegm and Choler; it also purges the Head,
Brain and Blood, it venteth evil Humors, it causes good Digestion, and freeth
him from Glaunders, Colds, Catarrhs, Rh^ums, running at the Note, and the like.
Or

15. When you let Blood you may save it in a Bowl or Dish, keeping it stirring
to keep it from Clotting, and give it him to drink in a Drenching-Horn, mingled
with a Handful of Salt. This is good for a Cold. Or


16. Take an Ounce of Aloes Succotrina beaten to powder, and as much of the
powder of Rozin of Jallop as will lie upon a six pence, mix them well with a
little fresh Butter, then divide it into three parts, and cover each part all
over again with Butter, about the bigness of a good handsome Wash-ball, and give
them him in the Morning Fasting, with a drenching Horn-full of strong warm Beer
after every Ball; And order him as you have Directions for sick Horses. This is
a very good Receipt to scour a Hide-bound Horse that is sick of Moulten Grease,
and that does not thrive, nor Fill himself, nor carry a good Coat. Or


17. Take a handful of Groundsel, half a handful of dried (or less of green)
Wormwood, and half a handful of Red Sage chopped very small, and boiled in
three Pints of strong Beer or Ale; Then strain the Beer from the Herbs, and put
into it a good Piece of Butter, with as much of the powder of Mecho^^an as will
lie upon a broad shilling, and give it him lukewarm in the Morning Fasting,
and order him as you do sick Horses. This Drink purges slime and Moulten
Grease in Lumps, and makes a Horse thrive very well both in Winter and Summer.
See the second Part for Purgations, for anothor of this kind.


Bran, how Boiled and Prepared to give a Horse that has a Cold; As also what
Seeds you are to give him amongst his Provender for the Cure of it.
Set a Kettle over the Fire almost full of water, and when it is ready to boil
put in your Bran, and let it boil about a quarter of an hour; Then take it off
and cover it with a Cloth or Board, let it stand till it cool a little, and
give it him early in the Morning as hot as he can conveniently eat it; At Night
let his Meat be Oats and white Water, but be sure you put into his Provender
the quantity of an Egg-shell full of these Powders grossly beaten (lest he blow
them away) viz. Linseed, Cumminseed, Nutmegs, Ginger, Cloves, Fennegreek,
Sileris-Montani, of each of these two Ounces, and of Brimstone six Ounces; but
before you give him his Oats and Powders, give him white Water, and Rub him
and Litter him well; Let him seed on Wheat-straw about an hour before you give
him his Oats, and afterward give him some Hay. This way of Feeding about
eight or nine days together, will quite free him from his Cold, if it be not
too violent.


Horse-Spice how to make.
These several Powders mixed together make it, viz. Rubarb one Ounce, Turmerick
two Ounces, Eleoampane six Ounces, Brimstone four Ounces, Fennel-seeds four
Ounces, Grains of Paradise four Ounces, etc. Put all these together in a Glass
or Gally-pot, and keep them till you have occasion to use them. The quantity
that you are to give your Horse, is either greater or smaller, according to the
strength and Constitution of your Horse; you are not to exceed above an Ounce
at a time, mixed with a spoonful of the best Sallet-Oyl, and a spoonful or two
of the Treacle of Jean, dissolved in a quart of strong Beer, which is very good
for a Cold, and to make a Horse thrive. Or you may give him an Ounce of them in
three pints of warm Beer or Ale, after Blood-letting, to prevent Diseases. If
you leave out the Rubarb, you may give him a greater quantity, for that is a
great Purger.

Rules to know where a Horse Halteth, either before or behind.
If he do Halt before, his Grief must of necessity be either in the Shoulder,
or Knee, or in the Shank, or in the Pastern, or in the Foot; if it be in the
Shoulder, it must be either toward the Withers, or in the pitch of the
Shoulder, you may know it in that he will a little draw his Leg after him, and
not handle it so nimbly as he does the other, if he cast his Leg more outward
then he does the other, it is a sign that he is Lame, and that the Grief lies
in his Shoulder; and if you take him in your Hand turn him short on either
Hand, you shall find him to complain of that Shoulder he is Lame of, and he
will either favor that Leg, or trip in the turning, you may find him Lame by
his standing in the Stable, and he will hold out that Leg that is Lame more
then the other; and if he complains more when you are on his Back then
otherwise, then be sure the Grief lies in the Withers, and Gripe him hard, *and
you shall perceive him to shrink, and perhaps offer to bite. If he tread thick
and short before, then is the Grie upon the Pitch of the Shoulder close to the
Breast, which you may find by setting your Thumb hard to the place, and by
Thrusting him with it, if you would have him to go back, whereat he will shrink
and put back his Leg, Foot and Body; if the Grief be in the Elbow, you may know
it by pinching him with your Forefinger and Thumb, and he will hold up his Leg
and offer to bite; and these be all the Griefs that lie in the Shoulder of a
Horse. If the Griefs lie lower, they must be either in the Knee, in the Skin,
in the Pastern, or in the Foot.

When in the Knee.
If it be in the Knee, you may find it by his stiff going, for he will not bend
it so nimbly as he does the other. If it be in the Shank or Shinbone, you may
see it, and likewise feel the same, it being then a Back-Sinew strain, Splint,
or some such like Sorrance or Annoyance If it be in the bending of the Knee,
then it is a Mallender, which is also easily descried; when it is in the
Pastern or Joint, then you may know it by his not bending it so well as the
other; besides, if you put your Hand upon the place, you shall find it very
hot; if it be in the Foot, it must be either in the Cronet or in the Sole; if
in the Cronet it is probable it came by some strain or wrench; if in the Heel,
then it came by some overreach, or else by some Disease in or about the Frush;
If in the Sole, then it came by some Prick, Accloy, Retoire, Nail, Stub, Stone
or Gravel. And thus I have showed unto you the several ways that cause a Horse
to be Lame before, and how to know and distinguish the places grieved, together
with the occasion of every particular Grief.

How to distinguish an old Grief from a New.
You have three Ways to find out his Lameness, in what Joint, Limb or Member
of the Body soever.

1. The first way is to cause him to be turned at the Halters end, on either
hand, suddenly and swistly, upon as hard a way as you can pick out; and if he
have any Ach, Wrench or Grief in his fore-parts, it will appear: for when he
turns upon that Hand that the Grief is on, he will favor that Leg, and so
run both toward you and from you, especially done at a little yielding Hill;
and if he have any imperfection, he will soon show it, for he will favor that
Leg wherein the Grief resideth* But if you cannot find it out this way.

2. Then your second way must be to take his Back, and Ride him till you have
thoroughly heat him, then set him up for two or three hours till he be cold,
then turn him at the Halters-end, or Ride him, and you may easily discover the
least Grief that may be in him.

3. A third way there is, and that to know whether the Grief proceeds from a
hot or cold cause, for if it proceed from a hot cause, he will Halt most when
he is hot; but if it be of a cold cause, then he will Halt least when he is
hot, and most ridden and traveled, and most at his first setting sorth,
whilst he is cold, and thus much for Lameness and Halting before.

Now finding that his Lameness is not before, you may then conclude, if he be
Lame at all it must needs be behind, and then it must of necessity be either in
the Foot or in the nether Joint, in the Pastern or in the Leg, in the Ham or in
the Hoof, in the stiffling place or Joint, or in the Hip. If the Grief be
either in the Leg, Pastern or Foot, you may know it by the same Signs as I
have inculcated to you already in the Forelegs. If it be in the bending of the
Ham it must be a Selander. If it be in the Hoof, then it is either a Bone or
Blood-spavin, which is easy enough to be discerned, or else it must come of
some Blow, Wrench or Strain, neither then will the swelling easily appear,
which you may perceive either by the stiffness of the Joint, or you may find
the place to be hot and burning. If the pain lie in the stiffing place, you may
know it by his Gate, for in his going he will cast the stifle-Joynt outward,
and the Bone on the inside will be bigger then the other, besides his Toe will
hardly touch the Ground. If it be in the Hip, which is upon the side of the
Buttock; and if it be newly taken, you may know it in that he will go side-long
like a Crab. And if it be an old Hurt, the Hip will be fallen lower then the
other, and the flesh to shrink, which to discover it the sooner run him at the
full length of the Rein, and he will be sure to favor that Leg the Grief is
in; but if you find him to go upright without favoring any Leg, then take his
Back and ride him till he be warmed, and then set him up till he be cold, and
then lead or trot him in your Hand as you did before, and if he be lame at all
he will be sure to complain. And so much for Lameness before and behind.

CHAP. I.
The True Art of Pairing and Shooing all ma^m^r of Hoofs, and in what Point the
Art of Shooing does consist.
The Art of Shooing consists in these Points, viz. in Paring the Hoof well,
in making the Shoo of good Stuff, in well-fashioning the Web thereof, and
well-piercing the same, in Fitting the Shoo unto the Horses Foot, in making
Nails of good stuff, and well-fashioning of the same; and finally, in well
driving of the said Nails, and cleansing of the same. But since neither Pairing
nor Shooing is no absolute thing of it self, but has respect unto the Foot or
Hoof, (for the Shoo is to be Fitted to the Foot, and not the Foot to the Shoo)
and there be diverse kinds of Hoofs both good and bad, requiring great
diversity, as well of Pairing as Shooing; it is meet therefore that we speak of
the diversities of Hoofs, and then show you how they ought to be paired and
shod.

CHAP. II.
Of Hoofs and diverse Kinds thereof.
^. Of Hoofs, some be perfect, and some imperfect. The perfect Hoof is that
which is round, smooth, tough and short, so as he may tread more on the Toe
then on the Heel, and also right, and somewhat hollow within, but not
over-hollow, having a narrow Frush and broad Heels.

The imperfect Hoof.
The imperfect Hoof is that which lacks any of these Properties before-said,
belonging to a perfect Hoof. If the Hoof be not round but broad, and spreading
out of the sides and quarters, that Horse for the most part has narrow heels,
and in continuance of time will be flat Footed, which is a weak Foot, and will
not carry a Shoo long, nor Travel far, but soon surbate; and by treading more
on his Heels then on his Toes, will go low on his Pasterns, and such Feet
through their weakness be much subject to false quarters, and to Gravelling,
which is most commonly seen in Flanders Horses, and such as are bred in moist
Grounds.

Brittle and rugged Hoofs.
Secondly, if the Hoof be not smooth, but rugged and full of Circles, like
Rams-horns, then it is not only unseemly to the Eye, but also it is a sign that
the Foot is in no good temper, but too hot and dry, and that makes it to be
Brittle, which defect is often seen in our English Horses.

Long Hoofs.
Thirdly, if it be long, then it will cause the Horse to tread all upon the
Heels, and to go low on his Pasterns, and thereby to breed Wi^d^gall^,
whereunto the Jennets of Spain be much subject, by reason of their long Hoofs.

Cro ked Hoofs.
Fourthly, if the Hoof be not right but crooked. viz. broad without and narrow
within, whereby the Horse is splay-footed, then it will cause him to tread more
inward then outward, and to go so close with his Joints together, as he cannot
well Travel without enterfering, or perhaps striking one Leg so hard against
the other, as he becomes Lame. But if he be broad within, and narrow without,
that is not so hurtful, notwithstanding it will cause him to Gravel sooner on
the outside, then on the inside.

Flat Hoofs.
Fifthly, if the Hoof be flat and not hollow within, is most commonly seen in
Frezons and Flanders Horses, then it breeds such inconveniences as are
before declared in the first imperfect Hoof. And again, if it be ever-hollow,
then it will dry the faster and cause him to be Hoof-bound, for the over-hollow
Hoof is a straight narrow Hoof, and grows upright, for though the Horse
treads upright, and not on his heels, yet such kind of Hoofs will dry
over-fast, unless they be continually stopped, and cause him to be Hoof-bound,
which Lameth him, making him to Halt, whereunto the Jennets and Barbary-Horses
are much subject.

Broad Frushes.
Sixthly, If the Frush be broad, then the Heels be weak and so soft, as you may
almost bend them together, and then he will never tread boldly on the Stones,
or on hard Ground.

Narrow Heels.
Seventhly, Narrow Heels be tender, and he will at last grow to be Hoof-bound,
to which defects the Jennets are most commonly subject.

CHAP. III.
Of Pairing the perfect Hoof and fore-Feet.
First, Pair the Scat of the Shoe, as even and plain as may be, that so it may
sit close, and not bare more on one place then another, and take more of the
Toe then the Heel, for the Heels must be higher then the Toes, because all the
weight of the Horses fore-Body lies upon the Quarters and Heels of the
fore-Feet. And therefore those Parts must be most maintained, and taken off
with the Butteris as little as may be, for the Heels are naturally weaker then
the Toes. But in the Pairing of the hinder-Feet is clean contrary, as you shall
sinde hereafter in its proper place.

CHAP. IV.
Of Shooing the perfect Hoof and fore-Feet, and how the Shoo, Pairing and Nail
should be made.
Make your Shoo of Spanish Iron, with a broad Web, fitting it to the Hoof, and
let the Spunges be thicker and more substantial then any other part of the
Shoo, yea, and also somewhat broad, so as the Quarters on both Sides may appear
without the Hoofs a straw breadth, to guard the Coffin, which is the strength of
the Hoof, and when you come to the piercing thereof, pierce it from the Quarter
to the hard Toe, but not backward toward the Heel, and that the holes may be
wider on the outside then on the inside, and that the Circle of the piercing
may be more distant from the edge of the Toe, then from the edge of the
Quarter, whereas it begins because the Hoof is thicker forward then
backward, and therefore more hold to be taken. Make your Nails of the same Iron
as aforesaid, the Heads whereof should be square, and not fully so broad
beneath as above, but answerable to the piercing holes, so as the Heads of the
Nails may enter in and fill the same, appearing somewhat above the Shoo, and
then they will stand sure without shogging, and endure longer, and that that
which pierces them be of the same Size as the Nails, that is to say, great
above and small beneath, which our common Smith, little regard, for they make
the holes as wide on the inside as the outside, and their Nails of so great a
Shouldering by driving them over-hard upon the Nail-hole, as that the Heads, or
rather Necks of the said Nails cannot enter into the holes. For to say the
truth, a good Nail should have no shouldering at all, but be made with a plain
and square Neck, so as it may justly fill the piercing hole of the Shoo, for
otherwise the Head of the Nail standing high, and the Neck thereof being weak,
either it breaks off or else bends upon any light occasion, so as the Shoo
stands loose from the Hoof, and is quickly lost. Moreover, the shanks of the
Nails should be somewhat slat, and the Points sharp, without hollowness or
flaw, and stiffer toward the Head above then beneath. And when you drive,
drive at the first with soft strokes, and with a light Hammer, until the Nail
be somewhat entered, and in Shooing fine and delicate Horses, Grease the Points
of the Nails with fost Grease, that so they may enter the more easily, and
drive the two Talon-Nails first. Then look whether the Shoo stands right or
not, which you shall perceive in beholding the Frush, for if the Spunges on
both sides be equally distant from the Frush, then it stands right, if not,
then amend it and set the Shoo right, and standing right drive in another Nail,
that done, let the Horse set down his Foot again, and look round about it, to
see whether it fitteth the Horses Foot in all places, and whether he treads
even or just on it or not, and if you see that the Shoo does not furnish every
part equally, but appears more on one side then another; Then lift up the
Horses other Foot, that so he may stand steadily upon that Foot, and so
standing strike him on the Hoof with your Hammer on that side that the Shoo is
scant, and that shall make the Shoo to come that way. The Shoo standing
straight and just, drive in the rest of all the Nails, to the Number of eight,
that is to say, four on one side, and four on another, so as the Points of the
Nails may seem to stand in the outside of the Hoof, even and just one by
another, as it were in a Circular Line, and not out of order like the Teeth of
a Saw, whereof one is bent one way and another another way. That done, cut them
off and clinch them, so as the Clinches may be hidden in the Hoof, which by
cutting the Hoof with a point of a Knife, a little beneath the appearing of the
Nail, you may easily do. Thus done with a Rape, pair the Hoof round, so as the
edge of the Shoo may be seen round about.

CHAP. V.
Of Pairing of the imperfect Hoofs, every one according to their Kinds. And
first of the broad Hoof.
A broad Hoof, not being as yet grown to be too flat, may be helped and kept
from being flat, by the skill and diligence of the Farrier in well pairing and
shooing it. And therefore to pair it well, let him take as much of the Toe with
his Butteris as he can possibly, keeping it always under, but let him not touch
the Quarters nor the Heels at all, unless it be to make the Seat of the Shoo
plain, and let that be done so superficially as may be, so shall the Hoofs
remain always strong.

CHAP. VI.
Of Shooing the Broad Hoof.
Make a good strong Shoo, with a broad Web, and broad Spunges, and pierced as
is before-said, fitting it to the Foot, being first pared as is abovesaid, and
from the Talon-Nail toward the Heel, let the Shoo appear a straws breadth
without the Hoof, and set it on in such order and with such Nails as
appertains unto the perfect Hoof, saving that you shall set five Nails on the
outside of his Hoof, and four on the inside, because he wears more without
then within.

CHAP. VII.
Of Pareing the rough and brittle Hoof.
This kind of Hoof is most commonly weaker without then within, and because it
is for the most part hotter then the other Hoofs be, the Heels may be more
opened then the other, that so they may be the more easily stopped with Cow Dung,
or other Ointment to keep it moist, and also the raggedness on the outside of
the Coffin should be Filed away with a Rape, and made smooth, and also more
often anointed then other Hoofs; and as for the rest of the Hoof it must be
pared as the perfect one.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Shooing the rough and brittle Hoof.
Make this Shoo neither too light, but so as it may well bear the Horse; nor
yet too heavy, for then the Hoof being weak, will soon cast it, and pierce this
Shoo, to be set on with nine Nails, five without and four within.

CHAP. IX.
Of Paring the long Hoof.
The long Hoof may be helped by cutting away the Toe, for the shorter foot a
weak and slender Leg has, the better. And to say the truth, it is the short
foot that makes the strong Leg, and the long Foot makes the weak Leg, being
forced thereby to tread all upon the Heel, and on the Pastern, and let the rest
of the Hoof be pared like the perfect Hoof.

CHAP. X.
Of Shooing the long Hoof.
Make this Shoo as round as you can at the Toe, that the breadth may take away
the evil sight of the length; and if the Foot be very narrow, then let the Shoo
disbord without the hoof, and pierce the Shoo the deeper, and set it backward
enough, because such kind of Feet dotread most on the Heels, and set the Shoo
on with eight Nails, like the perfect Hoof.

CHAP. XI.
Of Paring the crooked Hoof.
First, look on what side the hoof is highest and least worn, and then pare all
that away, and make it equal with the lower side which is most worn, without
touching the worn side at all, unless it be to make the Seat of the Shoo plain,
and as for the rest, pare it like the perfect Hoof.

CHAP. XII.
Of Shooing the crooked Hoof.
Make an indifferent strong Shoo with a broad Web, sitting it to the Foot, and
Pare it not until you have laid the Shoo unto the Foot, to the intent you may
pare it to the Horses most Commodity, which shall be done, if you pare the
scant side, which most commonly is the inside, more toward the Toe, then the
fuller or stronger side. And whereas the Hoof is weakest, there also make the
Shoo strongest, and set on this Shoo with nine Nails, viz. five on the stronger
side, and four on the weaker side.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Paring the flat Hoof, otherwise called the Promised Hoof.
Make the Seat of the Shoo plain, and take somewhat of the Toe, but touch not
the Heel nor the Ball of the Foot, but leave both them so strong as you can.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Shooing the flat Hoof, or Promised Hoof.
Make this Shoo with a very broad Web, for the more it cover the weak Sole, the
better, and let the mid-part of the Web that covers the Ball of the Foot be
much thicker then the outsides where the piercings be, and let it be so hollow
as it touch no part of the Ball of the Foot, and let it be large and long
enough in all places, so as the Horse may go at ease, and let it be pierced
round about the Toe, to favor the Heels, and make ten holes for ten Nails,
viz. five on each side.

CHAP. XV.
Of Paring the over-hollow Hoof.
Pare this Hoof round about, and especially the Seat of the Shoe, viz. round
about by the Edges, to the intent the hollowness of the Hoof within may not be
so deep, but more shallow then it was before, and let it be always kept moist
with stopping it, for fear of Hoof-binding, observing in your Paring so even a
hand as may be, in all points like unto the perfect Hoof.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Shooing the over hollow Hoof.
Make a light Shoo in such order and form as was said before, to serve the
perfect Hoof.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Paring the Hoof that has a broad Frush.
Broad Frushes do cause weak heels, and therefore had need of little or no
paring at all, and for that cause pare only the Toe, and also the Seat of the
Shoo, so much as shall be needful, to the even standing of the Shoo, leaving
the heels so strong as may be.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Shooing the Hoof that has a broad Frush.
Make this Shoo stronger toward the Heel then toward the Toe, and also let
the Web be somewhat broad toward the heels to save them from the Ground, and
set on this Shoo with nine Nails, because most commonly it is a great Foot, and
in all other points make it like the Shoo with the perfect Hoof.

CHAP. XIX.
Of Paring the Hoof that has narrow Heels.
Pare the Toe short, and make the Seat of the Shoo fair and plain, and open
only so much, as there may be some little space betwixt the Frush and the Heel,
for the less you take of the Heel, the better.

CHAP. XX.
Of Shooing the Hoof with narrow Heels.
Make a light Shoo with a broad Web, and let the Spunges be so broad as they
may almost meet together, to defend the Heel from the Ground, and pierce it all
toward the Toe, sparing the Heel so much as you can, and let the Shoo be long
enough toward the Heels, and set it on with eight Nails, like the Shoo that
fitteth the perfect Hoof.

CHAP. XXI.
Of Pairing and Shooing the Hinder-Feet.
The Paring of the hinder-Feet, is clean contrary unto the fore-Feet, for the
weakest part of the hinder-Foot is the Toe, and therefore in pareing the
hinder-Foot, the Toe must be always more spared then the Heels, but in all
other points observe the order of paring, according to the perfection or
imperfection of the Hoofs before declared.

CHAP. XXII.
Of Shooing the Hinder-Feet.
Make the Shoo fit for the Hoof as is before-said, and let it be strongest at
the Toe, and pierced nigher the Heel then the Toe, because the Toe is the
weakest part of the Foot, and let the outside of the hinder-Shoo be made with
a Calkin, not over-high, but let the other Sponge be agreeable unto the Calkin,
that is to say, as high in a manner as the Calkin, which Calkin is to keep him
from sliding, but then it may not be sharp pointed, but rather flat, and
handsomely turned upward, which is the best sort of Calkin.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of Shooing the Hoof that has a false Quarter.
If the Horse Halt, then make him a Shoo fitting to his Foot, tacking it on the
Quarter on that side that his false Quarter is on. If he do not halt then make
him a Shoo, with a Button or Shouldering on the inside of the Shoo, and next to
the Sole of the Foot, somewhat distant from the false Quarter toward the Toe,
and that shall defend the sore place, so as the Shoo shall not touch it. And
with this kind of Shoo you may Travel your Horse where you will.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of Pareing and Shooing for Enterfering.
Those Hoofs that enterfere, are most commonly higher on the outside then on
the in-fide, and therefore you should take off the outside with a Butteris, to
the intent that the inside may be somewhat higher (if it will be) then the
outside, and then make him a Shoo fit for his Foot, which should be thicker on
the inside then on the outside, and let that Shoo never have any Calkin, for
that will make him to tread awry, and the sooner to enterfere, and let it be
prepared in such sort that it makes him not to enterfere.

CHAP. XXV.
Of Paring and Shooing the Foot that is Hoof-bound.
First, Pare his Toe as short as may be, and pare the Sole somewhat thin, and
open the Heels well, and make him a half-Shoo like a Half Moon.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of making the Planch-Shoo, or Pauncelet.
The Planch Shoo makes a good Foot and evil Leg, because it makes the Foot to
grow beyond the measure of the Leg. Notwithstanding, for a weak Heel it is
mavelous good, and it will last longer then any Shoo, and it is borrowed from
the Moyl that has weak Heels and Frushes, to keep the Foot from Stones and
Gravel. Notwithstanding, woe be unto that Horse that has need of such a Shoo.

CHAP. XXVII.
Shoes with Calkins, Rings, Welts, and turning Vices, and of the Patten Shoo.
Besides, all these kind of Shoes before recited, there be diverse others,
whereof some be made with high Calkins, some with Rings, some with Welts or
Borders about, and some with Vices, some with Toes turned upward, some with
Heels turned upward, and of many other Fashions, which though they be not so
needful, I thought good to speak somewhat of them. And first, as touching
Shoes with Calkins, that though they be intended to keep the Horse from
sliding, yet they do him more harm then good, in that he cannot tread evenly
upon the Ground, whereby he many times wrencheth his Foot, or straineth some
Sinew, and especially upon Stony ways, where the Stones will not suffer the
Calkins to enter, the Foot slippeth with more violence; yet some do not think
him well shod, unless all his Shoes be made with Calkins, either single or
double, yet of two Evils, double is the less, for he will tread evener with
double then single Calkins, but then let them not be overlong, or sharp
pointed, but rather short and flat. And thus much for Shoes with Calkins.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of Shoes with Rings.
Shoes with Rings were first invented to make a Horse lift up his Feet high,
but such Shoes are more painful then helpful, and is an unhandsom Sight in
Horses, which thing is incident to most Horses that have not sound Hoofs, for
having tender Hoofs, they fear to touch the Ground that is hard. Now such kind
of Horses that have naturally these tender Heels, some for want of discretion,
do think to amond them by adding thereunto high Calkins, or else Rings, and
thereby cause him to have weaker Heels then he had before. Therefore I shall
advise you to lay aside all these unprofitable Devices, and make all your
Shoes, especially your sore-Shooes with Spunges, as has been before taught.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of Shoes with Swelling Welts, or Borders about.
In Germany and high Almany, the Smiths do make their Shoes with a swelling
Welt round about the Shoo, which being higher then the Heads of the Nails, do
save them from wearing, which are the best fort of lasting Shoes, for Mr.
Blundevill traveled in those Countries outright above 500 Miles upon very
stony Ground, yea, and upon Mountains, without removing Shoo or driving Nail,
for the Shoo being made of well tempered stuff, wears equally in all parts,
and the Horse treads evenly upon them.

CHAP. XXX.
Of Shoes with turning Vices, and also Joynt-Shooes.
Some that use to pass the Mountains where Smiths are not easily to be found,
do carry about them Shoes with Vices, whereby they fasten it to the Horses
Foot, without the help of the Hammer or Nail, notwithstanding they are more for
show then any good use. For though it fave his Feet from Stones, yet it so
pincheth his Hoof as he goes with pain, and does perhaps do his Hoof more hurt
then the stones do, therefore it is better upon such needful times to use the
Joynt-Shoo, which is made of two pieces, with a flat Rivet-Nail joining them
together in the Tow, so that you may both make it wide and narrow to serve any
Foot, therefore the Rider ought to understand to drive a Nail, and to have his
Instruments about him, meet for carriage, without the which there are but few
Gentlemen of Almany that loves his Horse, but can use those Instruments for
that purpose as well as most Smiths.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of the Patten Shoo.
Because every Smith knows the use of this Shoo, and how to make it, I shall
not need to use many words, but only show you that it is a necessary Shoo for a
Horse that is hurt in the Hip, or stiffle, or shoulder, which will make him
bear upon that Leg the Grief is on, and consequently make him use it the better.

In what Causes to Cauterize.
An Iron with a Button.

The Drawing Iron.


Cauterization or giving of Fire is of two Natures, viz. Actual and Potential.
Your Cautery Actual is made by hot burning Instruments, with which you sear and
burn those places which be requisite for the perfecting of the Cure you have in
hand, which cannot be peradventure well Cured, but by giving of Tire; as in
case of great Imposthumation, stenching of blood in Wounds, or in searing of
Veins, Sinews, or the like, or else in case of dismembring, if other means be
not at hand, whereby to stay the Flux of Blood without danger of bleeding to
death. And if they that give Fire be not very skilful, I would advise them to
practice upon Jades, and not Horses of price, to the end they may the better
come to know how to carry their hand either lighter or harder, and also that
they do make their Circles round, and their Lines straight and even. For this
Actual Fire is a thing most necessary for them that do understand the Virtue
thereof, and therefore ought to be very carefully applied, and never but upon
very good Grounds; which in so doing, you shall find it to be a most Sovereign
Remedy to hinder and stay all manner of Corruption, whereunto any Member may be
inclined; provided that in the handling of your Instrument you touch not
Muscles, Arteries, Sinews, Ligaments, Chords, or the like; for so you may
utterly lame, where you would set upright. For by this Actual Fire you shall
Join and Conglutinate Parts and Members severed, dry up superfluous Moisture,
and sick Members swelled, and bring forth all evil and putrefactious Matter,
congealed and gathered into Knots, as, Wens, Biles, ^ustils, Exulceration, and
the like: you shall also assuage old Griefs, and make perfect all such Parts of
the Body as be any way Corrupted: neither shall you need fear the increase of
any evil humors, by reason that the Skin being severed by means of the hot
Iron, it does Ripen and digest all manner of putrefaction and matterative
stuff, whereby it venteth and passes away much more easily, healing and
qualifying all grief and pain, causing the Member which before was subject to
Festering and to Gangreen, to become the sounder and stronger, and the worst
that can be made thereof, will be but a little Eye-fore, by reason of a Scar
which it leaves behind it. But then you must have a very great regard unto your
Instruments, that they be made according to the nature and quality of the Place
and Member which is to be Scared; for one fashion will not serve in all Causes:
for as the Places which are to be Cauterized, are commonly different in shape
and proportion, so ought the shapes and fashions of your Instruments to be
accordingly. You ought to have a care in the heating of them, for as they ought
not to be too hot, so they ought not to be too cold, for by that means you may
inflame the place too much. Your Instruments are to be made of Iron or Steel,
which are the best to work with, and to be preferred before Gold, Silver, Brass
or Copper, because Steel or Iron will retain its own received heat longer then
any other Metal, for the others, as they are the sooner made hot, so they are
the sooner cold. Now Steel and Iron Metals are much more substantial and harder
then the other Metals are, and though they are the longer a heating, yet they
retain their heat the longer. Again, a man cannot tell when those other Metals
are hot enough, as also when they be too hot, and if you put never so little
water to them to allay their heat, they presently become too cold, the contrary
whereof you shall find to be in the Nature of Iron and Steel.

Cautery Potential.
Now I will in a word handle Cautery Potential, which as the Cautery Actual
burns the Flesh by hot Instrument, even so does Cautery Potential burn the
Flesh by Medicine, of which there are three sorts or degrees.

Namely, by Corrosive, by Caustic, or by Putrefaction.

Corrosive.
Corrosive, is when that is applied to the wound, wherein is dead or proud
Flesh to corrode or eat it away, by which means the wound is prepared and made
the more fit for Emplasters, Waters or Unguents, which do carnisie and make
good Flesh, by which means the Wound which before was foul, is now become
clean, healed up and made sound, and these corroding things are commonly
Precipitates, Sublimatum, Arsnick, Resalgar, Leads white and red, Copper as
white and green, Verdegrease, Allom, Viteral, Sandaracha, Chrysocollo,
Origanum, Mercury, Aconitum, Capitellium, Roman, Vitrial, shaving of Ox or
Hartshorn, red Coral, Sponge of the Sea somewhat burned, Vnguentum
Apostolorum, Vnguentum Aegiptiacum, Vnguentum Caeraccum, Magistra, Sal niter,
Cantharides, Apium, Aqua fortis, Siclamine, Melanacardium, and many more, that
do burn, eat and corrode the Flesh, putting the poor Beast to a great deal of
pain.

A Caustic.
A Caustic is a great Burner, for that being once put to the Skin, will in a
short time make a Wound where none was before; for which we do use to make
Issues, for Causticks are stronger and more violent then either Putrifactives
or Corrosives; for whereas Corrosives do work only upon Skin broken, and to
corrode and eat out dead, proud, spungy and naughty flesh, and Putrifactives do
Ripen, Mollify and prepare the Wound for the Caustic, so Causticks do break
Skin and Flesh, and all; and therefore it is more violent, and burns worse
then any of the two former.

Putrifactive.
Now your Putrifactives are such Medicines as we do commonly apply to
Swellings, which we do make for the most part of Medicines compounded, as
Poltesses, roasted Sorrel, white Lilly-Roots and the like, for such things are
Drawers, causing swellings which be hard and Fleshy, to become soft and
putrifactive, and to prepare Sorrances for the Causticks, whose nature is to
break and open, what before the Putrifactive had ripened, which otherwise must
have been done by Cautery Actual, or by Incision. And this I do think
sufficient to be handled upon this subject.

How to make Bread for a Horse to keep him in Heart and Strength of Body, and
to Keep him from fainting in his Labor and Exercise, be it never so sore.
Take Wheat-Meal, Oat-Meal and Beans, all Ground very small, of each a Peck,
Anniseeds four Ounces, Gentiana and Fennegreek, of each an Ounce, Licoris two
Ounces, beat themall to fine Powder, and searce them well, and add to them
twenty new laid Eggs Whites, and all well beaten, and as much strong Ale as
will Knead it up, then make your Leaves like to Horse-bread, but not too thick,
and let them be well baked, but not burned, give it him not too new, and when
you give it him give it him five or fix Mornings together, without any
Provender, and thus you shall have him well winded, lusty, strong, hardy and
healthy, whereby to be able to hold out and retain his Metal to the last.

Another sort of Bread.
Take of Wheat-Meal one peck, Rye-Meal, Beans and Oat-Meal, of each half a
peck, Ground very small, Anniseeds and Licoris, of each one Ounce, and white
Sugar Candy four Ounces, beat all into fine powder, with the Whites and Yolks
of twenty new laid Eggs well beaten and put to them, and so much White Wind as
will Knead it into a Paste, make them into great Loaves and bake them well, and
after they be two or three days old, let him eat of this Bread, but chip away
the outside, Now the reason I prefer Meal before Flower is, because Flower is
much more hot and binding, and therefore the courser the Bread is, the better
it is for the Horse. And the reason why I put Rye into my latter Bread, is,
because Rye is a Loosner and a Cooler, and therefore it will make him the more
soluble.

For what causes Veins are to be taken up.
As touching taking up of Veins, you shall understand that it is a thing very
behoof-full, as that many times the most exquisite Farrier living shall not be
able to perfect this Cure, but by that way and means, for unless sueh Veins be
either taken up, or some way stopped, which are noxious to the Cure, by feeding
the Malady with its peccant Humors, the Farrier can never work by true Art.
Again, Veins well taken up do prevent many Maladies, whereunto many Horses are
much more propense then others are. And lastly, the taking up of Veins cures
some diseases which could otherwise never be cured. For the taking up of the
Thigh-Veins sends away Spavens, Splents, Curbs, Kibed Heels, Swelled Legs,
Scratches, Malenders, Farcin in the Legs, and the like Sorrances; besides, it
causes all Pains, Aches, Strains, stiffness in the Limbs, etc. Take up the
Shackle-Veins, and it preventeth the Quitter-bone, Ring-bone. Swelling in the
lower Joints, Founderings, etc. Wherefore for as much as ignorant People,
whatsoever Opinion they may have of their super-abundant skill, yet they are
very much to seek, in that they do so much exclaim against taking up of Veins
absurdly, affirming it to be a great means of Laming of Horses; but let them
not mistake themselves, for assuredly it is the best and only Remedy against
these and many more Maladies, and when they shall have made Trial, they will
not be of so prejudicate an opinion.

Of Roweling of Horses, and of the use thereof.
The Roweling of Horses is so common amongst our simple Smiths, that they will
Rowel him for any disease almost, without any sense or reason, whereby they
needlessly torment the Horse, and bring a Flux of naughty humors down to the
place, which causes him to be Lame, which might otherwise be sound. But this I
must say of it, that if it be well used by a skilful Farrier, it is not only
commendable, but causes great good to a Horses Body and Limbs.

Helps got by Roweling are these.
It separateth and dissolveth evil humors which are gathered together in any
one place, it loosneth those parts which are bound, and binds those parts
that are weakened, it strengthens sick Joints, and comfort whatsoever is
oppressed with any cold Phlegm. The use of it in General is for inward strains,
especially about the Shoulders or Hips, or else for great hard Swellings, which
will not be mollified or corroded by any outward Medicine. Now if the Bruise be
not taken away presently by applying to it some comfortable hot Medicine. There
will arise a certain Jelly between the Pot and the Bone which offends the
tender Gristle, which covers the ends of every Bone, which makes the Horse halt
most vehemently. Now nothing will take this away but Roweling.

Now the manner of Roweling is this.
When you have sound out the certain place of his Grief, after you have cast
him upon some soft place, make a little Slit a handful below the place grieved
through the Skin, no bigger then you can thrust in a Swans Quill into the same,
then raise the Skin a little from the Flesh with your Cronet, and then put in
your Quill, and blow all the Skin from the Flesh upward, even to the top, and
all over the Shoulder, then stopping the Hole with your Finger and your Thumb,
beat the place blown all over with a Hazel stick, and spread the wind with your
hand into every place, and so let it go, then take some Horse-hair, or some red
Sarcenet, half the bigness of a Man's little Finger, and put it into your
Roweling-Needle, which should be at least seven or eight inches long, thrust it
in at the first Hole, and put it upward, drawing it out above at least six
inches, and if you please you may put in another above that, and then Tie the
two ends of the Rowls together, and move and draw them to and fro in the Skin,
not forgetting before you put them in, to anoint them with sweet Butter or Hogs
Grease, and every day after likewise, for that will make the corruption run out
the better.

Now there are other Farriers think, that these long Rowels of Hair or Silk, do
make a double Sore and a great Scar, therefore they make their


Rowels of round Pieces of stiff Leather, such as is on the upper part of an old
Shoo, with a round Hole in the midst, according to the form in the Margent, and
then double it when they put it in, and then spread it open, and lay it flat
between the Flesh and the Skin, and that the Hole in the Rowel may be just
against the Hole in the Horses Skin, and once in two or three days to cleanse
the Rowel, and to anoint it with Hog's Grease or Butter, and so to put it in
again.

Another French way of Roweling, which is Reputed to be the best Way.
Cut open the Skin with your Incision Knife the length of an Inch or more
downwards; on the lowest part of the Horses Breast, close to the Side that he
is lame on; then raise with your Finger or Cronet the Skin from the Flesh round
about the Orifice, about the breadth of a six pence, which must be just the Size
of the Rowel you put into it, whether it be made of the upper Leather of an old
Shoo, or Horn of an old Lanthorn;


but the upper Leather of a Shoo is best. The form of your Rowel must be in the
shape of the Figure in the Margin, with a little Hole in the middle of it,
wherein you must put a Needle and thread through it, as you find by the two
Pricks on the top and bottom of the Hole. Then take a Quill and put it into the
Hole, and do as you were taught in the Receipt before, viz. To blow and beat
the wind upwards all over the Shoulder; when you have blown it as much as you
think fitting, draw a Needle and Thread through the Rowel and Skin, closing the
Rowel in the Slit, and let the Hole in the Rowel be right against the Slit you
have cut, so that it may not move. Then run another stitch or two thwart the
cut, as you


see the manner of it by the Figure in the Margin; When you have stitcht it up,
anoint it all over with Butter or Hogs Grease, and let the Rowel remain in for
about a week or more before you take it out, and he will do well.

Instructions upon Rowelling.
If you Rowel him for any Swelling, then put in your long Rowel the same way
that the Veins run, and seldom or never cross-wise, and the more you blow the
Skin for a Swelling, the better, for the Wind is that that causes
Putrefaction, and makes the festered Humors to dissolve and distill down from
the secret hollows of the Joints into those open places, where it falls away
in Matter, and so the Breast becomes cured.

How to Geld Horses or Colts.
You are to observe in the Gelding of Horses. First, the Age, Secondly, the
Season of the Year. And lastly, the state of the Moon. For the Age, if it be a
Colt, you may Geld him at nine days old, or Fifteen if his Stones be come down;
for the sooner you Geld him the better, for Growth, Shape and Courage. Now a
Farrier may Geld a Horse at any Age whatsoever, if he be careful in the Cure.

The Season of the Year to Geld in.
The best Season for Gelding is between April and May or in the beginning of
June at the furthest, or about the Fall of the Leaf, which is the latter end of
September.

The state of the Moon.
Now for the state of the Moon, the fittest time is ever when the Moon is in
the Wane: as touching the manner of Gelding, it is in this sort, whether it be
Foal, Colt or Horse, after you have cast him upon some soft place, take the
Stones between your fore-most Finger, and your great Finger, then slit the Cod,
and press the Stones forth, then with a pair of small Nippers, made either of
Steel, Box, Wood or Brazil, being very smooth, and clap the strings of the
Stones between them, very near unto the setting on of the Stones, and press
them so hard that there may be no Flux of Blood, then with a thin drawing
Cauterizing Iron made red hot, fear away the Stone, then take a hard Plaster
made of Rozin, Wax and washed Turpentine, well Molten together, and with your
hot Iron Melt it upon the head of the Strings; then fear the Strings, and then
Melt more of the Salve, till such time as you have laid a good thickness of the
Salve upon the Strings, then loose the Nippers, and do so to the other Stone,
and fill the two slits of the Cod with white Salt, and anoint all the outside
of the Cod with Hog's Grease, and so let him rise, and keep him in a warm Stable
loose, that so he may walk up and down, for there is nothing better for him
then moderate Exercise. Now if you do perceive that he does swell in his Cod,
and sheath very much, then chafe him up and down, and make him Trot an hour in
a day, and it will soon recover him, and make him sound.

To make a white Star either on your Horses Forehead, or in any other part of
his Body.
After you have with a Razor shaved away the Hair so wide as you
would have the Star, then take of a little of the Oil of Vitriol in an
Oyster-shell, and dip a Feather or a piece of Silk into it, (for it will eat
both Linen and Woollen) and just wet it all over the place shaved, and it will
eat away the Roots of the Hairs, and the next that comes will be white. You
need not do it above once, you may heal it up with your Copperas water and
green Ointment.

To make a black Star or white Hairs black.
Wash often the place you would have made black, with Fearn Roots, and Sage sod
in Lie, and it will breed black Hairs in a white Horse. Or take Souter Ink,
Galls and Rust beaten well together, and anoint the place therewith, and it
will turn white to black.

To make a Red Star.
Take Aqua fortis one Ounce, of Aqua vitae a penni-worth, of Silver to the
value of eighteen pence. Put them in a Glass, and heat them well therein, and
then anoint the place very well therewith, and it will immediately turn the
Hairs to be of a perfect red Color, but they will endure no longer then the
casting of the Hair, which you must renew again if you intend it shall contiuue.

To make a Horse seem Young.
Take a small crooked Iron, no bigger then a Wheat-Corn, and having made it red
hot, burn a little black hole in the tops of the two outmost Teeth of each side
the nether Chap before, next to the Tushes where the Mark is worn out, then
with an Awl-blade pick it, and make the Shell fine and thin, then with a sharp
scraping Iron make all his Teeth white and clean; This done, take a fine
Lancet, and above the Hollows of the Horses Eyes which are shrunk down, make a
little hole only through the Skin, and put in the Quill of a Raven or Crow, and
blow the Skin full of Wind, till all the hollowness be filled up, then take out
your Quill, and lay your Finger upon the hole a little while, and the Wind will
stay in, and he will look as youthful as if he were but six years old.

To make a Horse that he shall not Neigh, either in company or when he is
ridden.
If either you be in Service of the Wars, and would not be discovered, or when
upon any other occasion, you would not have him to Neigh or make a Noise, then
take a List of Woollen Cloth, and Tie it fast in many folds about the midst of
his Tongue, and he will not Neigh nor make any extraordinary Noise, with his
Voice, as has been often tried and approved of.

To Help a Horse that has Laved or Bangle Earer.
Take his Ears and place them in such manner as you would have them stand, and
then with two little Boards or pieces of Trenchers three Fingers broad, having
long strings knit unto them, bind the Ears so fast in the places where they
stand, as that they cannot stir, then betwixt the Head and the Root of the Ear,
you shall see a great deal of empty wrinkled Skin, which with your Finger and
your Thumb, you shall pull up, and with a sharp Pair of Scissers clip away all
the empty Skin close by the Head, then with a Needle and red Sllk stitch the
two sides of the Skin close together, and then with your green Ointment heal up
the Sore. Which done, take away the Splints which held up his Ears, and you
shall find, that in a short space his Ears will keep the same place as you set
them without Alteration; And this you shall find to be as certain and true as
the healing of a cut Finger.

The first Inventors of Riding.
Bellirophons, as some Men say, was the first that Invented Riding on
Horseback. And the Pelletrones, a People of Lapithia, found out afterward the
manner of Bridles, Bits and Rings, to guide Horses withal. But they of
Thessalia were the first that used the service of Horses in the Wars.

The Receipt of making the Cordial Balls.
The true manner of making those Cordial Balls, which Cure any violent Cold or
Glaunders, which prevent Heart-Sickness, which purge away all Molten Grease,
which recover a lost Stomach, which keep the Heart from fainting with Exercise,
and make a lean Horse sat suddenly.

Take Anniseeds, Cummin-seeds, Fennegreek seeds, Carthumus seeds, Elecampane
Roots and Coltsfoot, of each of these two Ounces, beaten and searced very
Fine, two Ounces of the Flower of Brimstone, then take an Ounce of the Juice of
Licoras, and dissolve it on the Fire in half a Pint of White Wind; which done,
take an Ounce of Chemical Oil of Anniseeds, then take of Sallet-Oyl, Honey, and
of Syrup of Sugar, or for want of it, Molosses, of each half a Pint, then mix
all these with the former Powders, and with as much fine Wheat Flour as will
bind and knit them altogether, work them into a stiff Paste, and make thereof
Balls somewhat bigger then French Wall-nuts, Hull and all, and so keep them in
a close Gally-pot, (for they will last all the year) yet I do not mean that you
shall keep them in the Pot in Balls; because they cannot lie close, the Air may
get in, and do hurt; as also the strength of the Oils will sweat outward, and
weaken the substance, therefore knead the whole Lump of Paste into the
Gally-pot, and make the Balls as you have occasion to use them.

The Form of the Balls.

If you give them upon the end of a stick, you must make them sharp at both
ends, and thick in the middle; But if you give him them in a Horn of Beer, make
them about the bigness of a good big Wall-nut, and put down a Horn-full of
strong Beer after every Ball, to clear his Passage, and to prevent sticking.

The Use of these Balls.
Now for the Use of these Balls, because they are Cordial, and have diver
excellent Virtues, you shall understand that if you use them to prevent
^ickness, then you shall take a Ball and anoint it all over with sweet Butter,
and give it him in the Morning in the manner of a Pill, then ride him a little
after it (if you please otherwise you may choose) and feed and water him abroad
or at home, according to your usual custom. And thus do three or four Mornings
together.

If you use them to Cure either Cold or Glaunders, then use them in the same
manner for a Week together. If you use them to satin a Horse, then give him
them for a Fortnight together. But if you use them in the Nature of a Scouring,
to take away Moulten Grease and Foulness, then instantly after his heat, and in
his heat. Again, if you find your Horse at any time has taken a little Cold,
as you shall perceive by his inward Rattling, if then you take one of these
Balls and dissolve it in a Pint of Sack, and so give it him, it is a present
Remedy. Also to dissolve the Ball in his ordinary water, being made lukewarm,
it works the like effect, and fatneth exceedingly.

To give one of these Balls before Travel, it prevents tyring; to give it in
the heat of Travel, it refreshes the weariness; and to give it after Travel,
it saves him from all Surfeits and inward Sickness.

A Reccipt to Fat a Lean Horse in twelve or fifteen days.
First, Therefore to let him Blood if he wants Bleeding, then instead of Oats
in the Morning give him Wheat-Bran prepared after this manner, Set over the
Fire a great Kettle, and fill it almost full with fair water, and when it boyls
put in your Bran, and let it boil a quarter of an hour at least, then let it
stand to cool, and in the Morning early give him of this Bran so hot as he can
eat it, and let his drink be of the same water, and at night give him Oats and
white Water, and let him be well Littered, and warm covered; but if it be in
the Summer, his Stable ought not to be too hot, and at Night with his Oats give
him an Egg full of this Powder, with which you are to continue him for the
space of eight days, or according as you shall see cause. You must understand,
that Bran thus prepared, dries up his naughty, gross and corrupt humors, and
does the better prepare the Body to assume Lust, Courage, Strength and Flesh,
together with the help of the Powder, which is this.

The Powder how to make a Lean Horse Fat.
Take of Cummin, Fennegreek, Sileris-Montani, Nutmegs, Cloves, Ginger, Linseed,
of each two Ounces. Quick Brimstone six Ounces, make all these into Powder, and
give him the quantity of an Egg-shell full with his Oats* every Night, but
first let him be watered with white water, which is two or three handfuls of
Bran stirred amongst his water, then Rub him, Litter him, and Cloth him well,
and then give him some sweet Wheatstraw in his Rack, and let himseed on that
for an hour, then give him his Oats mixed with his Powder, and when he has
eaten them, give him Hay at your pleasure, remembering to keep him warm, but so
as with Moderation, and you shall find him amend exceedingly, but you must put
into his Oats every time two handfuls of Nettle-seeds, for that is the thing
that will principally cause him to Battle. It will also greatly avail to his
amendment, if he be Aired every Morning and Evening, an hour after Sunrising,
and an hour before Sunset, if the Weather be warm, and the Sun do shine. And
this is the best Course you can take to set up a Lean and poor Horse.

Another Receipt to make a Lean Horse Fat.
Take of Elecampane dried, Cummin, Turmerick, Anniseeds, of each two Ounces,
Groundsel half a handful, boil all these together in a Gallon of Ale, with
three Heads of Garlic well bruised and picked, then strain it, and give him a
quart of it in the Morning fasting Blood-warm, and Ride him after it, but not
to heat him, and thus do four Mornings together, and in a short time after (if
the year be seasonable) turn him to Grass, and he will Fatten suddenly. But if
the time of the year will not serve, and that you have a mind to raise him in
the Stable, then give him amongst his Oats this Powder. Take of Elecampane
dried, and of Cummin both alike, well beaten and searced, and when you give
your Horse Provender, then give him half an Ounce of them well mixed amongst it
for fourteen days together, and you shall find him to amend and prosper, after
a strange manner: provided, that you give him seasonable Ayring, moderate
Exercise, and Mashes and white Water.

Of the Drink called Acopum.
Take of Euforbium half an Ounce, Castoreum one Ounce, Adraces half a quarter
of a pound, Bidellium half an Ounce and half a quarter, Opoponax one Ounce, Fox
Grease half an Ounce, Pepper one Ounce, Laserpitium three quarters of an Ounce,
Ammoniacum half a quarter of a pound, Pigeons Dung as much, Galbanum half an
Ounce, Nitrum one Ounce and a quarter, Spuma nitri three quarters of an Ounce,
Ladanum a quarter of a pound, Pyrethrum, and Bay Berries, of each three
quarters of an Ounce, Cardanum two Ounces, Seed of Rue half a quarter of a
pound, Seed of Agnus Castus one Ounce, Parsley seed half an Ounce, dried Roots
of Ireos, or Flower-de-luce one Ounce and a quarter, and half a quarter, of Oil
de Bay as much, of Oil of Spikenard three quarters of a pound, of Oleum
Cyprinum three quarters of a pound, and half a quarter, the oldest Oil Olive a
pound and a half, Pitch a quarter of a pound and two Ounces, Turpentine a
quarter of a pound; Melt of every of these that will be Molten, severally by
themselves, and then mingle them together with the rest of the Ingredients,
being first beaten to fine powder, and after they have boiled a little on the
Fire, take it off, and strain it into a clean Gally-pot, and so keep it for
your use. And when you give your Horse any of it at any time, you must not give
him of it above two spoonfuls in a Pint of Sack or Muscadine, and if by long
keeping you find it wax hard then soften it with the Oil of Cypress, so that it
may be good and thick.

The Virtues of it.
It is both a Medicine and an Ointment, for it helps Convulsions in the
Sinews and Muscles, it draws forth all Noisome humors, and disburdeneth the
Head of all Grief, being put up with a long Goose Feather anointed in it, into
the Nostrils of a Horse, it heals, I say all manner of Convulsions, Cramps,
Numbness, and String-halts, Colds and Rhumes; it dissolveth the Liver, being
troubled with Opilations and Obstructions, it helps Siccity and Aridity in
the Body; it banisheth all weariedness and tiredness, if his Limbs be Bathed
with this Medicine. And lastly, it Cures all sorts of inward Diseases, if it
be administered by way of a Drench, in Wine, strong Beer or good Ale.

The Nature of it.
It is hot in Working, otherwise it could not hold good in case of Surfeits,
Tiredness, and of Convulsions, and the like, wherein consists its chief
Virtues, being administered outwardly; but being administered inwardly, it is not
altogether so hot, for it helps Fevers for the most part, and I think it is
most safe, to give not above two spoonfuls of it in a quart of good strong Beer
or Ale, though Mr. Markham advises to give four or five spoonfuls in Sack or
Muscadine, which are hot things of themselves.

The Confection called Arman.
To make this Confection, of Honey of Roses a pound and a half, as much as will
suffice of the Crumbs of the whitest Manchet made into fine powder, then take
of Cordial-powder of Nutmegs, and of Cinnamon of each an Ounce and a half, mix
all these together, being first made into fine powder, then put it into a
Gally-pot, and moisten it with Rose-Vineger, that it may be of a thick
substance like unto Pap, and so keep it for your use. When you use it, put some
of it upon the end of a Bulls Pizel into his Mouth, and let him champ thereon;
but if you give it for the Quinsey or Fever, give him down two Hornfulls of
it, and do this in the Morning fasting, and let him fast two or three hours
after it.

The Virtues of this Arman.
It provokes a good Appetite to Meat, and causes good Digestion, and takes
away all Annoyances that troubles the Stomach, it cools the inward heat in
the Body, it helps all Agues and Fevers, and is most excellent against
Surfeits; it is good for the Quinsey in the Throat, coming of Cold taken; and
very good against the Gripings in the Belly or Guts, proceeding of Wind* This
Confection was brought out of France.

How to make the Cordial Powder which we have likewise from the French.
Take Cynamon and Sugar, of each four Ounces, and of fine Bole-Armoniack two
Ounces: make them into very fine powder, and mix them well together, and keep
it for your use in a Gally-pot close stopped.

The Virtues of it.
It is good for Sick Horses that are far spent with a Consumption in the Flesh
and Liver, etc. For it is a most Restorative Cordial, comforting the Vital
parts, and Spirits Animal, and restores it to Sanity.

Another Cordial Powder, called, Electuarium Theriacum, by reason it has much
Treacle in it.
Take Syrop of Violets, Syrop of Lemons, Syrop of Roses, of each half an Ounce,
adding to it an Ounce of London-Treacle, (which is the best of all Treacles for
Horses) mingle them well together, and it is a most Sovereign Cordial to be
Administered to Horses that are sick and weak.

To make the black and red Aegiptiacum, which are both Corrosives. For their
Natures are to Corrode and eat away all manner of Deal, Proud, Rotten and
naughty Flesh, out of any old Sore or Vicer, and they do also cleanse and
prepare a Sore, and make it apt to be healed with Carnifying or healing S^lves.
Take two pounds of Course English Honey, Verdegrease, Dyers Galls, and green
Copperas, of each four Ounces, make them all into Powder, and mixed together,
and put into an Earthen Pot, and set it upon the Fire, keeping it stirring, but
so soon as it begins to boil, take it off and let it cool, for if it boil too
long it will become red, which will not be so good. This black* Aegyp^iacum is
good to dissolve the Hoo^s of a Horse, if they be too dry, or hard, so as it
will cause the Corruption, if any be in the Foot, to ascend above at the
Cronet, where the Hair is, and also to restore the Hoof of the Horse when the
Sole is taken out, and in this Nature you must use this Unguent, but only at
the third dressing after you have taken out the Sole.

The Red Aegiptiacum is thus made.
Take course Honey two poun is, Verdegrease four Ounces, green Copperas two
Ounces, beat the Verdegrease and the Copperas very small to Powder, then put it
into an Earthen Pot, and put unto it a little Vinegar, and so boil it very well
till it become red, and keep it for your use.

General Drenches, or Receip's for all inward Diseases, or Sickness.
The Spaniards have this Receipt for all inward Diseases. Take Wheat-Meal
twelve pounds, Anniseeds four Ounces in sine Powder* Brimstone in Powder three
Ounces, Fennegreek in Powder three Ounces and a half, Cummin in Powder three
Ounces, Honey two pounds, good Sallet-Oyl one pound and a half, of good Sack as
much. These are all to be put into a Pot well nealed, and boiled until it be
thick, and when it is cold to make it up into P^lls or Balls, you must keep it
stirring while it is a boiling, otherwise it will burn to, and when they are
thus made into Pills, give him of them four or five Mornings together fasting.
These kills Worms in a Horses Body, helps Diseases of the Lungs and inward
parts, and is a very good Plaster applied outwardly. It is most useful in all
cold causes, and it is so Cordial, that it will bring a lean and poor Horse
unto Flesh and good state in a little time.

Another Excellent Receipt for all inward Diseases.
Take Wheat-Meal six pounds, or as much as will bring the Ingredients unto a
sti^^ paste, Anniseeds two Ounces, Cummin two Ounces, wild or Bastard-Saffron
two drams and an half, White Wind four pint^, Fennegreek one Ounce and two
drams, Brimstone one Ounce and a half, Sallet-Oyl apint and two Ounces, English
Honey one pound and a half* Make those things into powder that will beat to
powder, then compound them together, and make it into a stiff Paste, and keep
it in a Gally-pot close covered for your use.

When you use it, make a Ball thereof as big as a man's Fist, and dissolve it in
two Gallons of fair water, till it be all Molten, let him drink of this Morning
and Evening so long as he please, and let him have no other water to drink, to
the end he may be the better compelled to drink it, which in the end he will do
and like it very well. This is good for many inward Infirmities, it raises and
battleth a Horse much better then either Grass or Provender, and gives him
Life, Spirit and Stomach, and keeps him in perfect Health.

Another Receipt for all inward Diseases.
Take Fennegreek, Turmerick, Grains, Anniseeds, Licoris, long Pepper, Cummin,
of each half an Ounce, and of Saffron one dram; and of Herbs, take Celendine,
Rue, Pelamontine, Hysop, Thyme and Rosemary, of all of them no more then will
make half a handful, chopped small and boiled, first in a quart of good Ale or
Beer, then put in your Spices finely powdered, and boil them again, then strain
it and put to it the quantity of an Egg of sweet Butter, and an Ounce of London
Treacle, and give it him Blood-warm, and Ride him moderately after it, and set
him up warm, and let him fast three or four hours, and let his Drink be either
a sweet Mash or white Water. This is very good against Fevers, Colds and the
Yellows.

Another Receipt for inward Sickness.
Take Aristolochi^ Rotunda, Bay Berries, Gentian, Anniseeds, Ginger, and of
Trifora Magna, of each an Ounce, beat all the Simples to very fine powder, and
mix them well together, then take of White Wind or good Ale or Beer a quart,
then put into it one spoonful of all of them, with half a p^nt of Sallet-Oyl,
and of Mithridate two drams* warm these upon a Fire, and administer it
Blood-warm, and Exercise him before and after his drink, but not to Sweat him,
neither let him drink any cold Water in four or five days after, but either
warm Mashes or white Water. This is most Sovereign for any inward Sickness,
Droopings, forsaking of Meat, Fevers, Colds, Coughs or the like.

A Suppository for inward Sickness.
If he be so sick that you fear to give him any strong Medicine, and that
Costive withal, then give him this Suppository.

Take of Honey six Ounces, of Salt-Niter one Ounce and a half, of Wheat Flour
and of Anniseeds beaten into fine powder, of each one Ounce, boil all these
into a hard thickness, and make it into Suppositories, and after you have
Anointed your Hand with Sallet-Oyl, and the Suppository likewise, convey it
into his Fundament a pretty way, and Tie his Tail betwixt his Legs to his
Girts, or else hold it close with your hand about a quarter of an hour till it
be thoroughly dissolved, and this will purge kindly, and Loosen his Guts, so
that you may be the more bold to Administer what Drinks, Cordials, or other
things, which you think most requisite for his recovery.

Other General Dr^n^hes to Cure all inward Sickness in Horses, which trouble
the whole Body; of Fevers of all sorts, Plagues, Infections, and such like.
Sickness in General are of two Kinds, one offending the whole Body, the other
a particular Member, the first hidden, and the second visible. Of the first
then, which offend the whole Body, are Fevers of all sorts, as the Quotidian,
the Tertian, the Quartan, the Continual, and the Hectic. the Fevers in
Autumn, in Summer, or in the Winter; the Fever by Surfeit, Fever Pestilent,
Fever Accidental, or the General Plague; they are all known by these Signs,
much trembling, panting and sweating, a sullen Countenance that was wont to be
cheerful, hot Breath, sainting in Labor, decay in Stomach, and Costiveness in
the Body, etc. First, let him Blood, then give him this Drink, Take of
Sellendine Roots, leaves and all, a good handful, as much Wormwood and as much
Rue, wash them well, then bruise them in a Mortar, then boil them in a quart of
Ale or Beer, then strain them, and add to them a pound of sweet Butter, then
give it the Horse to drink lukewarm; or half an Ounce of the powder of
Diapente, given in Sack or Ale, two or three Mornings together. Or give him
three or four Yolks of new laid Eggs, beaten with seven or eight spoonfuls of
Aqua vitae or Brandy. This is good when he has his shaking Fit upon him. Or
take four Ounces of Diapente, and mix it with four Ounces of clarified Honey,
and keep it in a close Glass, and give him half an Ounce thereof in Wine or
Ale; or take of Licoras an Ounce, of Anniseeds, Cummin-seeds, and Elecampane
Roots, of each half an Ounce, of Turmerick and Bay Berries, of each a quarter
of an Ounce, of long Pepper and Fennegreek, of each two drams beaten small, and
put five spoonfuls thereof into a quart of Ale, warmed with a little Putter or
Oil, and it is very Sovereign, for any Disease coming of cold Causes. Or Red
Sage, Mint, Sellendine and Rue, boiled in Beer is good. Diatessaron is good
simply of it self, so is Diapente, or Diahexaple.

There are several particular Receipts which I might give you for every sort of
these Fevers I have Named, but I think these in General may serve instead of a
more particular Account, only observe this Note by the way. That you must in
all hot causes administer cooling things, and in cold Causes hot things.

Signs whereby you may know every sort of Fever.
Signs in General to know a Fever, is by holding down of his Head, he will
quake and tremble, and when his trembling is over, he will burn, and his Breath
be hot, he will breath fast, and his Flank will beat, he will reel, he will
forsake his Meat, his Eyes will swell and be closed up, and watering, his Flesh
will as it were fall from his Bones, and his Stones will hang down, he will
desire to drink, yet not drink much, neither will he sleep, but more
particularly.

A Quotidian Fever proceeds from hard Riding, being set up too hot in the
Stable without Riding.
Quotidian or every days Fever is known by Blood-shotten Eyes, short and hot
Breathing, panting, loathing of his Meat, and stiffness in his Limbs, and his
Sickness will not last above six or eight hours in a day, and then he will be
well again.

Tertian Fever proceeds from the same Causes as the Quotidian.
The Tertian or every other days Fever, is known by the Signs formerly spoken
of, and this as the chiefest, that he will be sick as on Monday, and well on
the Tuesday, and sick on the Wednesday following.

Quartan Fever proceeds from the same Causes as the Tertian does.
The Quartan Fever, as some Farriers call, a third days Sickness, as thus: If
his Fit begin on the Monday, he will be well on the Tuesday and Wednesday, and
sick again on the Thursday. There is no other Sign to know it, then the coming
and going of the Fits.

Continual Fever proceeds from Heats and Colds.
The Fever continual is that which continues without any Intermission, the
Signs are want of rest, and falling away of the Flesh, besides certain
Inslammations or Swellings, which will appear about his Withers and Flanks.

Hectic Fever proceeds from a sick Stomach, being Scalded with hot Drinks,
has lost the power of Digestion.
The Hectic Fever, which is the worst of Fevers, is known by this, that he
will never eat with Appetite, and when you draw out his Tongue you shall find
it Raw, his Flesh will be Loose and Flaggy, and his Body subject to trembling.
All these Fevers do most commonly happen to a Horse in the Spring, because the
new Blood is apt to be inflamed.

Autumn Fever proceeds from new Blood being inflamed.
The Signs of an Autumn Fever, is known by the same Signs I have declared,
for they are the same Fevers, only altering the time of the year.

Summer Fever.
A Fever taken in the Summer is the worst of all ordinary Fevers whatsoever,
especially such as are taken in the Dog Days. The Signs of this Fever are,
that his Arteries will beat most palpably* and wheresoever he staleth, you
shall perceive he sheddeth his seed also.

Winter Fever.
A Fever in the Winter is not so dangerous as the Fever beforementioned, yet
if you do not remove it speedily it will continue long. The Signs are no other
then has been declared.

Fever by Surseit.
The Fever by Surseit is known by these Signs, he will beat upon his Back,
his Breath will be short, hot and dry, and his Wind will draw only at his Nose
with great Violence.

Fever Pestilential.
The Fever pestilential, is known by the holding down of his Head, forsaking
of his Meat, shedding much water at his Eyes, and many times Swellings, or
Ulcers, rising a little below his Ear-Roots.

Fever Accidental
The Fever Accidental comes by some blow or wound, by which any of the Vital
Powers are let or hindered, which may bring him to a Fever, then the Signs be,
he will covet much to drink, but cannot, and his Flesh will fall away in an
extraordinary fashion.

How to make the Oil of Oats.
Take of Milk two Gallons, and warming it on the Fire, put to it a quarter of a
pound of burnt Allom, which will make it turn to Curds, then take out the Curd
and strain the Whey, then take a quarter of a peck of clean Husked Oats that
were never dried, and put them in the Whey, and set them on the Fire till they
burst and be soft; then put them into Cullender to let the Whey run through
them, then put the Oats in a Drying Pan over the Fire, keeping them stirring,
till you see the Vapor or Smoke of them ascend upwards, but as it were run
about the Pan, then take them off and put them into a Press, and press them
most exceedingly, and what comes from them is the Oil of them, which you must
save in a close Glass.

The Virtues of it.
This Oil of all Medicines and Simples whatsoever, is the most Excellent and
Sovereign for a Horses Body, as being extracted from the most Natural, wholesome
and best Food which does belong unto a Horses Body. This Oil being given by
four or five spoonfuls at a time in a pint of sweet Wine, or a quart of strong
Ale, and some of the Whey poured into his Nostrils does Cure the Glaunders
before all other Medicines; it is also (given in the same manner) the best of
all Purgations; for it purges away all those venomous and filthy humors,
which feeds the most incurable Farcy whatsoever.

How to make the Powder of Honey and Lime; which is so great a Drier, that i^
will dry up any Wound or Old Sore.
Take such a quantity of unslackt Lyme as you shall think fit, beat it into
very fine Powder, then take so much Honey as will make it up into a stiff
Paste, then put it into the form of a thick Cake, or Loaf* and put it into an
Oven, or burning Fire, till it be Baked or burnt glowing Red; then take it
forth, and when it is cold, beat it into fine Powder, and then use it as
occasion shall serve. If you mix amongst it the Powder of a burnt Shoo, it will
be much the better.

A Comfortable Drench.
Make it of these Cordials, to wit, of Sugar, Cinnamon, Cloves, Nutmegs,
Saffron, Licoris, Anniseeds; beat all these into fine powder, adding thereunto
White Wind, and all these infused in an Earthen pot.

An Operative Drink.
Put in such a quantity of these things as you think requisite for the Strength
of the Horse, viz. White Wind, Sallet-Oyl, Alloes, Rubarb, Agarick, Duke, or
Duck-powder, Honey, Cordial-powder, etc.

Several sorts of Charges.
Take of black Pitch half a pound, of Mastick two Ounces, of Galbanum four
Ounces, of fat Pitch and of Turpentine, of each half a pound, melt them into a
Pot together, and when it is half cold charge the place up to the Hanch, and so
overthwart the Reins of the Back, and if it be not Cured at the end of eight or
ten days, take it off and apply this Ointment. Take of Oil de Bay, Althea,
tried Hog's Grease, of each half a pound, incorporate them altogether, and
therewith anoint and chafe the place grieved.

[(...) the Second Part for the Best of Charges, I. W. marked in the Margent*]

A Honey Charge for a Wrench or Slip in the Shoulder, H^p or other Member; for
all sorts of Scratches, and for stiffness of Sinews hurt, or any other way
offended, to assuage Swellings and Tumors, and to draw away all bad Humors.
Take of Wheat-Meal two pounds, and put a little White Wind unto it, and put it
into a Kettle, as if you were to make a Poultess, and when it is well mixed,
add to it of Bole-Armoniack in fine powder half a pound, of English Honey one
pound, then set it upon the Fire and boil it, keeping it continually stirring,
and put to it in the boiling half a pound of black Pitch, keeping it stirring,
and when you think you have boiled it enough, put to it of ordinary Turpentine,
half a pound of Oil de-Bay, Cummin, Althea, Sanguis Draconis, Bay Berries and
Fennegreek, beaten to powder, and of Linseed-Meal, of each two drams, boil them
altogether again, still keeping them stirring till they be well incorporate,
and therewith Charge the grieved Member with it pretty warm, but not to scauld
him.

A Restringent Charge to be applied to broken Bones, or to Bones dislocated or
out of Joy^t, being first Set, and also to take moist Humors from weeping
Wounds, and so to dry up bad Humors, which do pre-occupate the Body.
Take of Oil de-Bay four Ounces, Orpin, Cantharides, and Euphorbium, of each
two Ounces, make all these into fine powder, and mix them with your Oil de-Bay
very well, and therewith charge the place grieved. This is also very good to
charge the Swelling of a Back Sinew-strain.


A celd Charge.
Take Bole-Armoniack* Wheat Flour, the white of an Egg, and Aquavitae or
White Wind; beat all these together pretty thick, and lay it to the place
grieved upon a brown paper, and when it is dry lay on fresh. You must keep that
part out of the water, if you intend the Plaster should slay on.

Of Salves, Vnouents, Powders and Waters.
Take of Perosen, and of hard Rosin, of each one pound, of Frankincense,
Virgin-Wax, or for want thereof, new Wax, and Sheeps Suet, of each half a
pound, of old tried Hog's Grease one pound and a quarter, boil the Gums and Wax
in half a pint of White Wind, and then put into it your Sheeps Tallow and
Hog's Grease, and when all is Molten and Incorporated together, strain it, and
whilst it is yet hot put in an Ounce of Venice-Turpentine, and so work all
well together, which when it is cold, pour in the Liquor from the Salve, which
put up into a Gally-pot for your use.

The Virtues of it.
This is a most Sovereign Salve to heal any green Wound, (that is not come to
an Ulcer) and so dry it up.

Another most excellent Powder.
Take unslacked Lyme, the dry dust of Tanners Oken Bark, and an old Shoo Sole
burned to a Coal, of each alike, make them into fine Powder, and mix them well,
and keep them in a Box for your use.

The Virtues of it.
This Powder heals the Buds of the Farein after they be broken, and skinneth
them, and if they be washed with the Juice of Vervine and strong Vinegar,
mingled together, and this Powder cast upon them, will heal and skin them. It
heals likewise and skinneth all other Sores.

Another Ointment.
Take half a pound of tried Hog's Grease, a penniworth of Verdegrease beaten to
fine Powder, give them two or three Walms on the Fire, then take it off, and
put into it half an Ounce of Venice-Turpentine, and stir it well together till
it be cold, this Ointment will heal any Wound or Sore in a Horse.

Another Ointment.
Burn a good quantity of Roch-Allum, and as much Bay Salt, and burn that also,
make them both together into fine powder. Then take of common Honey, and of
sweet Butter, of each alike, as much as will suffice, incorporate them
altogether, by melting them over a gentle Fire, and with a Taint or Plaster
apply it. And this Cures any foul Sore.

A good Water.
Take a pint of fair Water, and put into it of Bay Salt, and of green Copperas,
of each the quantity of a Hazel-Nut, first, made into fine powder, let them
boil a little upon the Fire, with this wash your Sore before you do apply any
of your Salves, Unguents or Powders.

Another Salve.
Take of common Honey, two Ounces, Roch-Allom, Verdegrease and Vinegar, of each
an Ounce, make your Allom and Verdegrease into fine Powder, then take of
^ublimate finely powdered, two Ounces, boil them a little on the Fire, this
laid Plaister-wise on the Wound once a day, or if the Wound be deep to Taint it
with it, but before you dress it, wash the Sore with Water made of green
Copperas and Bay Salt.

The Virtues of it.
This does not only Cure all sorts of Wounds in the Body, but the Foot also,
and it clears any Wound from dead and proud Flesh.

Another Salve.
Take the Buds or the tender tops of the leaves of Elder, (or for want there
of, the inner Rin^ of the Bark) one handful, and first shred, and after pound
them very well, till you bring them to a Salve, and apply this to the Sore,
binding a Cloth about it to keep it from falling off.

The Virtues of it.
This will Cure any Old or New Sore whatsoever in any part of the Body, as
Galled Backs, Spur-Galls, Gravelling, Pricked, being dressed every day once,
and it will Cure a F^^tula, if the Juice of it be injected into it unto the
bottom.

An Ointment.
Take the White of a new laid Egg, and Sallet-Oyl, as much as will suffice, and
beat them well together, and before you apply it unto the Wound, pour into the
Wonnd burnt Butter, and then lay on your Medicines with Hurds Plaister-wise.
And this will Cure any green Wound.

Another.
An Ounce of black Soap, and as much Dogs Grease, with as much burnt Allom as
will lie upon a six pence, melted upon the Fire together, is very good to heal
or skin any wound or hurt, let the burnt Allom be put in last, when the others
are melted.

How to give a Horse a Vomit.
Vomits are given to Horses newly taken from Grass, to bring away their gross
and Phlegmatic Humors, which do abound in their Stomach and Head, which if
they be not taken away in due time, may empair greatly the Health of the Horse.
I never knew that Vomits were useful to a Horse till I met with a French
Farrier, which I saw administered it to sundry Horses, which did work very
kindly.

The Receipt is this.
Take two of the greatest Roots you can get of Poll^podium of the Oak, washed
and scraped very clean, and Tie it to his Snaffle, Trench or Bit, then let it
be steeped in the Oil of Spike all Night, and in the Morning fasting put on his
Bridle with the same Roots, and Ride him about with it about an hour fair and
softly, and if he be troubled with any Rheuma^ick or Phlegmatic humor, or
with any cold or silthy Matter, which may annoy his stomach, this will force
him to vent it at his Mouth and Nose, and it will cause him to Cough and N^ez,
where he will send forth a great abundance of silth and evil slimy stuff from
off his Stomach and Head, as that in a very short time he will become very
clean in his Body, for this will both refine his Blood, and exhaust all his
watery Humors, which will make him found a long time after it. And this is not
only to be applied to a Horse newly taken from Grass, but to any other Horse
that has taken Cold or to any Ketty, Foul, Foggy or Pursive Horse whatsoever.
This may seem strange here amongst us, but let any man make trial, and he shall
find it to be most admirable.

Pur^ing Pills.
Take of Fresh Butter one pound, Alloes and Fennegreek, of each an Ounce,
Life-Honey and white Sugar Candy powdered, of each four Ounces, Agarick half an
Ounce, make all these into fine powder, and being well incorporated with the
Butter and Honey, make Pills thereof, and give them to your Horse, and if he be
but a small and weak Horse, you must give him but two parts of three, but if he
has a strong Cold and Cough withal. Then

Take Fresh Butter, and of Mel-R^s^rum, of each four Ounces, of Alloes and
Seen, of each an Ounce, of Rubarb and Bay-^erries, of each three Ounces,
Coll^quintida and S ffron, of each two drams, Co^di l-powder one Ounce, D^k^ or
D^tch-powder four Ounces, make them all into fine powder, and mix them well
with two Ounces of Mithrida^e, and with your Butter and Mel-Rosarum, beat and
pound them well together, and make them up into Pills, and give them your
Horse. This Receipt will purge him very well, though it heat him for some time,
and let him be ordered as in other Physical Cures of the like Nature, and
proportion your Pills according to the strength, greatness and corpulency of
your Horse.

A Plaster to dissolve and take away evil Humors, which shall at any time
fall down in the Legs of your Horse.
Take of Common Honey a pound, of Turpentine half a pound, of Mastick in fine
powder two Ounces, of Frankincense and Bole-A^m^^iack made into fine powder, of
each four Ounces, of S^ng^is D^aconis three Ounces, six new laid Eggs, of the
strongest Wine-Vineger one pint, of the Flower of Rice seven Ounces, mix all
these together, and hereof make a Plaster, and lap the Legs of the Horse from
the Feet to the upper Joyn^s, and do this but four or five times, and you shall
find that it will perform a strange and rare Cure.

Of several sorts of Baths, and first of a Bath to dry up Humors.
Take Sage, Rosemary, of each a handful, and of the Bark of the Root of B^^ch
three pounds, and of the B^^ks of young E^mes, Oaks and Ash, of each a handful,
of N^p, Penvy-Royal, and of Coestnuts, the Rinds being taken away, of each a
handful, three or four white Onions clean pilled and cut into small pieces or
slices, Red Wine three Pottles, strong White Wind Vinegar two Pottles; Boil all
these together, and cause him to be walked a quarter of an hour till he be
warm, then Bathe him with this Bath good and hot, and set him up warm, and let
his Drink be either sweet Mashes or white Water, and thus Bathe him for three
or four days together, and let him not be Ridden in any Water for eight or ten
days after.

The Use or Virtues of Paths.
Baths are somentations, which are the most comfortable things of any to the
Joints and Limbs of a Horse, for they dissolve all ill Humors, and give heat
and warmth unto all the Members that are benumbed with Cold, or for want of
Blood it comfort and strengthens them, and gives very great case to the
pained Sinews. Besides, it asswageth Swellings, in or about any part of the
Body; for Legs swelling stiff, or benumbed, or for any other Joint pained or
grieved, or for any String halt, Cramp or Convulsion. Which Bath to Cure all
such Maladies is this.

Bath 1.
Take Muscadine and Sallet-Oyl, of each a pint, Bay Leaves and Rosemary, of
each two handfuls, let them boil half an hour, and when you are to Bathe your
Horse therewith, rub and chafe the grieved place with a Wisp or Hair-Cloth a
pretty while, then put the Foot into some broad Bowl or Pail, whereby to
preserve the Liquor and Herbs, and Bathe him thus a quarter of an hour, which
ended, bind upon the place a piece of Sheeps or Lambs Skin, with the Woolly
side to the Leg, and let him stand so twenty four hours, apply this five or
six times, and it will be a perfect Cure.

Bath 2.

A Bath to Cure all Go^^dy and G^uty Legs, which comes either by Farcin,
Scratches, or the like, etc.
Take a quart or more of Chamber-ly, and put into it a Handful of Bay Salt, a
quarter of a pound of Soap, a pretty quantity of Soot, a handful or two of
Misle-toe, Chopped small, boil them very well together, and Bathe the place
very well therewith, and in three or four days Bathing it Morning and Evening,
it will not only take down the Swelling, but prevent the Farcin.

Bath 3.
Another Bath for the same purpose.
Take the Grounds of a Beer-Barrel, with the Barm, Smallage, Featherfew,
Winter-S^vo^y, Co^^rey, Mallows, Ru^, Se^-^^^l, Pennyroyal, Wormwood,
Archangel, of each a good handful, and of the Leaves and Berries of Misle-toe
three or four good handfuls, Sheeps Tallow one pound, tried Hog's Grease half a
pound, three or four Handfuls of Rye or Wheat-Bran, boil them altogether, till
the Herbs and Misle-toe become soft, and be sure you have Liquor enough, and a
little before you take it from the Fire, put into it some Hay, with this Bathe
his Legs; first one, then the other, as was before showed, and when you have
Bathed that Leg sufficiently, make a Thumb-Band of the Hay in the Bath, and
roll it about the Leg above the uppermost or middle Joint, and put off the
Herbs between the Thumb-band and his Leg, which done, pour on the Liquor
remaining upon the Thumb-bands, and so Bathe him for so many days once, as you
shall think requisite, and it will bring down the Swelling quite and make him
sound.

Bath 4.
Another Bath very Excellent.
Take Smallage, Ox-Eye and Sheeps Suet, of each alike, to a good quantity, chop
them small together, and after stamp them in a Stone*Mortar, then boil them
with Man's Urine, and bathe the grieved parts herewith warm, doing as before
with ^owl or Pail; then with Thumb-bands of soft Hay made, first wet in cold
water, rap up the Member, as well above as below the Grief, and use it as often
as you shall see cause. This Bath is very good for Swelled Legs upon Travel, or
for any other Lameness which comes either by stroke, strain or other Accident.

Bath 5.
Another Bath.
Take Savin, and the Bark and Leaves of the Bay Tree, Pellitory, Rosemary,
Sage, Rue, of each three Ounces, boil these in a Gallon of White Wind, until
half be consumed; And Bathe your Horse as before is showed.

To bathe a Horse in Salt water, is very wholesome, both for the Horses Skin,
and for any Disease in the Stomach.

Bath 6.
A Bath for a Horse that is Tired or over-Travelled.
Take of Mallows, of Sage, of each two or three handfuls, and a Rose-Cake, boil
them together in water till it be all consumed, then add to it a good quantity
of Butter or Sallet Oil, and mix them together, and bathe all his Forelegs
therewith, and all the parts of his Body also, or to let him Blood, and with
that Blood, Oil and Vinegar mixed together, presently to anoint his Body, helps
most sorts of Infirmities.

Of Perfumes or Purges of the Head of all filthy and gross Matter.
Perfumes are necessary to be applied to Horses in Cases of Colds* Glanders,
Rheums, Murs, P^z^s, Catharrs, etc. For they do not only break a Cold, but
dissipate congealed humors which do annoy the Head, Brain and Stomach of the
Horse, and sometimes they expel and cause him to vent at his Nose and Mouth,
much Filth and Corruption, which does stop, clog and pester his Head and Body,
and sometimes they do siccicate and dry up many bad Humors which are engendered
in the Head and Brain. The Ingredients of which Simples wherewith we Persume
sick Horses are many* As

The Juice of Onions snuffed up the Nose draws forth raw phlegmatic Humors.
The Juice of Coleworts squirted up his Nose, or the Juice of red Beets. The
leaves of the Wind-Flower stamped, and the Juice squirted up his Nose; or the
Juice of Dazies purge the Head of filthy slimy Humors. The Juice of Sage
draws forth thin phlegm. The Juice of the Primrose stamped, strained and
squirted up his Nose, is good to purge the Brain. The Juice of the small
Cellendine purges the Head of foul and filthy Humors; The Juice of the Leaves
or Berries of Ivy, that grows upon Walls, does infinitely purge the Head;
Fennel -- Gya^^ or Ferula snuffed up the Nose, white Hellebore or Neesing --
Root beaten to powder, after it is dried and blown up into the Nose, purges
the Head and Brain from gross and slimy humors, wild white Hellebore has the
same Virtues; The Juice of sweet Ma^y^em draws forth much phlegm; The Juice
of stinking Gladdon squirted up the Nose, draws down to the Nose great store
of filthy Excrements; Mustard Seed beaten to powder, and blowed up the Nose,
purges the Head; The Juice of Snees^wort squirted up the Nose, brings from
the Brain slimy phlegm; The Juice of the Leaves of Elder purges the Head; The
Juice of Mercury purges the Head of all gross and vicious humors; Pellitory,
Pimpernel, Rosemary, the smoke taken up his Nostrils, or take a Feather and
anoint it in Oylde*Bay, and thrust it up his Nose, is good for any cold or
obstruction in the Head.

The best Perfume of all.
But the best Perfume of all is to take the best Olibanum, Storax, Benjamin and
Frank cense, bruised grossly together, and strowed upon a Chasingdith of
Coals, and let him receive the smoke of it up his Nostrils through a Tunnel,
which will bring away abundance of tough Matter into water from the Head and
Brain, insomuch that it will be almost ready to extinguish the Fire; It is a
most excellent Comforter of the Brain, and brings a great cheerfulness to the
Heart, and rejoices the whole Body.

The Green Ointment.
The Green Ointment, which Cure Sores whether old or green, Vleers, Fistulaes,
Poll-evils, or what else; for where this Ointment comes, no proud or dead
Flesh will grow, no Flies will come near the place, or for Horse or Mare-Filly
that is Gelt or Splad, anoint but the place, and they will neither swell nor
fester, for it does not only heal soundly, but speedily also, provided you lay
nothing upon the Wound or Sorrance, where the Ointment is administered, as
neither Hurds, Lint, Plasters or the like, unless you have occasion to taint a
Wound which is deep, neither that for any long time, or too often; and besides,
the seldomer the Wound is dressed, as once a day, or once in two days, it will
heal the better and faster, especially if it be brought into good for wardness
of healing. And together with this Ointment you may do well; wash the Sorrance
with the Copperas water, which by reason it is always first to be used, you
shall have it first, and the Green Ointment after it.

The making of the Copperas water.
Take two quarts of fair water, and put it into a clean Postnet, and put to it
half a pound of green Copperas, of Salt a handful, of ordinary Honey a
spoonful, and two or three Branches of Rosemary, boil all these till one half
of the water be consumed, and a little before you take it from the Fire, put to
it the quantity of a Doves Egg of Allom, then take it from the Fire and strain
it into a Pan, and when it is cold put it into a Glass close stopped, and keep
it for your use. And when you are to dress any Sore, first wash it very clean
with this Water, and if the Wound be deep inject it with a Seringe.

The Virtues of it.
This Water will of it self Cure any reasonable Sore or Wound (but the green
Ointment being applied after it is washed) will heal any old Ulcer or Fistula
whatsoever, if they come to the bottom of them, and for green Wounds they have
not their fellow; if you think good you may boil it in Verjuice or Chamber-lye,
one being a great Searcher, Cleanser and Healer, the other a great Drier.

How to make the green O^n^ment.
Take a clean Skillet or Postnet, and first put into it of Rozin the quantity
of a Wallnut, which being Molten, put to it the like quantity of Wax, and when
that is also Molten, put to them of tried Hog's Grease half a pound, and when
that is Molten, put into it of common English Honey one spoonful, and when all
these are Molten and well stirred together, then put in of ordinary Turpentine
half a pound, and when that is dissolved, take it from the Fire, and put to it
an Ounce of Verdegrease beaten to fine powder, and so stir it altogether, but
be careful it run not over, for that the Verdegrease will cause it to arise,
then set it again upon the Fire till (...) begin to Simper, then take it off,
for if you let it boil too much it will turn red, and lose its virtue of
Healing, and become a Corrasive, then strain it through a Cloth into some
Earthen Pot, and keep it for your use close covered.

The Virtues of it.
This is the most Excellent Ointment that ever I knew, for de Gray has done
such rare Cures with it, that he has been offered ten pounds for it. For it
cleanses a Wound be it never so foul, or infected with dead, proud, spungy or
naughty Flesh it carnifieth and heals abundantly, and withal so soundly and
firmly, as that it does never more break forth, it draws forth Thorns,
Splinters, Nails, and all such things in the Flesh, and in a word it Cures all
sorts of Sores and Wounds.


Another Excellent Green Ointment made only in the Month of May, which Cures
all sorts of Strains, Aches, Burnings, Scaldings and Swellings whatsoever,
either in the Throator any other part of the Body.
Take half a pound of each of these things here under-mentioned, viz. Rue, red
Sage, Wormwood and young bay Leaves, beat them very well in a Mortar; Then take
four pounds of new Sheeps Suet, and work the Herbs and it very well together
with your Hands, till they be incorporated and become as one Lump; Then put to
them two quarts of Sallet-Oyl, and Work that also till it become all of one
softness and color; Then put it into a new Earthen Pan, and let it stand
covered eight days; then boil it over a soft Fire the space of two hours or
more, keeping it stirring all the while; Then put into it four Ounces of the
Oil of Spike, and let that boil as long; The way to know whether it be well
boiled, is to put a drop of it upon a Plate, and if it be upon a fair Green,
you may assure your self it is enough; Then strain it through a new Canvass,
and keep it in an Earthen Pot for your use. This Ointment will hold very good
seven or eight years.


A very good Receipt to keep back Humors that flow too fast to a Wound you
have in Cure, which will make it heal so much the sooner.
Take two pints of White Wind Vinegar or Tartar, and put to it an Ounce or more
of the powder of Bole-Armoniack, and of common Salt well dried the like
quantity, the powder also of the Bur-dock Root, or the Juice of the Leaves, and
wash the swelled place round about with it, once or twice a day, and it will be
a great help in Order to its Cure.


Another for the same Use.
After you have beaten a penniworth or more of Camphire very small, dissolve it
in a Pint of Verjuice, and boil it about a quarter of an hour, then put it into
a Glass close stopped, to keep for your use, and use it as you have Directions
in the former Receipt.


To Cleanse a Wound Old or New before you dress it.
Take more or less of White Wind Vinegar, according as you have occasion, and
put into it the powder of the Roots of Elder dried, or the Juice of the Leaves,
with a spoonful of Honey, and a little powder of burnt Allom, and boil it about
half a quarter of an hour, and use it warm.


Another sort of Green Ointment, which is good to heal any Wound Old or New.
Take a handful of these Herbs here under-mentioned, viz. Rosemary, Wound-wort,
Red Sage, Mug-wort, Comfrey, Rue and Southern-wood, etc. Cut them small, and
boil them in a pound and an half of May Butter, and the like quantity of Sheeps
Suet; When you have boiled it according as you have Directions for the Boiling
of Ointments in the latter End of the Book, strain out the Ointment from the
Herbs, and put i^ into a Pot, and keep it for your use.


Of Purging or Scouring Things in general.
Turn-sole boiled in water gently purges the Body, Felt-wort or Baldmony,
Alloes or Sea Housleek is the most convenient Medicine for the Stomach, that is
the Seed of St. Peter's wort, the seed of Tutsan or Park-Leaves do purge
Choleric Humors, Dodder that grows upon Savory, Hedge-Hysop purges
mightily waterish, gross and slimy Humors, Scamony or purging Bind-weed, does
mightily purge, and it is very hurtful to the Body, if you do not mix it with
Alloes, Colloquintida is a violent Purger, and is not to be used but upon some
desperate Diseases, and then not to be given, unless it be mixed with some
clammy things whereby the vehemence there of may be repressed, black Hellebore
or Bears Foot, Hogs Fennel purges by Siege both Phlegm and and Choler, either
of the Pollipodies purges Choler and Phlegm.

The Entrails of a Carp or Barble cut into pieces, and given him in White Wind
or Ale, or Rye sodden that it burst not, and dried and given him instead of
Provender, an Ounce of Alloes made up in Balls of Butter, after it is finely
beaten to Powder, purges excellently, Spurge boiled in Beer and given him,
Hempseed, Fennegreek, Cassia, Honey, Sallet-Oyl, in Sack given him, the powder
of Mechoacan boiled in Ale, or Ale-wort, London Treacle and Honey brewed
together and given him, or Seen, Agarick and Licoris boiled in Ale and given
him, or Gentian sliced and boiled in a quart of Beer till it come to a pint and
given him.

Particular Scourings at large, and first of a Scouring for any Horse, sick or
Sound, and especially for Running or Hunting Horses, whose Grease must
necessarily be Molten.
Take twenty Raisins of the Sun with the stones picked out, ten slit Figs slit
round-wise, boil them in a Pottle of Running Water till the Water is consumed
and thickened, then take the powder of Licoris, Anniseeds and Sugar Candy,
finely searc'd, and mix it with the Raisins and Figs, stamping and working them
together till they become a stiff paste, then making round Balls thereof of a
pretty bigness, roll and cover them all over with sweet Butter, and give as
many of them to the Horse as you shall think meet for his Strength, provided
that the day before, you give him such Exercise as will raise up his Grease,
and that immediately before you give him this Medicine you also warm him
thoroughly, that the Humors being again stirred up, the Medicine may work the
more effectually.

Another Scouring to purge a Horse from ail Grease, Glut or Filthiness within
his Body, which I think may go for as good a Scouring as can be Invented by Art.
Take of Anniseeds three Ounces, of Cummin seeds six drams, of Carthamus a dram
and a half, of Fennegreek-seed one Ounce and two drams, of Brimstone one Ounce
and a half, beat all these to fine powder and searce them, then take a pint and
two Ounces of Sallet-Oyl, of Honey a pound and a half, and of white-VVine four
pints, then with as much fine VVheat-Meal as will suffice, make all into a
strong stiff Paste, and knead and work it well; this Paste keep in a Gally-pot
close covered for your use; when your Horse has been Hunted, and is at Night
or in the Morning very thirsty, take a Ball of it as big as a Man's Fist, and
dissolve it in a Gallon or two of cold Water, and it will make the Water look
white as Milk, then give it him in the dark lest the Color displease him; if
he drink it, then feed him, but if he refuse it, let him fast till he take it,
which assuredly he will do in twice or thrice offering, and when he has once
taken it, he will refuse all other drink for this, and you cannot give him too
much nor too often of it if he have exercise. It is an excellent thing for all
inward Infirmities whatsoever.

Another Excellent Scouring after any sore Heat, or for any fat Horse after his
Exercise, with Directions how he is to take it, and how you are to Order him
after it, with Cautions what to do when you give any Scouring.
Take a quart of good Sack, and set it on the Fire in a Basin or Skillet, it
and when it is warm, take an Ounce of the clearest Rosin, being bruised very
small, and by degrees little by little put it into the Sack, and keep it
stirring for fear of Clotting, and when it is well incorporated into the Sack,
take it from the Fire, and put into it half a pint of the best Sallet-Oyl, and
in the cooling, stir them all very well together, then put (...) it an Ounce of
brown Sugar Candy beaten to powder, and being lukewarm, give it the Horse in
the height of his Heat, as soon as you come home from Exercise, then Rub him
well and Cloth him warm, and let him fast two hours after it, and keep him
stirring in the Stable, for that will make Spirits work, for Rest does but dull
the Spirits. When you give him any Scouring, be sure that day to give him no
cold water after it, for it is binding and knitting, and detaineth that
soulness which the Scouring should take away.

Another Scouring when others will not work.
Take a quarter of a pound of sweet Butter, and so much of Castle-Soap, and
half an Ounce of Alloes, beat them together, and add two spoonfuls of beaten
Hemp Seed, and of Rosin half a spoonful, of Sugar Candy an Ounce bruised, work
them all into a Paste, and give it him in Balls immediately after his heat, and
when you have warmed him, and stirred up the Grease and Foulness within him.

[There is in my second Part a very safe and easy Scouring.]

If you have a desire to see more Variety of Purgations of all sorts, look back.


Of Loosening things in General.
Brank-ursin or Seed, Hemp Seed, Fennegreek-seed, the Juice of the white Beets,
Coleworts, Spinach, Mercury, Succory, white Soap and Spurge brayed together and
given him to drink, Sallet-Oyl given him in Sack or Ale, or Anniseeds, Linseeds
and Piony boiled in Beer, or the Bark of the Elder-Tree bruised and mixed with
old Ale and given him, or take of the Decoction of Mallows, Sallet, Oil and
fresh Butter, Benedicta Laxativa, given him Blood-warm Glister-wise, or Rye
thrown amongst his Provender, or Mustard Seed, or to anoint your hand with
Butter or Hog's Grease, and pluck away his Ordure, and then put into his
Fundament a good piece of the great end of a Candle, or give him in Ale eleven
Leaves of Laurel stamped, the Seed of horned Poppey given him in Ale. All sorts
of Docks being boiled are Loosners of the Belly, Marigold-Leaves, Burage,
Bugloss, the Leaves of Hounds-Tongue boiled in Ale do mollify the Belly, Syrop
of Violets, black Hellebore or Bears Foot, Hogs Fennel Loosneth the Belly
gently, Speraege or Asparagus.


Things good to Fatten a Horse in general.
Beans boiled in two Gallons of water till they swell or burst, and mix them
with a peck of Wheat bran, and give it him in the manner of a Mash, and it will
Fat suddenly, or Coleworts sodden and mixed with Wheat Bran, and give them
instead of Provender, or to give him in stead of his Provender, the Grain
called Buck, or to give him Parched Wheat mingled with Ale, or Wheat Bran
mingled amongst his Provender, but be sure to keep him well dressed and cleanly
looked after, for without clean keeping his Meat will do him but little good,
and to give him a little Meat at once for fear you Cloy him. Or take Sage,
Savin, Bay Berries, Earth-Nuts, Bears-Grease mingled with a quart of Wine or
Ale, and give it him, or to feed him a Month together with scalded Bran, or
take Cummin-seed, Fennegreek-seed, Siliris Montani, Nutmegs, Cloves, Ginger,
Linseed, of each two Ounces, quick Brimstone six Ounces, made all into line
powder, and give him an Egg-shell full of it every Night in his Provender, and
white Water after it, and put into his Oats with his powder a handful of
Nettleseed, for that is a thing which will principally cause him to batten, and
when he is Glutted with this Meat, then give him Bread, if he leave his Bread,
then give him Malt, or any Grain that he will eat with a good Appetite, or to
give him many Mornings together half an Ounce of Brimstone finely beaten with a
raw Egg, and a penny weight of the Powder of Myrrh in a quart of Ale, or to
give him three Leaved Grass half green and half dry for many days together, or
to give him Pepper, Saffron, Anniseeds, Turmerick, Treacle, Licoris,
Pennyroyal and Archangel, mingled in Milk with the Yolks of Eggs, Barley dried
or Barley boiled till it burst is a great Fattener, but most of these ways will
not breed Fat that will continue; but the best way to make him Fat, and to
cause him to keep it, is to give him three Mornings together a pint of sweet
Wine, and two spoonfuls of Diapente brewed together, for that will take away
all Infection and Sickness from the inward Parts, then to seed him well with
Provender at least four times a day, viz. After his Water in the Morning, after
his Water at Noon, after his Water in the Evening, and after his Water at nine
a Clock at Night, and if you find that he eat not his Provender well, then to
change it to another, and to let him have most of that Food he loves best, and
there is no question but he will grow fat suddenly. But if you will have a more
particular Account, then turn to the Mirror of all Medicines, to make the
Leanest Horse that may be Fat, Sound and Fit either for Market or Travel, in
the space of fourteen days, you may find before, with several other such like
Receipts ensuing.

An Explanation of several hard Words belonging to Chyrurgery.
What a Fracture is.
If there be a loosening in the Bone, it is called a Fracture.

What a Wound is.
If it be in any Fleshy part, it is called a Wound.

What a Rupture is.
If it be in the Veins, then it is a Rupture.

What a Convulsion is.
If in the Sinews, then it is a Cramp or Convulsion.

What an Excortication is.
If it be in the Skin, then it is called an Excortication.

Of Giving of Fire, and there are two ways of it, the one Actual, and the other
Potential; the First is done by Medicine, either Corrasive, Putrif active or
Caustic.
Cautery Actual.
The Actual Fire does burn the Flesh by Instrument, which stops Corruption
of Members, and stancheth Blood, provided the Sinews, Cords and Ligaments be
not touched, the Instruments to Cauterize, are Gold, Silver, Copper or Iron.

Cautery Potential.
The Potential Fire does burn by Medicine, of which there are three sorts or
degrees, namely, by Corrosive, by Caustic, or Putrefaction.

The Corrosive.
The Corrosives are Simple or Compound, the simple Corrosives are Roch-Allom,
burnt or un-burnt, Red Coral, Mercury sublimed, Verdegrease, Copperas white and
green, and these Corroding things are called Precipitates, which are Eaters of
dead Flesh. The Compounds are Vnguentum Apostolorum, Vnguentum Aegyptiacum, and
Vnguentum Coraceum, with others.

Medicines Putrifactive.
Medicines Putrifactive are such Medicines, which are applied to Swellings,
which are made for the most part of Medicines Compounded, as Poultesses, roasted
Sorrel, white Lilly Roots and the like.

What a Caustic is.
A Caustic is a great Burner, for that being once put to the Skin, will in a
short time make a Wound where there was none before, and those things are Lie,
Lime, Vitriol, Aqua-fortie and the like.

Corrosives.
Corrosives are weaker then Putrifactives, and Putrifactives are weaker then
Causticks. Corrosives work in the soft Flesh, Putrifactives in the hard, and
Causticks break the sound Skin.

Thus you see the use of these things, you may apply them at your pleasure, for
these Cure all sorts of Farcies, Cankers, Fistulaes, Leprosies, Maungies,
Scabs, and such like poisonous Infection.

Of the several sorts of Purgings, which are Five, by Pills, by Pori^ons, by
Glisters, by Suppositories, and by Grass.
What Pills are.
Pills are solid or substantial stuff fixed together in one Body, and being
made into round Balls are cast down the Horses Throat, which purge the Head and
Brain from Phlegm, and other gross Humors down into the Excrements.

What a Portion is.
Portions are when you give him liquid purging Powders dissolved in Wine or
Ale, or that if it be any other liquid stuff, now Portions cleanse the Stomach
and Guts from such naughty Humors, which Glaunders, Colds and Surfeits have
engendered in the Body.

What Glisters are.
Glisters are given at the Fundament, and are made up of four things, that is
to say, Decoctions, of Drugs of Oils, and such like Unctious Matter, as Butter
or Grease; And ^ourthly, of diverse Salts to provoke the Virtue Expulsive. Now
they are of several Natures, some to ease and appease Griefs, and allay the
sharpness of Humors, some to Bind and some to Loosen, and some to heal, as in
Cases of Ulcers and Old Sores within the Body, etc.

What a Suppository is.
A Suppository is only a Preparative to a Glister, and but only to cleanse and
make loose the great Guts which comes to the Tuel, and they help the disease
of the Guts, being of Nature more gentle then Glisters are, and may be applied
when Glisters cannot.

Purging by Grass.
Purging by Grass, is either by green Corn, Wheat, Rye, Barley, Oats or Tares,
which is a great Clen^er and Cooler of his Body.

What a Decoction is.
A Decoction is a Broth made of certain Herbs, as Mallows, Mash-Mallows,
pellitory, Camomil, and sometimes of white Lilly Roots, and other such like
things.

Simples that are good to conglutinate and knit things together, either inward
or outward.

Iris Illyrica beaten and sifted, and mingled with pepper, Honey and Currants,
and given him to drink in Wine and Sallet-Oyl, Conglutinateth any inward
Rupture or Burstness, Dragant, Saffron, the fruit of the Pine, with the Yolks
of Eggs given him to drink with Wine and Sallet-Oyl, is good to Conglutinate
any inward Member or Vein broken, the Roots and Seeds of Asparagus sod in water
and given him, and after three days give him Opoponax with Honey and Myrrh, and
it will Conglutinate any inward Ulcer or Rupture whatsoever. The Bark of Ash
beaten with Wine, and Plaster it, is a great Knitter of broken Bones, or the
inward Bark of an Elm laid in Running water, and Bathe the place therewith, or
the Roots of Rocket boiled in water, and plaster it, or Wild Briony stamped
and plaistered also, Hazel-tails and the Seeds of red Docks made into powder,
and given him to drink is good, or Bugel is a Knitter of Wounds inward or
outward, so does Lions-paw, or Self-heal, the distilled water of sow-Bread does
Knit any broken Sinew in the Body. Bole-Armoniack beaten to powder, and finely
Sifted and beaten with the white of an Egg, and spread upon the Leg, and
covered over with Flox, is very good for a Sinew-strain, and is a great
Strengthner of the grieved place, where a Bone has been out of Joint, and put
in again; The yellow Wall Flower strengthens any weak part out of Joint.

A Poultess made of brank-Ursin and applied is good, so is a Decoction of the
Root of Butchers-broom or Knee-Holly, with the Berries
made also into a Poultiss; the Root of the great Comfrey bruised and laid to
them, does consolidate and knit them together; The Decoction of the Leaves,
Bark or Roots of Elecampane heals them, being bathed therewith; The Roots of
Eringo or Sea-holly boiled in Hog's Grease, and applied to them, draws not
only Bones out of the Flesh, but also Thorns, and heals them again; An
Ointment made of the Roots of Osmond-Royal or Water-Flag in a Mortar, with the
Oil of Swallows, and the place grieved anointed with it, is very good;
Flix-weed does consolidate broken Bones, so does the leaves of the Holly-tree
used in Fomentations, so does Knot-grass and Moon-wort, the leaves of Mullen
bruised and boiled in Wine, and laid to any Member out of Joint, and newly Set
again, takes away all swellings and pains thereof; the Leaves of Nettles also
bruised and laid to them refreshes them; the Juice of Plantine applied to any
bone out of Joint hinders the Inflammation, swelling or pain that shall arise
thereon; Solomon's Seal knitteth any Joint, which by weakness uses to be often
out of its place; Or the Decoction of the Root being bruised and infused in
Wine all Night, and given him, much helps toward the Cure; the Leaves of
Turn-Sole bruised and applied to Bones out of Joint is very good for them, etc.


Simples that are good to clea^se the Blood.
Avens, VVater-Cresles, or Brook-lime, Burage or Bugloss, Butchers broom or
Knee-holly, Cardus B^nedictus, the red Dock, which is commonly called
Blood-wort, Fennel-seeds, Fumitory, Hops, VVall-Rue, or ordinary white
Maidenhair, Mustard Seed, the Root of the bastard Rubarb, Sage, Succory,
Scurvey-Grass, Smallage, VVood-sorrel, Star-Thistle, Ladies Thistle, the yellow
VVall-Flower, etc.


Simples that are good in general to ex pel the dead Foal.
A^heal, the Herb Alkanet applied to her Shape draws it forth, Angelica,
Brook-lime, or Water-Pimpernel, Centaury or sweet Chervil given her in Wine is
very good. The powder of the Root of Cuckowpoint, or the Juice of it given in
Wine brings it away, Flax-weed or Toad-Flax is good, Flower de-luce made up
in a Pessary with Honey, and put up into her Body brings it forth, Germander,
Hore-hound, Filapendula or Drop-wort is good also given her; so is the Root of
Masterwort; Ground Pine is excellent good to expel it. The Decoction of the
Leaves and Branches of Sage given is also good, so is the Juice of the yellow
Wall-Flower, etc.


Simples good in general to provoke Lust in Horses.
The Decoction of Asparagus given him for some time, the seed of the Ash-tree
powdered with Nutmegs is a great Increaser of it, Beans, Chest-Nuts, Cream of
Cich-pease, or Cicers boiled in water and given. The Seeds of both the sorts of
Clary, the pith of the stalk of the Burr-dock, before the Burr comes forth;
The weight of one Ounce of Cloves given in Milk provokes it exceediugly; Bread
made of Potatoes and Beanflower, and given him, is a great Provoker of it; The
Roots of Chervil, the Roots of Fennel-gyant, Spear-mint, Mustard Seed,
Nettle-seed; The seed of the wild Rocket increases it exceedingly, Raisins of
the Sun, sweet Almonds, Pine-Nuts, the pizzle of a Bull or Heart, Boars stones
dried and powdered, and given him amongst his Provender, etc.


Simples good in General to increase Milk in Mares.
The seed or leaves of Burrage or Bugloss, Cicers boiled in Milk, Cocks-Head
the leaves or seed of Fennel, the seed of wild Rocket, Sow thistles, the seed
of Vipers, Bugloss given him in Ale, Dandelion, etc.

Things good in General to wash all manner of Sores and Ulcers*

Alehoof bruised with White Wind and Allom, is very good to wash all sorts of
them, Flixweed made into a Salve does quickly heal them, how foul or malignant
soever they be, the distilled water of the Herb works the same effect, but it
is somewhat weaker. The Juice of Fox-Gloves does cleanse, dry and heal them.
The Juice of the Leaves or Roots of stinking Gladwin, and anoint any Scab or
sore in the Skin, it takes them away. The Juice of Purslain is good to allay
the heat in sores and hurts, Meadow sweet, Ragwort, the Juice of the green Herb
of Tobacco, wild Tansie boiled with Vinegar and Honey is good to heal moist,
corrupt and running Sores, etc.


Simples that are good in General for all manner of swellings or risings in the
Skin, viz. hard Knobs and Kernels, as also swelled Legs, Swellings under the
Chaul, hard or soft, and to ripen them.
Archangel stamped with some Salt and Vinegar, and applied, dissolveth them,
Bdelium (a kind of Gum) does ripen them; The leaves of the Beech Tree is good
to discuss hot swellings; Barley-meal and Flea-wort boiled in water, and made
into a Poultess with Honey and Oil of Lillies, cures swellings under the
Throat; Brine dissolveth hard swellings, Chickweed boiled in water very soft,
adding to it Hog's Grease, with the powder of Fennegreek and Linseed, and a few
Roots of Marshmallows stamped in the form of a Cataplasm or Poultess, and
applied, takes away the swelling of the Legs, or any other part. B^ook-lime or
water Pimpernel used in the like manner is also very good; the Decoction of
Coleworts takes away the pain and Ach, and allayeth the swellings in swollen
Legs, wherein any gross or watery Humors are fallen, the place being bathed
with it warm. Oil of Camomil is good to dissolve hard and cold swellings,
Cummin put into a Poultiss is also good for them; so is Chervil bruised and
applied, Cinquesoyl boiled in Vinegar helps all hard swellings, so does Clary
and Cleavers boiled in Hog's Grease do the like; Cocks-head bruised when they
are green, and laid as a Plaster, dispenses Knots and Kernels in the Flesh;
the Juice of Coltsfoot is good for all hot swellings and inflammations. Endive
applied asswageth all Swellings and Tumors coming of a hot cause, an Oil made
of the broad Flag Flower-de^luce, mollifieth all manner of Tumors and Swellings
in any part of the Body; As also of the Matrice, the Roots of stinking Gladwin
boiled in Vinegar or the Grounds of Beer, and laid upon them, consumes them,
the Decoction of the leaves of the Goose-berry bush cools them, Frankincense
mingled with Honey, and applied, dissolveth hard swellings; the fresh Herb of
Groundsel made into a Poultess, takes away the heat and pains of them, and
used with Salt dissolveth Knots and Kernels; Henban^ asswageth all manner of
swellings in the Cods or elsewhere, if they be boiled in Wine, or the Grounds
of Beer, and applied either of themselves, or by a fomentation warm. True-love
or one Berry has the same Virtues. Hore-hound boiled in Hogs Grease is also
good for any swelling in any part of the Body; St. J^h^s wort dissolveth
swellings, Knotgrass cools all manner of hot Inflammations breaking out by
heat, Hedge Mustard is good for swellings in the Stones* The Decoction of
Rag-weed, or Pellitory of the Wall is good, Rye-bread, or the leaves thereof,
ripeneth and breaks Imposthumes and other swellings, so does Wood-Sage, the
leaves of Southern-wood boiled till they be soft, and stamped with Barley-Meal,
and Barrows Grease, and applied to the place grieved is good for all cold
Tumors. The Decoction of the Root of Scabins applied, does wonderfully help
all sorts of hard or cold swellings in any part of the Body, etc.


Simples good in General to cause Sweat, given inwardly or applied outwardly*
Mountain Calamint given inwardly, or applied outwardly, being boiled in
Sallet-Oyl, and the Body anointed with it, the Juice of Scabius given him with
Treacle; Camomil used in Baths provokes it, opening the Pores, and mitigating
the Griping pains in the Guts and Bowels; the Juice of Bugloss mixed with
Brandy, and the Body rubbed therewith is good, Master-wort or Herb-Gerrard is
also good; Fennel-Gyant mixed with Sallet-Oyl, and the Body anointed with it.
An Oil made of Asarabaca, with Landan^m, by setting it in the Sun, and the Back
anointed with it is good, Wood-sage, etc.


Simples, and other things that are good to Expel the Heam in Beasts, which is
the same as the Afterbirth is in Women.
Time, Winter-succory, penny Royal boiled in White Wind and given, Common
Horehound boiled also in the same Wine and given, Dittany given or put up in a
Pessary, drives forth the dead Foal, and expels the Secundine; Angelica
drives it forth also, so does Parsley-seed, Alexanders, Hops, Fennel, Savin
and Bay Berries, the powder of the inside of the wrinkled skin of the Gizzard
of a Hen that Lays, dried and given in White Wind is excellent, etc.


Simples good in general to provoke or expel Wind.
Alexander or House-parsley, Angelica seeds, Bay Berries, the seeds of the wild
Carriots, Bishops-weed dissolveth it, Caraway-seeds, Cardamum seeds, sweet
Chervil, Cummin taken inwardly, or given in Glisters is good for the gnawing of
the Guts and Belly, Dill-seeds, the Herb Devils-bit boiled in Wine,
Fennel-seeds, Filapendula or Drop-wort, Hemp*seed, the Berries of Holly,
Juniper Berries, the Root of Lovage, Lavender, Nep or Cat-mint, Nutmegs, wild
Parsnix, or the Seeds or Roots of common parsley dissolveth it both in the
Stomach and Bowels, China-Roots, Winter and Summer-Savoury, pennyroyal given
him in Sack, Burnet, Saxa^rage, stone-parsley, the seed of smallage, Time or
Mother of Time, Valerian, etc.


Simples that are good in general for Cattle that are bewitched.
Two drams of the berries or seed of True-love, or one berry beaten to powder,
and given him for twenty days together restores him, Misle-toe growing upon
Pear Trees and hung about the Neck is very good, Amara ^ulcis, gathered in its
Influency, is also good for it used as before; Peony is good. The branches of
the Holly-tree is reported to defend, not only from Witchcraft, but Lightning
also, etc.


Simples that are Cordials and Strengthners of Nature.
Gentian strengthens the Stomach exceedingly, and keeps the Heart from
fainting; Clove Gilly-Flowers are great Strengthners both of the Brain and
Heart, and are very good to put into Cordials for sick and weak Horses, St.
John's Wort, Juniper Berries strengthens the Brain, and all the Limbs of the
Body; Marigolds strengthens the Heart, so does Saffron and Mustard Seed; Give
not above two drams of Saffron at a time when you use it; Mother of Time is a
great strengthner of it, Red Roses does not only strengthen the Heart, but
Stomach and Liver, and the retentive Faculty, and mitigateth the pains that
arise from Heat, Bugloss, Balm, Motherwort, Mace, Cinnamon, Cloves, Anniseeds,
Canary, etc.


Simples that are good in general, either taken inwardly, or applied outwardly,
for the Biting or Stinging of any venomous Beast, viz. Adders, Vipers, Spiders,
Wasps, Bees and Hornets, etc.
The Decoction of Agrimony given him, or the Juice of Alexander or
Horse-parsley, Aristolochia rotunda or Birthwort, Asarabica, Balm, Woodbitony,
the powder of the dried Leaves of the blew Bottle given in Plantine-water,
Comfrey, Bucks-horn, Plantine given him, with some of the Leaves laid to the
hurt place is good against the Biting of Adders, the Juice of the Root of the
Bur-dock, given him inwardly, and applied outwardly to the place bruised with
Salt, is also very good for them to ease the pain thereof, Water-Caltrops,
Cantaury, Campions, Flower-de luce boiled in Vinegar and given is good, so is
the Decoction of the Root of Common Elder; the seed of St. John's wort given
inwardly and applied outwardly is good for them; so is Sage, Rocket,
Pennyroyal, Pimpernel, Ground Pine, Marjorem, Summer-Savory takes away the
stinging of Bees or Wasps, the Root of Spignel, the green Herb of Tobaccho
applied to the place bruifed; the Leaves of the Tamarisk Tree boiled in Wine
and given him is good, so is Valerian and Vipers Bugloss, the Flower of Barley
or Wheat-meal boiled in Vinegar, applied to the place grieved, is very good to
draw forth the Venom, the Juice of Mead or Trefoyl is also good for them, etc.


A very large Account in general, of what Simples are good for all sorts of
Sor^s or Ulcers, whether inward or outward, of what Nature soever.
Agrimony, Alehoof boiled with a little Honey and Verdegrease, does wonderfully
cleanse them, and stays the spreading and eating of the Cankers in them; the
Juice or the Water of Angelica is very good to wash them with, so is Anemone or
Wind-Flower and Archangel, Arsmart is good for putrid Ulcers, Alloes beaten to
powder and strewed upon them is also good, so is the Juice of Broom and
Water-bitony, the Water or Juice of Bistort, or Snakeweed, or of the Leaves,
Buds or Branches of the Bramble is very good to wash them with; the ^uice of
the Leaves of the blew Bottle helps all Ulcers or Sores in the Mouth; Bugle,
Burnet, wild Champions given inwardly, or applied outwardly, is very good, so
is the Juice of Celandine and Centaury, the red berries of the VVinter-Cherries
given inwardly, cleanses the inward Imposthumes and Ulcers of the Reins and
Bladder, and is also good for bloody and foul Urine; the Juice of the bruised
Leaves of Chickweed, Cinquefoyl or ^omfrey is good to wash them with,
Cuckoe-point, the Root of it in powder, or the Herb boiled in Sheeps or Cows
Milk heals the inward Ulcers of the bowels; the distilled Waters of
Cucumbers given inwardly is very good for Ulcers in the Bladder; the powder of
the Root of both kinds of Fern strewed upon them, dries up the moisture in
them, and heals them speedily, so does the powder of Sow-Fennel, or Fig-wort,
the Juice or the Water of Flix-weed injected into them, does cleanse and heal
them up, Elecampane Root beaten to powder and mixed with Honey is also very
good. Dill burnt and laid upon moist Sores cures them* Franckincense is good
to Fill up hollow Ulcers, Hemlock is good for all creeping Ulcers and Pustles
that arise from hot and sharp Humors, by cooling and repelling the heat. Take
this Receipt for the Cure of all manner of Ulcers.

Take the green leaves of the yellow Henbane, three pounds and a half of them,
stamped in a Mortar, and boil it in a quart of Sallet Oil, in a brass Pan,
gently upon the Fire, keeping it stirring till the Herbs are black, and will
not boil nor bubble any more, then you shall have a most excellent green
Ointment, which being strained from the dross, put it to the Fire again, and
add to it half a pound of Bees Wax, four Ounces of Rosin, and two Ounces of
common Turpentine, melt them together, and keep them for your use. This will
cure any iuveterate Ulcer, Botch, Burning, green Wound, and all Cuts or Hurts
in the Head.

The fresh leaves of Ivy boiled in white Wine does wonderfully help to cleanse
them; Juniper Berries dries up hollow Ulcers, and fills them up with flesh;
Knot*grass, or the powder of the Herb or Seed, cools all Gangreens, Fistulaes,
and foul and silthy Ulcers; Knape weed is a great Drier up of Moisture in them;
Madder helps them in the Mouth, if unto the Decoction you put a little Allom
and Honey of Roses, Herb Mouse-Ear is very excellent to stay the Malignity and
spreading of them; Pellitory of the Wall, Pennyroyal bruised and put to
Vinegar cleanses them; The Juice of Plantain is good for old Ulcers that are
to be healed; The Juice of Purslain is good for Inflammations in the privy
Parts; the powder of Savin mixed with Honey cleanses them, but it hinders
them from healing; The Juice of Rag-wort is very good also, etc.

Burning Compositions.
The gentlest is Vnguentum Apostolorum, next to it is Verjuice and Hog's Grease
beaten together; Next to this is Precipitate and Turpentine mixed together; Next
to it is Arsnick allayed with any Oil or healing Salve; Next to it is Mercury
sublimate likewise allayed with some cooling Salve; and the worst is Lime and
Soap, or Lyme and strong Lie beaten together, for they will corrode and
mortify the soundest part whatsoever.

To make Hair smooth, sleek and soft.
To do this, keep him warm at the Heart, for the least inward Cold will make
the Hair stare, then make him Sweat often, for that will raise up the Dust and
Sweat which makes his Coat foul, when he is in his greatest Sweat, with an old
Sword Blade scrape off all the white Foam, Sweat and Filth that shall be raised
up, and that will lay his Coat even and smooth. And when you let him Blood, rub
him all over with his own Blood, and so let it remain two or three days, and
then Curry and Dress him well, and this will make his Coat shine like Glass.

How to cast and overthrow a Horse.
When you intend to Cast your Horse, bring him upon some even, smooth and soft
place, or in the Barn upon some soft straw, then take a long Rope, and double
it, and cast a Knot a yard from the Bought, then put the Bought about his Neck,
and the double Rope betwixt his Forelegs, and about his hinder Pasterns, and
underneath his Fet-locks, then put the ends of the Rope underneath the Bought
of his Neck, and draw them quickly, and they will overthrow him, then make the
ends fast, and hold down his Head, under which you must be sure to have always
good store of straw. Now if you would at any time Brand your Horse on the
Buttock, or do any thing about his hinder-Legs that he may not strike, take up
his contrary fore-Leg; and when you do Brand your Horse, see that the Iron be
red hot, and that the Hair be both seared away, and the Flesh scorched in every
place before you let him go, and so you shall be sure to lose no Labor.


To make an unruly Horse stand still to be Trimmed, that will not be Trimmed
with Barnacles.
Take off one of his Stirrop-Leathers, and put it into his Mouth, and so over
his Head as you do a Bridle, and girt up his Chaps very hard, and he will stand
quietly to be Trimmed.


Another to make an unruly Horse stand still to be shod.
The common way is to put a pair of Barnacles upon his Nose, and Tie them very
hard; but if you find that will not do, then at the same time put some round
stones into his Ears, and Ty them up hard that they fall not out.


How to make a stubborn Horse to go.
Tie a small Cord or Line about his Stones pretty hard, and bring it between
his Forelegs, and let it be of that length that you may reach the other end of
it with your Hand when you are upon his Back, and when you find that he will
not go forward, Jerk him with your Line, which is the only means I know of to
break him of his stubborn tricks. If he be a Gelding, then strike him with a
long Rod that is burnt at one end, and this will help.

To make a Horse follow his* Master, and find him out and Challenge him
amongst never so many People.
Take a pound of Oat-Meal, and put to it a quarter of a pound of Honey, and
half a pound of Lunarce, and make a Cake thereof, and put it into your Bosom
next to your naked Skin, then run or labor your self till you Sweat, then rub
all your Sweat upon your Cake, then keep him Fasting a day and a night, and
give it him to eat, and when he has eaten it, turn him loose, and he shall not
only follow you, but also hunt and seek you out when he has lost you, or does
miss you, and though you be enviroued with never so many, yet he will find you
out and know you, and when he comes to you spit into his Mouth, and anoint his
Tongue with your Spittle, and thus doing he will ^^ver forsake you.

How to make a black Star or white Hair black.
If you desire to make on a white Horse a black Star, you shall then take a
Scruple of Ink, and four Scruples of the VVood of Oliander beaten to powder,
incorporate this in as much Sheeps Suet as will suffice, and anoint the place
therewith, and it will make any white Hair black, or take the Decoction of
Fearn Roots, and Sage sod in Lie, and wash the place therewith, and it will
breed black Hair, but you must wash the place very often therewith* Or take the
Rust of Iron, Galls and Vitriol, and stamp them with Oil, or else take
Souter-Ink, Galls and Rust, and beat them well together, and anoint the place
well therewith, and it will turn any white Hair to be black.

Certain Principles touching Simples.
As touching Simples, some are only to ease pain, as Linseed, Camomile, soft
Grease, Suet of all sorts, or any other Oil that is hot in the first degree,
and whenever any of these Simples are compounded with their like, the
Medicine is called Anodina or Lynogs.

There are other Simples which are astonishing, benumbing or bringing asleep,
as Opium, Mandrake, Poppey, Hemlock, and such like, which are gross and cold in
the fourth degree, and whenever any of these Simples are compounded with
their like, then the Medicine is amongst Leaches called Narcotica.

The third sort of Simples are such as incarnate, or breed Flesh, as
Frankincense, Flour, Saffron, Yolks of Eggs, and such like, which are hot in
the second degree; and whenever any of these Simples are compounded with
their like, then the Medicine is called Sa^cotica.

The fourth sort of Simples are corroding, fretting and burning, as Arsnick,
Resigallo, Mercury, Lime, and such like, which are hot in the fourth degree;
and whenever they are applied Simple or Compound, then the Medicine is called
Corrosive.

The fifth sort of Simples are those which be called Mollifying, and are four
in Number. That is Green Mallows, white Mallows, Violets and Brank-Ursin.

The last sort of Simples are those which are called Cordials, and are three in
Number, viz. Violets and Bugloss of both kinds.

And thus much touching the Nature, Use, Property and Operation of Simples.

The End of the First Part.

A TABLE
Of the Price, Value and Virtue of most of the Principal Drugs, both Simple and
Compound, belonging to Farring, as they are frequently Sold at the Druggists in
London, viz. Roots, Barks, Woods, Flowers, Fruits, Seeds, Juices, Gums, Rozins,
Simples from Plants, Animals, their Parts and their Excrements; Minerals,
Metals and Stones; Together with Chemical Oils and Spirits; As also Treacles,
Ointments, Electuaries, Powders and Waters, etc.
ROOTS.
ANgelica strengthens the Heart, and is good against Pestilence and Poison. The
price the Pound is -- 0 s. 6. d. Aristolochia Longa of long Birth-wort, brings
away the Heam in See more of them in the Table of Simples.
Beasts, (which is the same as the Afterbirth is in Women) The price the Pound
is -- 0 s. 9. d. Aristolochia Rotunda, of Round Birth-wort, Powdered and Given
in Malaga Wine, is good for Ruptures, both of them Resist Pestilence and
Poison. The price the pound is -- 0 s. 9 d. Bistort is good against Pestilence
and Poison, Bruises, Huxes and Staling of Blood. The price the pound is -- 0 s.
8 d. Costus Amarus and Costus Dulcis are both hot and dry, and are good to
bring away Wind, given him; And boiled in Sallet-Oyl, and applied* outwardly to
any Pain or Grief in the Legs, eases it. The price of them the pound is -- 2
s. 4 d. Agarick, Look for it farther in Simples out of Plants, and for the
Virtues of it in the Table of Simples. You may give him two Ounces of it by it
self.
Jallop powdered, is very good to mix amongst other Powders; Correct it with
Liquoris Powder, to prevent Gripi^g, to Purge a Horse. The price the pound is
-- 3 s. 3 d. Turmentil is a kind of Cinquefoyl, and is dry in the third degree,
but moderately hot; It is very good Given in Pestilential Diseases, and for
Poison. See more of the Usefulness of it in the Table of Simples. The price the
pound is -- 0 s. 8 d. China, see the Virtues of it in the Table of Simples; the
price the pound of the Lupid or Flinty, is -- 2 s. 6 d. The price of the best
the pound is -- 3 s. 6 d. Di^tany is hot and dry in the third degree; It
brings away the Heam in Beasts; the price the pound is -- 3 s. 4 d. Doronicum
Romanum is hot and dry in the third degree; It is a great Strengthner of the
Heart, and is a very Sovereign Cordial; It preserves wonderfully against
Pestilence and Poison, and is also good for the bit^ng of any venomous Beast.
The price the pound is- 5 s. 0 d. Elecampane, See the Virtues of it in the
Table of Simples; the price the pound is -- 0 s. 6 d. Eringo, see the Virtues
in the Table of Simples the price the pound is -- 1 s. 0 d. Gentian, see the
Virtues in the Table of Simples* The price the pound is -- 0 s. 7 d. Galangal,
see the Virtues in the Table of Simples; the price the pound is -- 2 s. 4 d.
Hermodactils purge Phlegm from the Joints, and therefore they are good for the
Diseases of them Their Vices you may correct with long Pepper, Ginger,
Cinnamon, Mastick, etc. The price the pound is -- 1 s. 4 d. Hellebore, black
and white; see for Bears-foot in the Table of Simples, and you shall there find
the Uses of them; the price of them the pound are -- 1 s. 0 d. Liquorice, see
the virtues of it in the Table of Simples; the price of it in the stick the
pound is -- 0 s. 7 d. Mechoacan, is to be Corrected with Cinnamon; it is
temperate, yet drying; it purges phlegm from the Head and Joints; it is also
very good for Coughs and pains in the Reins, and is also good against the most
pockey and inveterat^ Farcy that is; You may safely give as much of the Powder
of it, as will lie upon a Sixpence; The Price of it formerly was about 5 s.
but now it is worth 10 s. and hardly got for that. Meum is very good given in
Pestilential Diseases, and is much of the Virtue of the Angelica Root, and is
used in the room of it, when it cannot be got, the price the Pound is -- 3 s. 0
d. Poll Pody of the Oak, is a great Dryer up of superfl^ous Humors from the
Legs being Corrected with Fennel-seeds, Anniseeds, or Ginger, etc. The price
the ^ound is -- 0 s. 6 d. O^ice of Florence is hot and dry in the third degree;
It resists Poison, and helps Shortness of Breath, the price the pound is -- 0
s. 8 d. Rubarb, see the virtues of it in the Table of Simples; it is worth from
4 s. to 48 s. the pound. Turmerick* see the virtues of it in the Table of
Simples; the common Price in the Race is about 7 d. but now it is worth 1 s.
BARKS.
Cinnamon is hot and dry and binding; It strengthens the Stomach, and helps
Digestion, Coughs and Destuction of Humors upon the Lungs, Dropsey and pain in
Pissing; There is hardly a better Remedy to be given to a Mare or Cow that is
Foaling or Calving, to expedite it, and to comfort them after it, then two
drams of the Powder given in White Wind or Ale. The price of it the Ounce is --
0. s 6 d. Cassi^ Lignea is somewhat more Oily then C nnamon, and is much of the
virtue of that only this is Lo^sening, whereas the other is binding. The price
of it the pound is -- 1 s. 6 d. Pomgranate-Rinds or Pill, cools and binds and
is therefore very good to stay Fluxes or Scourings. It helps also Digestion,
and strengthens the Stomach, the price the pound is -- 1 s. 0 d. Tamarisk B^rk
is good to strengthen weak and feeble Joints, infused in Ale and gives, and the
burnt Ashes of it made into an Ointment, and applied to the Place grieved, the
price of it the pound is -- 1 s. 0 d.
WOODS.
Lignum vitae is a great Drier up of evil Humors, causes Sweat, resists
Putrefaction, and is good for the Pockiest Farcy that is, as also for all
manner of Scabs, Ulcers and Leprosy, give him inwardly in the Nature of a
Diet-drink, (not exceeding a quart of it at a time), the price of it the pound
is -- 0 s. 2 d. Saffafras is a very large and fair Tree growing in Florida, and
smells very much like unto Fennel. It is hot and dry in the second degree, and
is also a great Drier up of evil Humors, the Decoction of it, or some of the
Chips, with Lignum vitae boil^d in a Horses Drink that is given for the F^rc^,
is a great Furtherer of the Cure: It is very good also to open Obstructions and
Stoppings in the Stomach, and is a great Strengthner of the Breast, if it be
weakened through Cold, the price of it the pound is -- 0 s. 6 d. Sanders white
the pound is -- 3 s. 6 d. Sanders yellow the pound is -- 2 s. 4 d. Sanders read
the pound is -- 0 s. 6 d. They are all cold and dry in the second and third
degree; They stop Destuctions from any part of the Body, helping Inflammations,
and cools the Heat of Fevers, the yellow is accounted the best, but the Red is
good enough to use for Horses. See more of the virtues of them in the Table of
Simples,
FLOWERS.
Staechas or Stoechados is hot and binding, and opens stoppings in the Bowels,
and is a very great strengthner of the whole Body. They are not much unlike in
Shape and Sent unto Lavender, the price of them the pound are -- 1 s. 6 d.
Belaufi is a Red Flower, and is very Binding, and is often given with very good
success to stop Scourings and bloody Fluxes, the price the Pound is -- 2 s. 0
d. Clove-Gilliflowers strengthens the Heart, Liver and Stomach, Provokes Lust,
and Resists Pestience, the Gardens do afford them you. Saff^on, see the virtues
of it in the Table of Simples, the price the Pound is -- 30 s. 0 d. Metholet is
good for the Reins, the price the Pound is -- 0 s. 10 d*
FRUITS.
Bay Berries, see the Virtues of them in the Table of Simples; the price the
pound are -- 0 s. 4 d. Juniper Berries, see the virtues of them in the Table of
Simpses, the price of them the pound are -- 0 s. 4 d. Gauls, see also the
virtues of them in the Table of Simples; the price of the best the Pound are --
0 s. 8 d. Raisins of the Sun helps the Inflammations of the Breast and Liver;
they help Coughs and Consumptions, and cleanse and Loosen the All these within
this Bracket are bought at the Grocers.
Belly. The price of them are very well known by every good Housewife Nutmegs
strengthens the Brain, Stomach, Liver and Body; They ease Pain in the Head, and
stop Lasks or Looseness, the price the Ounce are -- 0 s. 5 d. Mace is a great
Comforter of the Heart and Spirits; the price the Ounce is -- 0 s. 10 d:
Cubebs, is a kind of Pepper that comes out of the Indies, its hot and dry in
the third degree; They expel Wind, and cleanse the Stomach from tough and
vicious Humors, and provoke Lust. The price the pound are -- 1 s. 0 d.
Tamarinds are cold and dry in the second degree; They cool the Blood, Liver and
Stomach, and purge Choler, and are also good for the Yellows. The price the
pound are -- 0 s. 9 d. Mirtle-berries are dry in the third degree, they Loosen
evil Humors; the Price the Pound are -- 1 s. 2 d. Long Pepper is hot and dry in
the fourth degree; see the Virtues of all the sorts of them in the Table of
Simples; the price the pound is -- 0 s. 8 d.
SEEDS.
Angelica-seeds, see the virtues of it in the Table of Simples; the price the
pound are -- 0 s. 9 d. Broom-seeds, see the virtue of them in the Table of
Simples, the price the pound are -- 0 s. 9 d. Grains of Paradise, see the
virtues of them also in the Table of Simples, the price the pound are -- 0 s. 7
d. Anniseeds, see also the virtues of them in the Table of Simples, the price
the pound are -- 0 s. 7 d. Burdock-seeds, bruised and given in White Wind or
Ale causes a Horse to stail freely, that could not stail before, the price the
pound are -- 0 s. 4 d. Fennel-seeds are good for the same purpose; They cause
also Milk in Mares, the price the pound are -- 0 s. 10 d. Cardamum-seeds heat
and kill Worms, cleanse the Reins, and cause a Horse also to stale. The common
price of them is 3 s. 6 d. but now they are worth -- 6 s. 6 d. Staves-Acre, see
the virtues of it in the Table of Simples, the price the pound is -- 1 s. 0 d.
Cummin-seeds, heat and dry. They stop Blood, expel Wind, ease Pain, and helps
the Biting of venomous Beasts; And being outwardly applied in Plasters, are of
a discussing Nature, the price of them the pound are -- 0 s. 6 d.
Fennegreek-seeds are also of a discussing Nature, they ease Inflammations both
internal and external; they are also very good for Colds, given him amongst his
Provender, or boiled amongst his Oats, keeping his Body solvable, the price of
them the pound are -- 0 s. 4 d. The price of them in powder is -- 0 s. 6 d.
Linseed has the same virtue as the Fennegreek, the price the pound is -- 0 s.
3 d. Common Nettle-seeds provoke Lust, and is a great Fattener of a Horse given
him amongst his Provender; the price of them the pound is -- 0 s. 8 d.
Pa^sley-seed, see the virtues of them in the Table of Simples, the price the
pound is -- 0 s. 4 d. Peony-seeds helps the Wild Mare, Convulsions and
Falling Sickness* the price the pound are -- 1 s. 0 d. Plantine-seeds are good
for the Plague and Pestilence, the price the pound are -- 0 s. 9 d.
Saxafrage-seeds, see the virtues of them in the Table of Simples, the price the
pound are -- 1 s. 4 d. Poppey-seeds white and black provoke Sleep, the price of
them the pound are -- 1 s. 6 d. Pu^slain-seeds, see the Table of Simples for
the virtues of them, the price the pound are -- 1 s. 4 d. Lupines are a kind of
small flat Beans, they ease the pain of the Spleen, kill Worms given inwardly,
and being outwardly applied, cleanse filthy Ulcers and Gangrenes, helps Scabs,
Itch and Inflammations, the price of them the Pound are -- 0 s. 10 d.
SIMPLES out of PLANTS.
You may Give one Ounce and a half of it by it self.
Agarick purges Phlegm and Cholar, cleanses the Breast, Liver, Stomach and
Reins, you are to Correct it with Powder of Ginger; the Price of he best the
pound is -- 7 s. 0. d. The outward Parings of it the Pound is -- 1 s. 6 d.
congealed JUICES, GUMS and ROZINS.
Aloes Succotrina, see the Virtues of it in the Table of Simples, the price of
it the pound is form 1 s. 8 d. to 8 s. Barbados Aloes has the same virtues as
the other but is a great deal stronger, and therefore the better Purge for a
Horse of the two for an Ounce and a quarter of it is a Purge strong enough for
the strongest BodiedHorse almost that is; The price of the best the pound is --
1 s. 8 d. Ass^loetida, see the virtues of it in the Table of Simples, the price
the pound is -- 1 s. 4 d. Camphire is cold and dry in the third degree, if
beaten to Powder and mixed with Oil of Olives, and the Temples anointed with
it eases the pain in the Head coming of Heat; It takes away also any hot
Inflammation in the Eyes, and cools any place that.' it is applied to. The price
commonly the pound was 6 s. or 7 s. but now it being very scarce, it is worth
16 s. Bitumen, see the virtues of it in the Table of Simples, the price of it
the pound is -- 3 s. 0 d. Colophony the pound is -- 0 s. 4 d. Benjamin is a
very good Perfume for a Horse Head that is stuffed with a Cold, the smoke being
received up his Nostrils through a Tunnel, strowed upon a chaffing-dish of
Coals. The price the pound of the best is -- 5 s. 0 d. The price of the course
which is good enough for a Horse is -- 2 s. 6 d. GUM COPPAL and Gum Anime are
in Nature much alike; It is good for pains and Meagrim in the Head, and to stop
Desluctions that flow from thence if it be used as the Binjumin. It is also a
great Strengthner of the Sin^ws. The price of it the pound is -- 2 s. 6 d. Gum
Lack see the virtues of it in the Table of Simples, the price the pound is -- 1
s. 0 d. Gum Armoniack, or Amoniack, softends, draws and heats, dissolved in
vinegar, and applied Plaster wise, takes away hardness in the flesh and made
in o an Cintment with Sallet Oil, is good to anoint the s^ff and wearied LImbs
of a Horse; An Ource of it made up into a Pill according to Art, Loosneth the
Belly, and is good for a Horse that stales Blood. The price the pound is -- 1
s. 6 d. Opopo^x is of a heating, mollifying, digesting quality. See more of the
virtues of it in the Table of Simples. the price the pound is- 5 s 4 c. Gum
Arabic thickneth, cools and corrects sharp humors, helps Burnings, and
keeps the Place from Blistering, the price the pounds is -- 0 s. 10 d. Opium
is good to cause Sleep, but be very cautious how you use it, two or three
Crains is enough to give him at a time, the price the pound is -- 12 s. 0 d.
Gum Dragon is good for Coughs and Distillations upon the Lungs, and is also a
good put into Poultisses to sodder Wounds together, especially Nerves and
Sinews that be heart, the price the pound is -- 1 s. 6 d. English Liquoris Juice
strengthens the lungs, and helps Colds and Coughs, and is better for use then
the Powder of Liquoris, the price of it the pound is -- 1 s. 0 d. Spanish
Liquoris-Juice is of far better use then the English, and has the same virutes
as the English* but more effectual for the Purposes aforesaid, the price of it
the pound is -- 1 s. 4 d. Accatiae is a small Thorn growing in Egypt, out of
the leaves and fruit whereof is drawn a Juice or Liquor, which being dried is
called by this Name; it is cold and very Ast^ingent and binding, and therefore
is very good to st^p Lasks, Looseness, or Scouring; The Apothecaties has seldom
the right, but instead thereof use the juice of Sloes, which they call by this
Name; The price of the Right is worth five or six shillings, but of the common
but one. It Is not so strong as Alloes Succe^ing.
Rozin of Jallop is a very good Purge for a Horse; but if you think it too
dear, you may use the Powder of the Root, the price of it the Ounce is about --
4 s. 6 d. Mastick, see the virtues of it in the Table of Simples, the price the
pound according to its goodness is from 2 s. to 5 s. Manna is a very safe and
gentle Purger, you may give him a quarter of a pound of it, or more, dissolved
in a Pint of Canary, or four want of that, aquart of warm Ale or Beer; It is
temperately hot and cleanses the Throat and Breast. The price the pound is
according to its goodness from 2 s. to 6 s but now it is so scarce that it is
worth 11 s. Olibanum is hot in the second degree and dry in the first; You may
give an Ounce of it safely at a time; It helps Loos^ess and the shedding of the
Seed; It is also good for Colds and Coughs, and to make Plasters of, the price
the ^ound is -- 2 s. 0 d. Burguncy-Pitch is good applied as a Plaster, for all
Pains coming of B^u^ses or Dislocation, the price the pound is -- 0 s. 4 d.
Bdelium, see the virtues of it in the Table of Simples, the price the pound is
-- 5 s. 6 d. Gum Carauna outwardly applied is very good fo Aches and Swellings
in the Nerve and Joints, and also good (...) draw back humors from the Eyes*
spread upon a Leather, and laid behind his Ears, the price the pound is -- 10
s. 0 d. Pitch common Mollifieth hard Swellings and brings them to
Suppupuration; It cleanses Ulcers and fills m with Flesh; The Table of
Simples will show you more of the use of (...) the price the pound is -- 0 s. 2
d. Rozin, all the sorts of them are good to f^^l (...) holl w U cers and Woun^s
with Flesh and to comfort the Body oppressed with cold Griefs, the price of the
best the pound is -- 0 s. 3 d. Stone-Pitch is very good to strenghten w^ak and
sway^d Backs, or Sinew-strains, applied in the nature of a Charge, with other
strengthening Gums, the price the pound is -- 0 s. 5 d. Sangus Draconis in the
Lu^p the Pound is: -- 3 s. 0 d. Sanguis Draconis is drops the pound is -- 4 s.
6 d. They cool and bind exceedingly and are very good given inwardly or applied
outwardly, for the stopping of Fluxes of blood. Tartar French is the Excrements
of Wine which sticks to the Vessel; it is hot and dry an cleanses, the
pricethe pound is -- 0 s. 6 d. Tartar Renish the pound is -- 0 s. 7 d.
Frankincense applied to the Temples, stops the Rheum that flows to the Eyes,
and also is very good to stop th bleeding of Wounds, though the Arteries be
cut, if it be applied to them made up into a Salve or Ointment. The price the
Pound is -- 0 s. 4 d. Borax inwardly taken in small quantities, stops Fluxes
and the Running of the Reins, and eing be atcn to fine Powder, and put into
green Wounds, Cures them specaily; The best is that that comes out of the
Silver and Godl Mines, the Price the Pound is -- 2 s. 6 d. Turpentine common,
see the virtues of it in the Table of Simples, the Price the Pound is -- 0 s. 3
d. If you intend to clcanse the Horse Reins, being soul, which you may know by
the Mattering of his Yard, then make it up into Balls, according to Art, with
some Flower and Bole-A^moniack, and give him a Ball of it every Morning till
you find him Cured. Turpentine Venice the best the pound is -- 1 s. 3 d. Tar^
is very good for a Cold given a Horse, mingled with the Flower of Brimstone,
the Fat of Rusty Bacon and Honey, made up into Balls with some Powder of
Liquoris, and given him for two or three Mornings together; It is also good to
put into Salves for the Cure of Wounds; The price the pound is -- 0 s. 2 d. Gum
Elmni is very good for Fractures in the Skull, and also for Wounds, and is
commonly put into Plasters for that purpose, the common price of it the pound
when it is plenty is about 2 s. but now it is worth 3 s. 0 d. Eusorblum is a
Gum that comfort wounds; you may see more of the virtues of it in the Table
of Simples, the price the pound is 0 s. 8 d. Labdanum, is a Gum that is of a
very heating Nature, yet mollifying; It is used in Plasters to open the Mouth
of Veins, and is also good to keep hair from falling off, and for pains in
theEars, the price the pound is 1 s. 10 d. Myrrh is a Gum that heats and dries,
yet opens and softens the Womb, given inwardly, and expels the Heam in Beasts,
(which is t he same as the afterbirth is in Women). It is also very good for
Cold and Coughs, and outwardly applied fills up hollow Ulcers with Flesh. The
quantity that you may give him inwardly with saf^^y, is about two or three
drams, with other Compounds; You may sie more of the ver^ue of it, if you look
into the Table of Simples, she price of it the pound is -- 2 s. 6 d. Storax
Calamite is a sweet Gum, which helps Coughs and Distillations upon the Lungs.
It is also a very good Perfume for Sickness in the Head, to draw away evil
Humors from thence, the price of the best the pound is -- 7 s. 6 d. Storax
Liquid is much like Tarr. It is good put into Plasters, to modifie hard Wounds
and Swellings, the price the pound is -- 0 s. 8 d. Galbanum is a Gum that is
hot and dry, and disussing applied to her Shape, expels the Heam; See more of
the virtues of it in the Table of Simples; the price the pound is -- 2 s. 6 d.
ANIMALS, their Parts and Excrements.
Issing glass is made of the Skin of Fishes; it is a very great Strengthner of
a weak Back given inwardly, boiled in Milk with some fine Bole*Armoniack; if
you find it very clear and sweet when you break it, you may conclude that it is
very good, the price of it the pound is -- 3 s. 6 d. Oysters newly opened and
applied to a Pestilential Swelling, draws the venom out of it, the price of
these are very well known. Grasshoppers bruised and given in Ale or Beer, is
very good to ^ase the Griping Pains of the Guts and Bladder, every Meadow
affords plenty of them, which you may have for Gathering. Cantharides are
Spanish Flies, that will raise Blisters in any sound part of the Body, if they
be bruised and applied, the price of them by the Ounce is -- 0 s. 3 d.
Harts-Horn-Shavings resists Poison and Plague, provokes Urine, and strengthens
Nature very much, the price the pound is -- 1 s. 4 d. Ivory Raspt strengthens
the Heart and Stomach, and helps the Yellows, the price the pound is -- 0 s. 4
d. Ivory burnt strewed upon a Galled Back, or any raw place, dries and heals
it up, the price the pound is -- 0 s. 10 d. Wax sotens, heats and fills up
Sores with flesh put into Ointments and used as a Salve, the price of the white
the pound is -- 1 s. 6 d. The price of the Yellow is -- 1 s. 3 d. Honey is a
most excellent cleansing thing, and profitable in all inward Ulcers and Wounds,
in what part of the Body soever they be; It also opens the Veins, and
strengthens the Reins and Bladder. The price the pound is -- 0 s. 6 d. A Stags
Pizzle dried, and the powder given him in Ale, helps the Biting of venomous
Beasts, stirs up Lust, and provokes Urine, the price the Ounce is -- 0 s. 6 d.
The Bone that is found in a Stags Heart, being well dried and beten to powder,
and given him in Ale, is also very good against Poison and Pestilence, the
price of it the Ounce is -- 1 s. 4 d.
MINERALS, METALS and STONES.
Verdegrease, see the Nature of it in the Table of Simples, the price the pound
is -- 1 s. 8 d. Allom Common the pound is -- 0 s. 3 d. Allom Roch is the best,
see the virtues of them in the Table of Simples, the price the pound is -- 0 s.
5 d. Bole-Armoniack is a certain red Earth which is cold and dry, and drives
back evil Humors; It is also very good to stop Bleeding, either inwardly given,
or outwardly applied, by strewing the powder of it upon Wounds; the Greasiest
is accounted the best, the price of it the Common the pound is -- 0 s. 2 d. The
pric of the best is -- 0 s. 4 d. Quicksilver is good given a Horse that has
his Guts Twisted by Wind, and is also good for the Farcy* you may give him with
safety a quarter of a pound of it at a time with Sallet-Oyl, the price of it
the pound is -- 3 s. 6 d. Brimstone, see the Table of Simples for the virtues
of it, the price the pound is -- 0 s. 2 d. Flower of Brimstone is better then
the common Powder, for any inward use you apply it, Therefore I advise you
wherever you meet with any of the common powder in your Medicaments, take this
in the Room of the other* the virtues are the same with the common Brimstone,
but more effectual in ^peration; It Is good for Colds, Coughs and rotten Lungs,
as also for the Worms, Yellows and Mange, the price the pound is -- 0 s. 6 d.
Red Corral prepared according to Art, that is made into a very fine powder, and
about as much of it as will lie upon a broad shilling given him in Claret or
Beer, stops any Issue of Blood, Scouring or Running of the Reins, if it be
often Repeated; you may see more of the virtues of it in the Table of Simples,
the price the pound is -- 6 s. 0 d. Steel Filings cleanses not only the Reins
and Bladder from Gravel, but is also a great Purifyer and Sweetner of the
Blood, the price the pound is -- 0 s. 6 d. White-lead is of a cold, dry and
earthy quality; It helps inflammations and dries up evil humors, the price of
it the pound is -- 0 s. 4 d. Lythargy of Gold and Silver binds and dries much,
they fill up Ulcers with flesh, and heals them; the Gold is accounted the best,
and is worth the pound -- 0 s. 5 d. The Silver the pound is -- 0 s. 3 d. Red
Lead mixed with Sallet-Oyl, being beaten to a very fine Powder, and the grieved
place where the Pole-evil is anointed with it every day, and heated well in
with a hot Fire shovel, will sink it, the price of it the pound is -- 0 s. 3 d.
Lapis Haematites or Boodstone, is good to stanch Bleeding inwardly and
outwardly, being Ground very fine, and given him. It has also many other
Medicinal Virtues. The price the pound is -- 3 s. 0 d. Sal Prunella the pound
is -- 0 s. 10 d. Mercury Precipitate the pound is -- 8 s. 0 d. Sal Armoniack is
hot and dry in the fourth degree, the pound is 1 s. 0 d. Sal Jemma, see the
virtues of it in the Table of Simples. the price the pound is -- 0 s. 4 d.
S^^t-Peter refined in the Lump evaporateth* It comfort the Sinews, and
takes away tyring and weariness; The price in the Lump or Chrystallized the
pound is -- 1 s 0 d. Tutia is a certain Mineral that is cold in the first, and
dry in the second degree, and is very good for the defects in the Eyes, the
price the pound is -- 2 s. 0 d. Vitriol, which we call Copperas is of two
*Kinds. viz. Vitriol Romanum, which we call green Copperas, and Vitriol Albium,
which we call white Copperas; They are both hot and dry, but the white
accounted the stronger; They take away Scurfs and kill Scabs, boiled in Spring
water, and the grieved place Bathed therewith, the price of the white the Pound
is -- 1 s. 6 d. The price of the Green the pound is 2 s. 4 d. It is very good
laid in Spring*water (till it be Colored) for sore Eyes Vitriol Common, or
Copperas green and white, which is sold at the Colour-shops is worth about
three half pence* or two pence the pound Irish Slate beaten to a very fine
Powder, and about an Ounce of it given in a quart of warm ^le is very good for
a Horse that has been bruised by Falls, the price the pound is -- 0 s. 8 d.
SIMPLES that you may buy ^heaper at the Druggists, to en you can prepare them
your selves.
Elecampane Powder the best the Pound is -- 1 s. 2 d. Elecampane Powder the
common the Pound is -- 0 s. 8 d. Liquoris Powder the best the Pound is -- 1 s.
4 d. Liquor is powder the common the Pound is -- 0 s. 5 d: Red Sanders Powder
the best the Pound is -- 1 s. 4 d. Turmerick powder the best the Pound is -- 0
s. 11 d. Powder of Ginger the Pound is -- 0 s. 6 d.
PRICS of s veral Things bought of the GROCERS.
Sugar*candy white is good for sore Eyes, being beaten to Powder and blown into
them, the price of it the pound is -- 1 s. 4 d. Sugar Candy brown is good made
up with other Simples or Compounds for Colds or Coughs, the price the pound is
-- 0 s. 10 d. Common Treacle is also very good for Colds, Coughs and Surfeits,
made up with other Compounds or his Drink sweetened therewith, and a Lump of
sweet Butter put to it, the price the pound is -- 0 s. 3 d.
OILS.
Oil of O rganum is very good for all manner of Swellings, occasioned by
Bruises or Strains in the Nerves and Sinews the price the pound is -- 32 s. Oil
of Euphorbium helps Sinews and strengthens them, mollifying their hardness the
price the pound is -- 32 s. Oil of St. Johnswort is also very good for all
Sinew-Strains and Swellings in any part of the Body, the price the pound is --
1 s. 6 d. N^^v^ Oil is good to strengthen the Nerves and Sinews, the price of
the best the pound is -- 0 s. 6 d. The price of the Common is -- 0 s. 3 d. Oil
of Turpentine is good for Swellings, Bruises, Strains and old sores and
F^^^ulaes, the price the pound is -- 0 s. 6 d. It Is commonly adulterated with
the Oil of Turpentine. This is also adulterated.
Oil of Spike is also good for all manner of St ains, whether in the Shouder or
Joints, and also for all manner of Swellings in any part of the Body the price
of the righ the pound is -- 1 s. 0 d. Oil of Peter is very good for stains,
hard swellings splints, spavins and ^ruises. The Places grieved being anointed
with it, the price the pound is -- 2 s. 6 d. Have a care of the adulterate.
Oil of Exceter is also good for the same Distempers, the price the pound is --
1 s 6 d. Oil of sweet Almonds, helps Colds and Coughs wet and dry sweetened with
brown sugar Candy; it is good also for Ulcers in the Bladder and Reins, and is
a great Enc^easer of seed; if you give it inwardly, use new, for it will sour
in three or four days, the price the ounce is -- 0 s. 4 d. Oil of Bays is good
for the Cholick, and is a Sovereign Remedy for any Disease in any part of the
Body coming of Wind or Cold, you may safely give him feur or five drops of it
at a time, in any Compound Medicine appropriated to that use, the price the
pound is -- 1 s. 4 d. Have a care of the Adulterate.
Oil of Swallows is very good to anoint the Sinews of a Horse, that stumbles or
ae shrunk, to stretch and make them give way again, and is also good for all
manner of Bruises, Sprains and Strains, the price the pound is -- 1 s. 6 d.
Chemical PREPARATIONS bought of the Druggist.
Mercurius dulcis sub. the Ounce is -- 0 s. 6 d. Tarta^um Vitriolarum the Ounce
is -- 1 s. 0 d.
Chemical Prices of CYLS and SPIRITS, which do Corrode and eat off dead and
proud Flesh, and Dony Excrescences.
Aqua fortis Singlethe Pound is -- 2 s. 0 d. Aqua fortis double the Pound is --
4 s. 0 d. Oil of Anniseeds the Ounce is -- 0 s. 8 d. Oil of Organum the Ounce
is -- 0 s. 3 d. Oil of Tartar Deliq. the ounce is -- 0 s. 6 d. Oil of Vitriol
the ounce is -- 0 s. 3 d.
COMPOUNDS or ELECTUARIES.
Diascordium stops fluxes, and mightily strengthers the Heart, it is not so
hot, but it may be Given to a sick Horse to provoke Sleep, one ounce of it is
enough to give him at a time, dissolved in a quart of warm Beer the price the
ounce is -- 0 s. 2 d. Diatessaron, see the virtues of it in the First Part;
It Is worth the Pound at the Apothecaries 1 s. 8 d. but if you make it your
self, you may make it for 1 s. Mithridate is good against Poison, provokes
Sweat, is good for Consumptions and Colds, helps the Cholick, by expressing the
Wind, as also Ulcers in the Bladder, two or three drams is enough to give him
at a time dissolved in a quart of Ale or Beer, the price the pound is -- 6 s. 0
d. London-Treacle is a very good Cordial; It resists Poison, and is an
excellent Antidote against pestilential diseases; it strengthens also a cold
Stomach, and helps Ingestion; You may give him with safety two Ounces of it by
its self, or more, (according to the strength and courage of the Horse)
dissolved in a Pint of Sack, or for want of that a quart of (...) Ale or Beer
sweetened with Honey. But if you put it into (...) where there are other
compounds mixed with it, then (...) the price of it the pound is -- 2 s. 0 d.
OYNTMENS.
(...) O^ntment, is a most excellent (...) in the Nerves and Arteries coming of
(...) as also for old B^uises-dead pa^sies, Chillness, Coldness or (...) or any
particular Member, by hard Travel or otherwise; It Is indeed a mest precious
Fuel both for Man or Beast, for any Disease in any part of the Body coming of
cold; It is also very good for the W^n^ (...) if the Belly be anointed with as,
and chase) and heated invery well; It Is sold at the Apothecaries by the Pound,
for -- 1 s. 01 1 s. 2 d. Dialtlae^ is very good to moisten hard Wounds, and to
soften hard Swellings, or any Bony Excrescence in the Flesh; It is sometimes
given inwardly to a Horse or Cow, (with very good success) that is in great
danger of loss of life, by licking up any venomous or poisonous thing, either
at Hay or Grass, or when they have over-Gorged themselves by eating too much
delicious food, as Clover-Grass, Turneptops, or the like, which will cause them
to swell so full, that they will be ready to burst. If you find him in this
desperate condition, give him according to his Strength and Constitution, more
or less of this Ointment, mixed with the like quantity of Castle-sope,
dissolved in some warm Beer, and Ride or stir him afterward, which will not
only make him Piss freely, but also cause him to scour, which is the best
means I know of to be use for the preservation of his Lifoe. This is sold at
the Apothecaries also for about 1 s. 8 d. the pound. If you desire to knew for
your farther satisfaction, what things this ointments is made up with, take
this Acceunt of them; They are these viz. Sallet-Oyl, Marsh-Mallowes, Linseeds,
Fennegreek-seeds, Bees Wax, Rozin and Turpentine. If he be a strong, lusty and
healthy Horse, you may venture to give him two Ounces of each. But this I leave
to the skilful Farrier, Discretion. Patch or Piece Grease, was formerly made by
the Shoomakers from the shreds of their Leather boiled in Spring water, on the
top of which arises a certain Oily Unctuous Matter which they skin off, and
boil up with other Ingredients to a Salve. 'Twas many years ago frequently used
to Liquor Boots and Shoes with, and only made by them for that purpose; But
the more skilful in the Art of Farring has found out a far better use for it,
viz. The Curing of many outward Distempers, which you shall have an Account of
in its due time and place; This most excellent Receipt or Salve is almost quite
lost to Posterity, for few or none can make it truly. I knew only but of one,
and she is a Shoomakers Wife, who keeps this secret to her self, (and you
cannot much blame her for it) by reason of the great profit and advantage she
bath made by the sale thereof, having got many She has been dead about
lafayear, but he Son contrives in the H use, and sells it.
a fair Pound by it. Her Name is Mrs Harvey, and keeps a small Alchouse in
Bedford-Bury street, near Covent Garden, at the Sign of the Horns.
The Virtues of it. It Is a most Excellent Ointment of it self both for Man or
Beast, for all Pains and Aches in the Limbs New or Old; As also for all manner
of Stains and Swellings, in what part of the Body soever they be. But more
powerful and effectual it is in Operation, for these several Distempers. If it
be used according to Markhams Direction, viz. To Melt ten Ounces of it on the
Fire, and after you have taken it off put into it these several Oils here
underwritten, viz.

Oil of Spike four ounces. Oil of Origanum one ounce Oil of Exceter an Ounce
and a half Oil of St. John's Wort three ounces.
Stir all these very well together and put it up into a Gally-Pot close coverd
with a Bladder and Leather over that, and keep it for your use.

A CAUTION: If you cannot get Piece-Grease use Goose Grease, but this is not
half so Powerful in Operation as the other. But this I must needs say of it, it
is of such thin and subtle Parts, that it will quickly search to the bottom of
the grieved Part.

How you are to use it.
Melt your Ointment over the Fire, and anoint the grieved place and rub and
chafe it in very well with your hand, holding at the same instant before it a
hot Brick-bat, or Fire shovel to make it sink in the better. Anoint it once in
two days, but rub and chase it in twice or thrice a day, and give him moderate
Exercise. The Price of this excellent Salve, as she commonly sells it for the
Pound is -- 4 s. 0 d.
SPIRITS.
Spirit of Lavender is a most excellent Cordial, and may serve in the Room of
many more; you may give him half an ounce of it in a quart of warm Ale or Beer
sweetened with Honey or Common Treacle. This is sold at the Apothecaries by the
ounce for -- 0 s. 4 d.
Compound Powders bought of the Druggist.
Horse Spice, see the Virtues of it in the Receipt how to make it in the First
Part, the price the pound is -- 0 s. 6 d. Diapente, see also the Virtues of it
in the First Part, the price the pound is -- 0 s. 10 d.
Another single Powder.
Carolina is a kind of Sea-Moss, that grows upon the Rocks; It is cold, binding
and drying, and is good for hot Inflammations, and to kill Worms, you may
safely give him as much of the powder of it as will lie upon a shilling in Ale
or Beer, the price the pound is -- 0 s. 4 d.
WATERS.
Treacle-Water has the same virtues as the Treacle, the price the Pint is -- 4
s. 6 d.

A Caution to the Farrier about the Buying of his Drugs.
These several Drugs both Simple and Compound, which the Farrier makes use of
in the Cure of any inward or outward Distemper, does commonly Rise or Fall
according to the scarcity or plenty of them; And therefore I Advise you,
whenever you have occasion to buy any of them, do not depend too much upon the
Prices here set you, but get them as cheap as you can. For it is customary
amongst the Druggists not to sell any thing, unless they get double, if not
treble profit by what they sell, though withal I must tell you, they are here
valued as near to their standing selling price as can be possibly, for Goods
that do Rise and Fall, yet notwithstanding this, I am persuaded to believe they
yet get four pence out of every shillings worth of Goods they generally sell,
etc.

THE SECOND PART OF THE EXPERIENCED FARRIER.

SHOWING, I. The Nature, Temperature and Virtue of most Simples, for the Cure
of all inward and outward Diseases, never yet Printed in this Nature before.

II. You have things in general, set down one after another, for the Cure of
all diseases, which you may use as your discretion serves

III. You have severally particular Receipts for the Cure of all Diseases.

IV. Where you find the Hand Pointing, you shall find such Receipts that were
never before Printed.

V. You have the Gathering, Drying and Preserving of Simples and their Juices.

VI. You have the way of making and keeping of all necessary Compounds.

VII. You have hot Medicaments appropriate to the Parts of the Body.

VIII. You have cold Medicaments appropriate to the Parts of the Body.

IX. You have the Properties of Purging Medicaments.

X. You have the Properties of altering Medicaments.

XI. You have a Table of all the Diseases of a Horse, either inwardly or
outwardly, set down Alphabetically, where they do grow in any part of a Horses
Body, and how you may know them, and what was the cause that bred them.

XII. And lastly, you have in the Margent of these said Diseases, the Page
quoted where to find the proper Cure for every of these Diseases, with many
other things contained in this Book, not here inserted.

The Second Impression much Enlarged and Amended by A. O.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Northco: Adjoining to St. Peter's Alley in
Cornh^ll; And at the Anchor and Mariner near London Bridge. 1680.


Purging Simples.
Rubarb, Cassia, Tamarinds, Myrobalans, Aloes, Seeny or Senna, Mechoachan Root,
Agarick, Pollypody, Carthamus, Bastard or Spanish Saffron, Dwarfs Elder, Ensula
or Devils Milk, Hermodactils, Jallop, Turbich, Scamony, Hellebore or Bears
foot, Colloquintida, Spurge-Olive, Spurge-Flax, Laurel, Soldanella, Turn-sole,
etc.


Binding-Simples. Look for them in the Table, at the latter End of the Book.


Foreign Simples that are Heating.
Ginger, Zedory or Set-wall, Galangel, Acorus or Water-Flag, Calamus
Aromaticus, or the Ariomatical Reed, Costus, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Mace, Pepper,
Cloves, Cardamums, Cubebs, Kermes, Sanders, Sassafras, China-Root, Guiaccum or
Lignum vitae, Sarsaparilla, Aloes wood, etc.


Homebred Heating Simples.
Pellitory of Spain, Mustard Common, and Treacle Mustard, Rocket, Nettles,
Flower-de-luce, or Orrice, Elecampane, Cyprus, Angelica, Lovage, Hartwort,
Gentian, Turmentil, Paeony, Madder, Rest-harrow, Sea-holly, Common-Grass,
Liquoris, Sow-bread, Radish-roots, Anemone or Wind-Flower, Wall-Flowers, Time,
Marjorem, Pennyroyal, Polium, Basil, Origanum, Mint, Calamint, Wormwood,
Mug-wort, Balm, Horehound, Bitony, Speedwell, Ditany, Sage, Clary, French
Lavender, Scordium, Rue, Gromel, Saxifrage, Aristolochia or Birth-wort,
Asarabaca, Burnet, Germander, Ground Pine, Feather-few, St. John's Wort, Hysop,
Cranes-bill, Doronicum or Leopards-bane, Cardus Benedictus, Motherwort, black
Chameleon Thistle, Valerian, Fumitory, Eyebright, Centory, Rhaphonticum,
Coriander, Wood-bine, Broom, Ashen-Keys, Misletoe of the Oak, poplar,
Cummin-seeds, etc.


Cooling Simples.
Mandrake, Nightshade, Winter-Cherries, Henbane, Poppey, Housleek, Purslain,
Dogs-Tongue, Plantine, Knot-Grass, Comfrey, Sorrel, Agrimony, Sower-dock,
Primrose, Cabbage or Garden Coleworts, Flea-bane, Coltsfoot, Hops, Bistort,
Strawberry Bush, Cinquefoil, Goose-grass or Cleavers, Scabius, Cats-foot,
Melilots, Fennegreek, Red Cicers, Lupins, Sumack, Myrtle, Yarrow, Tamarisk.

Before you enter upon the Use of these Simples, (unless you know them very
well) Look into the Table of Simples to see the Nature of them, for some of
them are very pernicious, unless corrected by Art.

THE Nature, Temperature and Virtue of most Simples,
set down Alphabetically. As also some Drugs, Liquors, Seeds, Rozins and Juices,
etc.
A.
AGaricum, or Agarick is a kind of Mushrom or Toad-stool. It is hot in the
first, and dry in the second degree. It expels Humors, purges all phlegm
and choler, and is good for the Liver and Kidneys; correct it with the powder
of Liquoris. Agripa is an Ointment that is good against all Humors. Amoniacum
is hot in the third degree, and dry in the second; it loosneth and dissolveth
Humors. Allom, commonly called Roch-Allom, is hot and dry in the third degree,
it is a drier up of Humors, and is good for fore Mouths, and old Cankers and
Fistulaes, and kills the Worms taken inwardly. Alloes is hot, and that in
the first and second degree, but dry in the third, it is extreme bitter, yet
without biting; it is the most Natural Purger of Man and Beast that is, for it
strengthens the Heart, and revives the Spirits; it is also of an Emplastick and
Clammy quality, and sometimes binding, being externally applied. Sweet Almonds
when they be dry be moderately hot; but the bitter ones are hot and dry in the
second degree; there is in both of them a certain Fat and Oily substance, which
is drawn out of them by pressing of them. They provoke Urine, and is very good
for the Lungs and Liver. Anniseed are hot and dry in the third degree, says
Galen, but others, that they are hot in the second degree, and much less then
dry in the second degree; they are good to expel Wind, provoke Urine, stir up
Lust, and is a great cleanser of the Breast from phlegmatic Humors.
A^^stolochia, which we call Birth-wort or Harts-wort, is hot and cleanses, but
if it be Rotunda, then it is so much the stronger, being hot and dry in the
fourth degree, and draws and purges thin Water and Phlegm, and is good to
open the Lungs, and is good against all manner of Poison whatsoever, or the
Biting of any venomous Beast. Armoniack, both draws, cools and softneth.
Arsnick of both kinds, is hot in the third, and dry in the first degree, it
binds and eats away proud and naughty Flesh, and is a very strong
Corrosive. Assafoetida, or Devils-Bit, is a stinking Gum that is hot in the
third, and dry in the fourth degree, it cleanses evil Humors, it is good for
the Yellows and Staggers in a Horse, a little piece of it being dissolved in
Brandy, and put it into his Ears. Asphaltum, is Pitch that is mixed with
Bitumen, it is hot and dry, and omforteth any swelling. Asponteo is hot in the
first, and dry in the second, it cleanses and draws, and is good to comfort
the Stomach. Ashes are hot and dry in the fourth degree, and cleanses
mightily. As^rabacca is hot and dry with a purging quality, yet not without a
certain kind of binding, the Roots are hot and dry, more then the leaves, they
procure Urine. The black Alier Tree, the inner Bark of it is of a purging and
drying quality, it purges thick phlegmatic Humors, and also Choleric
downwards, and also by vomiting, which must be used with care. Of Aller or
Alder Tree, the leaves and bark of it are cold and dry, and Astringent, and is
used against hot Swellings and In^lammations, especially of the Almonds and
Kernels of the Throat, the bark of it is used amongst poor Country Dyars, to
Dye Cloth, Caps, Hoose and such like. The Ash Tree, the leaves and bark of it
are dry and moderately hot, the Seeds are hot and dry in the second degree,
they stop the Belly, being boiled in Vinegar and Water, the Se^ds provoke Urine
and stir up bodily Lust. Asp^d^lls are hot and dry in the third degree.
Anemones, all the kinds of them (which are Wind-Flowers,) are sharp, biting the
tongue, and are of a binding faculty. Adders Tongue is dry in the third degree,
and is good for Wounds in the Breast and Bowels, and is good for Ulcers and
Inflammations. Arsmart* or Water-Pepper is hot and dry, yet not so hot as
Pepper, is good for Ulcers, cold Swellings, Bruises, and to lay under the
Saddle, to make tired Horses go. Alh^^^, all the kinds of them are dry with
little or no heat, and are endued with a binding quality, they are good for
green Wounds being bruised and boiled in an Ointment; It is good for the
Worms, Gout, Cramp and Convulsions of the Sinews, provokes Urine, and is good
for cold Griefs of the Head, biting of mad Dogs, Lethargy, Cholick,
Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, Stone, and expels the dead Birth.
Archangel or dead Nettles are hotter and drier then Nettles, approaching to the
temperature of Hore-hound, and is good for the bleeding at the Nose, Ulcers,
old sores, Bruises and Burnings, and to dissolve Tumors. Alkanet, the Root of
it is cold and dry, and binds, and because it is bitter it cleanses away
Choleric Humors; the Leaves are not so forcible, yet they do bind and dry,
and is good for the Stone, Yellows, Leprosy, venomous Bea^ts, Fluxes and
Bruises by Falls, Worms. Angel^ca is hot and dry in the third degree, and
op^n^th and attenuateth, digesteth and procures Sweat, and is good against
Poison, Plague, Cold, Wind, Cough of the Lungs, Strangury, short Windedness,
stoppings of the Liver and Spleen, biting of mad Dogs, Ulcers and old ^ains.
Alexanders or wild Parsley, the seeds and roots are less hot and dry then the
Garden Parsley, they cleanse and make thin, being hot and dry in the third
degree. They are good to consume Wind, provoke Urine, and is good for the
Strangury, and opens the Obstructions of the Liver. Amara dul^^s, which is
woody Nightshade, the fruit and leaves of it are in temperature hot and dry,
and cleansing and wasting away, it is good to remove Witchcraft, Tied about the
Necks of Cattle, and is good to remove the Obstructions of the Liver and
Spleen, difficulty of Breathing, Bruises by ^alls, congealed Blood, Dropsey,
Yellows. Water-A^ri^^ny is hot and dry in the second degree; It is good to
secure and open; It makes thin, thick and gross humors, and to expel and drive
them forth by Urine, and therefore is good for the Dropsey; It opens
Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, kills Worms, Itch, Scabs, Flies and
Wasps. It is good to strengthen the Lungs, and is good for a Cough and broken
Wind in Cattle. Aleho^f or Gro^^d-Ivy is hot and dry, and because it is bitter
it scoureth and removes stoppings out of the Entrails; It is good for inward
Wounds, Pains and Gripings by Wind, Choler, Spleen, Plague, Poison, old pains
in the Joints, sore Mouth and Throat, Ulcers in the Privities, Itch, Scabs, Web
in the Eyes, Redness and Wateriness in them, and Deafness. Amaranthus, which is
called Flower Gentle, is good for the Running of the Reins and inward Bleeding.
Garden Arrach, or O^rach, is moist in the second degree, and cold in the first;
It is a Loosner of the Belly, and fortifieth the expulsive faculty, and is good
for Swellings of the Throat being bruised and laid to it, and being taken
inwardly is good for the Yellows. Wild^ Arrach and stinking by smell, is good
given inwardly for the Fa^cy, and is good for any disease of the Womb. A^^ns
called Col^wo^^, or Herb B^^n^t, has a drying and binding faculty, with a
certain salt quality, whereby they cleanse, the decoction of them Loosneth the
Belly, and is good for the Diseases of the Chest and Breast; It is good for
inward Wound^, the Heart, a cold Brain, Obstructions, Cholick, Fluxes,
Ruptures, Plague, Poison. Agarick comes of the Larch Tree, which is almost
like a Pine Tree, and the leaves and bark is in temperature like it, but not so
strong. It purges away gros^ and phlegmatic humors; it troubles the stomach,
therefore Ging^r is to be Mixed with it; it is hot in the first degree, and dry
in the second; it is good against short Windedness, Cough of the Lungs,
Consumption, comfort the Stomach, and is good against Worms. Agnus C^stus,
the leaves and roots of it are hot and dry in the third degree, they are of
very thin parts, and waste and consume Wind.
B.
Balm is hot and dry in the second degree, and it mundisieth and cleanses, it
chear^ up the Heart* opens Obstructions of the Brain, and is a remedy against
the stinging or biting of any venomous Beast, Mad dogs, the bloody Flux,
Surfeit, short-windedness. The B^rberry bush, the leaves and berries are cold
and dry in the second degree, and as Gallen affirms, are of thin parts, and
have a certain cutting quality; they are good to stop La^ks and bloody Fluxes,
the inner Rind of the Tree is good to purge the Body of Choleric Humors, and
is good for Agues, Scabs, Itch, Tetters, Yellows, Boyls, Scalding and the
Farcin. Garden-B^zil is hot in the second degree, but it has adjoined with it
a superfluous moisture, and therefore not very good to be taken inwardly, but
being applied outwardly to the stinging of any venomous Beast, Wasps or
Hornets, it takes away the venom. Wild Bazil, the seeds are hot and dry.
Bazil V^lerian is dry in the second degree. Bay Berries are vehemently hot and
dry, and are good for all manner of Rheumes, shortness of Wind, especially for
any disease of the Lungs, they are good against Poison, Consumptions, Phlegm,
helps Tiredness, Cramps, Stone, stopping of the Liver, the Yellows and
Dropsey, and provokes Urine. Bdelium is a Gum that is brought out of Arabia and
the holy Land, and is hot and dry; it softeneth and draws away Moisture, and
is good for all manner of hard Swellings whatsoever; it is most excellent for
mixture with a Poultess, against hardness and knots in the Sinews, and being
drunk, breaks the Stone, and expels Urine. Beans are moderately cold and dry,
and are very Windy, Ladies Bedstraw is good for the Stone, and stays inward and
outward Bleeding. White B^ets are in moisture and heat temperate, and is a
Loosner of the Belly, and is of a cleansing quality, and provokes Urine. Red
Beets are of a binding quality, and therefore good to stop the bloody Flux.
Water B^tony is hot and dry, and is good for Ulcers and Bruises. While Runn^ng
Bitony smelling like Marjorum, is hot and dry in the third degree, it binds
Wounds and Conglutinateth, and is good for Diseases of the Liver, for the
Worms, Old Sores and Wounds, and is commonly called Centau^y. Beech-Tree, the
leaves of it does cool, and the Kernels of the Nut is somewhat moist, the
leaves are good for hot swellings, and the Water that is found in the hollow
places of it, will Cure Man or B^ast, of any Scurf, Scab, or running Tetters
anointed therewith. Blites are of a cold and moist Temperature, and are good to
stay Fluxes of Blood. Bilberries called by some VVhorts, and Whortle-berries,
are cold, even in the latter end of the second degree, and dry also, and are of
a binding quality; there is two sorts of them, a black and a red, the black are
good for hot Agues, and to cool the heat of the Liver and Stomach, and do bind
the Belly, the red are more binding, and stay any Fluxes of Blood whatsoever,
used outwardly or taken inwardly. Byfoil or Tway-blade are often used for
Wounds both green and old, and to Conglutinate and Knit Ruptures. Bitumen is
the fatness of the Earth swimming above the water, which cast upon the Shore
condensates and becomes hard, and resembles dry pitch, it discusses, mollifies,
glutinates and defends from Inflammation; It takes away gross humors in all
parts of the Body, and cures the Weakness of the Sinews, Palsy, and diseases
of the Arteries from a cold cause. Birch-tree, the Juice of the leaves is good
to wash a sore Mouth or Throat, and is good to break the Stone in the Kidneys
or Bladder. Birds-foot, all the kinds of them are of a drying quality, and
therefore very good to be used in Wounds drinks, and to be applied outwardly
for the same purpose; but the paler Flowered Birds-foot is good to break the
Stone in the Back and Kidneys, and helps the Rupture taken inwardly.
Bishops-weed is hot and dry in the third degree, of a bitter taste, and
something sharp withal; it provokes Lust, causes Urine, is good for the Wind,
and for the biting of venomous Beasts. Bistort or Snakeweed is cold and dry in
the third degree, the leaves and roots are excellent good to resist Poison or
Plague, and is good for all manner of Fluxes of blood whatsoever, and stays a
Lask, is good for the Yellows, Ruptures, or Burstness and staling of blood. One
blade is a very Cordial Herb, and will cause sweat, and is sovereign against
the Plague, by expelling the Poison, and is an excellent VVound-herb for green
and old wounds, and Sinews cut. The Bramble or black Bush, the flowers and
leaves of the unripe fruit do very much bind and dry, and is good for all kind
of Fluxes, the buds, leaves and branches of it, while they are green, are of
good use in Ulcers and putrid Sores; the Root is good against the Stone in the
Reins or Kidneys; the leaves of them are good for sore Mouths and Throats, or
Quinsey, the powder of the dried leaves strewed on Cankers do wonderfully heal
them. Burrage and Bugloss is in a mean betwixt hot and cold, the leaves and
roots are good against Pestilential Fevers, Poison of venomous Beasts,
Yellows, Itch, Tettars, Worms, Weakness, Corruption, Cough, sore Mouth or
Throat. Blew-bottle is naturally cold, dry and binding; the powder of the dried
leaves is good taken inwardly, is good for broken Veins, and given with
Plantine water expels Poison or the Plague, the Juice of it is good to
sodd^r green wounds together, and is good to heal Sores in the Mouth; And the
Juice of the leaves dropped into the Eyes, takes away the Inflammation of
them. Bra^k-ursine, Bears-breech and Acanthus is betwixt hot and cold, being
somewhat moist, with a mollifying and digesting quality, as are these of the
Mallow* and are good to put in Glisters to Loosen the Belly; the Decoction
taken inwardly is good for the bloody Flux and Burstness; and is good for
Hectic Fevers; Or applied made up in a Poultess, unite broken bones, and
strengthens the Joints that have been put out, and is an excellent Remedy for
burnings by Fire. White B^iony is hot and dry in all parts in the third degree,
both the white and the black are furious Martial Plants, and purge the Belly
with great violence, and therefore you are to Correct it, and then it is very
good for all manner of Griefs in the Head, as also for the Joints and Sinews,
Cramps and Convulsions, Dropsey, provokes Urine, and is good for the Stone.
Brook-lyme or VVater-Pimpernel is a hot and biting Martial Plant, and is of the
same Nature as Watercresses, and are good to cleanse the blood, provokes
Urine, and breaks the Stone. Butchers broom is hot in the second and dry in the
first, and is of a cleansing Nature, it opens Obstructions, provokes Urine,
expels Gravel and the Stone, and is good for the Strangury, Yellows and pain
in the Head. B^oom and Broom-rape, the Twigs, Flowers and feed of it are hot
and dry in the second degree, they are of a thin Essence, and are of force to
cleanse and open, and especially the feed which is drier, and not so full of
superfluous moisture, it is good for the Dropsey, Cleanser of the Reins,
Kidneys and Bladder from the Gravel and Stone. Bucks-horn Plantine is of a
drying and binding quality, it is good against Poison, Stone in the Reins and
Kidneys, stops a Lask, and is good for a bloody Urine and bloody Flux.
Bucks-horn is called Hartshorn, Herb-Ivy, Wort-cresses or Swines cresses,
their virtues are the same with Bucks-horn Plantine. Bugle is of a mean
Temperature, and is good taken inwardly to dissolve Congealed Blood that is
occasioned by Bruises or Falls, and is effectual in all VVound-drinks, it is
good for Fistulaes, Gangrenes, the leaves of it being bruised and applied to
them. Burnet is a drier and a binder, yet it is meanly cool, it is a most
precious Herb little inferior to Bitony, it stancheth bleeding as well
inwardly as outwardly, and is good to stay the Lask and bloody Flux; It is good
for all old Ulcers or Running Cankers and moist Sores, to be used either by
Juice or Decoction of the Herb or Root, the seed is also good for the same
Purposes aforesaid. The Butter-bur or Petasitis is hot and dry in the second
degree, and of thin parts, the Roots is good against the Plague and
Pestilential Fevers, by provoking Sweat, the Powder of the Root given in Wine
is good to resist the force of Poison; It is good for VVheezing and difficulty
of Breathing, kills flat and broad Worms. Bran is hot and dry, and dissolveth
very much. Bur^-deck is dry and wasting, the root is something hot, the leaves
are cooling and moderately drying, and is good for old Ulcers and Sores, the
Juice of the leaves or roots is good against the biting of any venomous Beast,
the seed of it is most excellent to provoke Urine, being beaten to Powder, and
drank in White Wind or Ale, and remedieth the pains in the Bladder; It is good
for Burnings, Cankers. Bu^^ re^ds are cold and dry of Complexion. Vipers
bugloss, all the kinds of them are cold and dry of Complexion. Sea Bind-weed is
hot and dry in the second degree. Beares-^oot or black Hellebore is hotter in
taste then the white, and is in like manner hot and dry in the third degree; it
is safer to be taken, being purified by the Art of the Alchymist, then given
raw; the roots are good against all melancholy diseases, as Quartan*Agues and
Madness; It is good for the Falling Sickness, Leprosy, Yellows* pains in the
Hip; the Root beaten to powder, and strewed upon Ulcers or putrified Sores,
consumes the dead flesh, and instantly heals them. It will help Gangrenes in
the beginning, twenty Grains is a sufficient dose for one time, and let it be
Corrected with half so much Cinnamon. The Root boiled in Vinegar is excellent
good against S^abs, M^nge and Leprosy, a piece of it being put into a Hole
made in the Ear of a Beast troubled with a Cough, or that has taken any
Poison, and taken out in twenty four hours, helps them; And is very good
also to Rowel Cuttel withal that has the Gargel, and also for many other uses.
Bal^mo^y or F^ltwart, the roots are hot, cleansing and scouring, some say it is
likewise binding withal. B^l^^om is hot and dry in the second degree, and is
good for new and green wounds. Bishops-weed. Herb-VVilliam, Amtos, the seed is
hot and dry in the latter end of the third degree; it is given against the
biting of any venomous Beast; It causes Urine, it is good against Poison, the
Plague and all Pestilential Fevers. Sweet Briar or Eglantine Balls are
binding, and are good for bloody Fluxes, and is good to stop a Lask or
Looseness. VVilde Briar-balls are greater Binders, and are good to stop a Lask
and bloody Flux, and for staling of blood, and is a great Drier up of evil
Humors. Bucks-thorn or Laxative Ram, the Berries as they are in taste bitter,
so they are binding, and are also hot and dry in the second degree, and does
purge thick phlegm and choleric humors. The Box-tree is of a binding quality,
and is good against the biting of mad Dogs. B^acca is cold and dry in the
second degree, it closes things opened, it softens hardness, fills places
empty, and do extenuate all excretions. The Flower of it is best, used for any
inward use.
Brimstone is hot and dry in the third degree, draws and disperseth humors,
kills the Itch given inwardly, and outwardly applied it is good for Coughs
and rotten Phlegm; It is good likewise for the Worms, being mixed with a
little Salt in his Provender; it helps Lethargies snuffed up the Nose, heing
beaten to powder. B^learmoniack is a certain red Earth, which is cold and dry,
which draws and drives back evil humors, and is also an excellent defense
against Fluxes of Blood, and all manner of bleeding whatsoever, either taken
inwardly, or outwardly applied. Brine, or Water and Salt is of the same Nature
as Salt is, it is good given inwardly to kill Worms, or applied outwardly to
dry humors, and takes away swellings.
C.
All Cabbages and Coleworts have a drying and binding faculty, with a certain
salt quality, whereby they cleanse, and being boiled in Broth opens the Belly,
but the second Decoction binds; the Juice of them drank is good against the
Poison of venomous Beasts, they are good against a Consumption, obstructions of
the Liver and Spleen, Stone, Swellings, Sores and Scabs, and the Juice being
dropped into the Eyes with Honey is good to clear them. The Sea-Colewort is of
a biting quality, the first decoction Loosneth, and is more cleansing then the
other kind; the seed bruised and drank kills Worms, the Juice of them
cleanses and heals Sores, dissolveth Swellings, and takes away
Inflammations. Calamint or Mountain Mint is of a fervent taste and biting hot,
and of a thin substance, and dry after a sort in the third degree; it wastes
away thin humors, cuts and makes thick humors thin; it is good for Ruptures,
Convulsions, Cramps, shortness of Breath, torments and pains in the Stomach,
helps the Yellows, kills Worms given with Salt and Treacle, kills Scabs
either inwardly taken or outwardly applied, and kills the Worms in the Ears;
the Juice being dropped therein. Camomel is hot and dry in the first degree,
and of thin parts, and heateth moderately, and dries little; it mollifieth and
dissolveth all Griefs, and especially for the Liver; it is good for Swellings,
Cholick, Stone, Pains in the Belly, Cold, Yellows, Dropsey and Cramps.
VVater-Caltrops are of a cold Nature, and consists of a moist Essence, being
made into a Poultess, are good for Inflammations, Swellings, Cankers, sore
Mouths and Throats, they are good for the Farcin and Stone, especially the Nuts
being dried, they resist Poison, and this biting of venomous Beasts. VVilde
Champions are reserved to those of the Garden, they are good to stay inward
bleeding, taken inwardly; and outwardly it does the like to Wounds; it
expels Urine and Gravel, and purges the Body of Choleric humors, and is
good against the poison of venomous Beasts, the Plague, etc. and is good for
old Sores, Fistulaes and Cankers, to cleanse and heal them Cardus benedictus is
good for pains in the Head, the Yellows and other Infirmities of the Gall,
cleanses the Blood, helps the Itch, biting of mad Dogs, and other venomous
Beasts, and is good for Agues. VVilde Carrets are hot and dry in the second
degree, expels Wind, provokes Urine and causes Lust; they are good for the
Dropsey, Cholick, Stone, for running Sores and Ulcers, the seed of them works
the same effects as the roots do. Caraway-seeds are hot and dry in the third
degree, has a moderate sharp quality, whereby it breaks Wind, provokes
Urine; the seeds are good for Colds in the Head and Stomach. Cellandine is hot
and dry in the third degree, the Juice of it put into the Eyes clears them
from Films and Cloudiness, which darkneth the Sight, it is good in old filthy
creeping Ulcers, to stay their Malignity of fretting and running, and to cause
them to heal the more speedily: It heals also Tettars, Ring-wormes and
spreading Cankers, the powder of it mixed with brimstone kills the Mange, it
is good taken inwardly for the Yellows, and opens the Obstructions of the
Liver and Gall. The lesser Cellandine, called Pilewort, is hot and dry, and
more biting and hotter then the greater, and comes nearest in faculty to the
Crow-foot, it is good taken inwardly for the Farcin, and to be applied
outwardly for the same Disease. The ordinary Centaury purges choleric and
gross Humors, opens the Obstructions of the Liver and Gall, helps the
Yellows, kills Worms, is good for Cramps and Convulsions, against venomous
Beasts, it cleanses foul Ulcers, and kills spreading Scabs; all the
Centaurys are much of one and the same Nature, only take this Observation, That
in Diseases of Blood use the red; if of Choler, use the Yellow; but if of
Phlegm or Water, the White is best. VV^nter-Cherries, the leaves are cool, and
are used in Inflammations, but not opening as the Berries and Fruit are, which
draw down the Urine, and expel the Gravel and Stone out of the Reins, Kidneys
and Bladder; it is also good for all Imposthumes in them, likewise to cleanse
them, and is good for bloody and foul Urine. Chervil is of temperate heat and
moderate dryness, but not so much as the Parsley; it warms the Stomach, and is
good to dissolve congealed blood in the Body; it is good for the Stone, the
wild Chervil applied dissolveth Swellings in any part of the Body. Sweet
Chervil or sweet Cicely, the Roots warmeth the Stomach oppressed with Wind and
Phlegm, and is good for the Consumption of the Lungs, it is good against the
Plague, the Juice of it is good to heal Ulcers. Chest-Nut-tree, the Fruit is
dry and binding, and is neither hot nor cold, but in a mean between both, the
inner Rind that covers the Nut is of so binding a quality, that it will stop
any Lask or Looseness whatsoever, and likewise the bloody Flux. Earth Chest-Nuts
are hot and dry in quality, and also binding in quality, but the seed is
hotter, they provoke Lust exceedingly, the seed provokes Urine. Chickweed is
cold and moist, and of a waterish substance, it cools without binding, and is
good for all Swellings and Imposthumes whatsoever, Itch, Scabs, Cramps, and is
good for Ulcers and Sores in the privy Parts. Bastard Chickweed is like to the
other in Virtue and Operation. Cinquefoil, or Five-leaved Grass, the Roots of
it are dry in the third degree, and without biting, for they have very little
heat and sharpness, it is good given inwardly for Agues, and to cool the heat
of Pestilential Fevers, the Juice of it drunk for certain days together,
Cures the Quinsey and Yellows; It is good for the Falling Sickness, Cough of
the Lungs, the Roots boiled in Vinegar is good for all hard Swellings, Knots
and Kernels, and Lumps growing in any part of the Flesh, and all Inflammations
and St. Anthonies Fire, and all sorts of running and foul Scabs, and is good
for Ruptures or Burstings used with other things, taken inwardly or outwardly
applied, and is good likewise for to stay bleeding of Wounds, inwardly taken or
outwardly applied. Garden Clary, or more properly Clear-Eye, is hot and dry in
the third degree, the feed put into the Eyes does clear them of Motes, and
takes out the red spots out of them; It is good for Swellings, and draws
forth Splinters and Thorns out of the Flesh; the Powder of the Root put up the
Nose purges the Head and Brain of much Rheum and corruption; It is a great
Strengthner of the Back, the Juice of it drank in Ale or Beer expels the
secundine. Wild Clary is hotter and drier then the Garden Clary, the seeds
provoke lust, warmes the Stomach, scatters congealed Blood in any part of the
Body, and helps dimness of Sight, being put into the Eye, and there let it
remain till it drop out of it self, and it will cleanse the Eyes from putrified
matter, and by often using of it will take off a Film. Cleavers or Goose-grass
is moderately hot and dry, and somewhat of ^^in parts; it is good for the
biting of any venomous Beast, for the Yellows; it stays Lasks, bloody Fluxes
and bleeding Wounds, being bruised and laid to them, as also to close up green
Wounds; the powder of the Herb dried and strewed upon old filthy Ulcers helps
them, and being boiled with Hog's Grease, helps all hard swellings about the
Throat, being anointed therewith. It is a great Cleanser of the Blood and
Strengthner of the Liver. Clowns wound-wort is hot in the second degree, and
dry in the first, and is a most excellent Wound-herb for all green Wounds, and
is a Stancher of Blood, and will dry up fluxes and humors in old fretting
Ulcers and ^ankers that hinder the healing of them; A Syrup made of the Juice
of it is inferior to none for inward Wounds, Ruptures of Veins, and Pissing of
Blood. Cocks-head, red Fitching or Medick Fitch* the green leaves bruised and
laid as a Plaster disperseth knots or kernels in the flesh, and being dried
and taken in Wine helps the Strangury; and being anointed with it provokes
Sweat; it is a good food for Cattle to make them give good store of Milk, so is
Alder and Medick Fitch. Columbines are thought to be temperate, between heat
and moisture, the Leaves are used in Lotions for sore Mouths and Throats, the
seed opens the obstruction of the Liver, and is good for the Yellows.
Coltsfoot, the leaves of it while* it is green have a drying quality and are
somewhat cold, but the dried leaves are not so biting; they are good for
Wheezings and short-windedness, Agues, Inflammations and Swellings, St.
Anthonies Fire and Burnings. Comfrey is cold and dry, and of an earthly
quality, the use of this is the same with Clowns wound-wort; the great Comfrey
helps a bloody Urine, and is good for all inward Wounds, Bruises, Hurts and
Ulcers of the Lungs, is good for the falling or shedding of the seed, and is
good made into an Ointment for all pains and old Aches. Coral-wort cleanses
the Bladder, and provokes Urine, expels the Gravel and Stone, and eases pains
in the Sides and Bowels; it is good for inward Wounds, especially for those in
the Breast and Lungs, and is good for outward Wounds made up in an Ointment, it
stops Fluxes, and is good to dry up the watery humor that is in Ulcers, that
hinder their Cure. Red Corral binds and meanly cools, and is very effectual
against Issues of Blood, and eases the difficulty of staling, and is good for
the Falling Sickness. Costmary or Alecost, or Balsam-herb, is hot and dry in
the second degree, and provokes Urine as well as Maudlin; it purges choler
and phlegm, and is good for Agues, and dries up all thin Rheums from the Head
and Stomach. Of Cud-weed or Cotton-weed, their kinds are of a binding and
drying quality, and are good for defluxions of Rheums from the Head, and to
stay all Fluxes of Blood whatsoever; it helps the bloody Flux, and is good
for inward and outward Wounds, Hurts and Bruises, and is good for burstness,
the Worms and old and filthy Ulcers. Crabs-Claws is a great strengthner of the
Reins; it is good for St. Anthonies Fire, and all Inflammations and Swellings
in Wounds, and an Ointment made of them is good to heal them. It is a most
excellent thing for bruised Kidneys, and upon that account Pissing Blood.
Winter-Cresses is hot and dry in the second degree, the seed causes Urine, and
drives forth Gravel, and helps the Strangury; the Juice of them made up into
the form of an Ointment, with Wax, Oil and Turpentine, cleanses foul Ulcers.
Banck-Cresses, the seeds are of a fiery temperature, and does extenuate and
make thin, they strengthen the Brain, and is little inferior to Mustard Seed,
and are good to stay those Rheums that fall down from the Head upon the Lungs;
It is good likewise for the Yellows, and the paint in the Hip. Sciatica-Cresses
are hot and dry in the fourth degree, like to Garden-Cresses both in smell and
taste; they are good to put into a Poultess to help all old Pains and Griefs in
the Hips or Joints, and other parts of the Body that is hard to be Cured.
Garden-Cresses are sharp and biting, and therefore it is hot and dry, whilst
it is young and tender, the seeds are much more biting then the Herb, and is
hot and dry almost in the fourth degree, and is good for Pains in the Hip, and
hard Swellings and Inflammations. Dock-Cresses are of nature hot, and somewhat
obstersive, and cleansing, the Juice of them is good for ulcerated Sores.
Watercresses are hot and dry, they cleanse the Blood and Humors, serve in all
other uses in which Brook-lyme is available, as to break the Stone, and to
provoke Urine, and cleanse Ulcers. Cross-wort is of a binding and drying
quality, and is a most excellent Wound-herb, both inwardly taken and outwardly
applied, it sends forth Phlegm out of the Stomach, and is good for Ruptures
and Burstness. Crow-foot is a fiery hot Herb not fit to be given inwardly
unless it be Corrected, it will draw a Blister as well as Cantharides.
Cuckow-Point, or VVake-Robin is hot and dry in the third degree, it is good
given against the Plague or Poison, being mixed with Vinegar, it is good for
short-windedness and Cough of the Lungs, it is good to provoke Urine, is good
for the Itch, Ulcers, and to take away the Pin and Web in the Eye. Calamus is
of a hot heating quality, says Dioscordes; but Gallen and Pliny affirms, that
they have thin and subtle parts both hot and dry, it provokes Urine, expels
Poison, and is good for inward Bruises, and the Juice of it strained with Honey
takes away the dimness of the Eyes. Corneflag is of force to waste, consume
and dry, as also of a subtle and drying quality, being stamped with
Frankincense and Wine, draws forth Splinters out of the Flesh; It is likewise
good for hard Swellings. Cowslips of Jerusalem is of the temperature of great
Comfrey, and is somewhat more drying and binding. Colloquintida is hot and dry
in the latter end of the second degree, and therefore it purges, cleanses and
opens, and performs all those things that bitter things does, but that the
strong quality that it has, is as Gallen says, of more force then all the
rest of the Operations, therefore it is not rashly to be used, but upon some
desperate Diseases. Cranes-bill is cold and somewhat dry, with some binding
quality, it has power to join and sodder together, and is therefore good for
Burstness and broken Bones. The seed of Garden Cummin is hot and dry in the
third degree, and has also a binding quality, and is good for the Wind, the
Chest and Lungs, and all Raw Humors, and is good to put into Plasters and
Poultesses for Swellings. The seed of Cockle is hot and dry in the latter end
of the second degree, and is good against the Yellows. Camock is hot in the
third degree, it cutteth and makes thin, the Bark of the Root given in
White Wind causes Urine, and breaks the Stone, and drives it forth.
Cyprus-Roots, long and round, are of a hot Nature, the Ashes of them burnt is
good for Ulcers in the Mouth, Cankers, etc. Cypres, the fruit and leaves are
dry in the third degree, and Astringent, the Nut being stamped and drunk in
Wine, stops the Lask and bloody Flux. Cassia Fistula or Pudding-Pipe, the
Pulpe is moist in the latter end of the third degree, it gently purges
Choleric Humors and s^imy Phlegm. Cochinile is given alone, and mixed with
other things in malignant diseases, as Pestilential Fevers and the like, and
is a great Cordial. Cynamon has power to warm, and is of thin Parts, it is
also hot, dry and Astringent, it breaks Wind, provokes Urine, and is good
against the fretting pains of the Guts and Entrails, proceeding of cold Causes.
Cloves are hot and dry in the third degree, they streng^hen the Stomach, Liver
and Heart, provokes Urine, the Oil of them takes away the Pin and Web in the
Eye. China Roots is thought to be moderately hot and dry, it strengthens the
Liver, removes the Dropsey, Cures malignant Ulcers and Scabs, and is good in a
Consumption, and for the Farcin. Copperas are of two sorts, green and white,
they are hot and dry, but the white is much the stronger, they are great Driers
up of evil Humors, being outwardly applied they kill likewise Scurfs and
Scabs. Costus has an heating and attenuating quality, it is good to help
Strains, Convulsions and Cramps, kills Worms, and is good against the biting
of Vipers, and against Windiness in the Stomach. Calafonia or Colofonia, does
incarnate Ulcers, and does Conglutinate things that are separated. Camphopa is
a kind of Gum which is cold and dry in the third degree, and preserves the
Body from Putrefaction, and binds Humors, it is good against Poison, Plague
and Fevers. Cantharides are certain Spanish Flies which are hot and dry in the
third degree, they increase Lust taken inwardly, and being applied outwardly to
any part of the Body they will raise Blisters. Cardamonium is not, and
extenuateth Humors, and being mixed with Vinegar kills Scabs. Castorum is hot
and dry, and purges much. Cerusa is a white Ointment made of Oil and white
Lead; It is cold and dry in the second degree, and is a great healer and
shealer of Scabs. Cito or Cisto is dry in the second degree, and binds much.
Citrons or Cithrons are cold and moist in the second degree, they do cleanse
and pierce. Cam^^ry is cold, and conglutinateth and binds, and is good
against Ruptures. Castro or Cosse, being bitter, is hot and heals Ulcers.
Cane-reed is hot and dry in the third degree.
D.
Daisies are cold and moist, being moist in the end of the second degree, and
cold in the beginning of the same. They are good for Wounds in the Breast, and
therefore sitting to be made into Oils, Ointments and Plasters, as also into
Syrups; the great and wild ones is a very good Wound-Herb, and the distilled
water of them both is good to refresh the inward parts and to allay the heat of
choler; They are good for Ulcers. Swellings, Kernels, Bruises by Falls,
Ruptures, Burstings and all Inflammations. Dandelyon, vulgarly called
Piss-a-beds, is like in temperature with Succory, that is to say, of wild
Indive, it is cold, but it dries more, and does withal cleanse and open* by
reason of the biting quality it has, and therefore is good for the
Obstructions of the Liver, Gall, Spleen and Yellows; the distilled water of it
is good to allay the heat of Pestilential Fevers, and to wash Sores. Darnel is
hot in the third degree, red Darnel dries with sharpness. The Meal of it is
good to stay Gangrenes. Cankers and putrid Sores; It kills Ring-wormes and
soul Scabs; If it be used with Salt and Radishroots, with Brimstone and
Vinegar, it dissolveth Knots and Kernels, and being boiled with Wine, Pigeons
dung and Linfeed, dissolveth those that are hard to be dissolved; Darnel Meal
draws forth Splinters and broken bones, being applied as a Poultess; the red
Darnel boiled in Wine stays the Lask and bloody Flux, and all other Fluxes of
Blood. D ll is hot in the end of the second degree, and dry in the beginning of
the same; or in the end of the first degree; it provokes Urine, and is good
against Windiness; it is good to case Swellings and Pains. Devils-bit is
somewhat bitter, and is of a hot and dry temperature, and that in the latter
end of the second degree; it is good against the Plague and all Pestilential
diseases; as Poisons, Fevers, and biting of venomous Beasts; It is good for
Bruises either inward or outward; it is good to expel Wind, drive forth Worms.
The distilled Water of it is good for green Wounds, old Sores, and cleanses
the Body inwardly, and the Seed outwardly, from Sores, Scurss and Itches.
Docke, all of them are generally cold a little, and moderately, and some more.
They do all of them dry, but not after one manner, yet some are of opinion that
they are dry in the third degree: The red Dock cleanses the Liver, but the
yellow is best to take when the Blood is afflicted with choler. The Seeds of
most of the kinds do stay Lasks and Fluxes of all sorts; they are good for the
itch and breaking out of the Skin, if it be bathed therewith. Dodder is of the
Nature of the Herb on which it grows; is more dry then hot, and that in the
second degree; It is a Purger of Choler and Phlegm from the Head, Obstructions
of the Liver, Gall and Yellows. Dogs-grass, Quich-Grass; or Couch-Grass, opens
Obstructions of the Liver and Gall, stopping of Urine, and eases the pains of
the Belly, Inflammations, and wastes the Stones in the Bladder, and Ulcers
thereof. Also being boiled, the seed does more provoke Urine, and stays the
Lask; it is a good Remedy against all Diseases coming of stoppage. Doves-foot
or Cranes-bill is cold and somewhat dry, with some binding quality; It is good
for the Wind; Cholick and Stone* the decoction thereof in Wine is a good
Wound-drink for inward Wounds, Hurts or Bruises, and is good to cleanse and
heal outward Sores, Ulcers, Fistulaes and green VVounds, and is excellent for
Ruptures. Ducks-meat is cold and moist in a sort in the second degree; it is
good for Inflammations and St. Anthonies Fire. Dragons is under Mars, and
therefore the best way to use it is after it is distilled, and then the Water
of it cleanses all internal parts of the Body, and so it does the external
from Scurfand Scabs, and being dropped into the Eye takes away the Pin and
Web, and is good against Pestilence and Poison. Dogs-tooth is of a very hot
temperament, and of an excrementitious Nature. The Roots of all the Daffodils
are hot and dry in the third degree. Dyars-weed is hot and dry of Temperature,
the Root as also the whole Herb heats and dries in the third degree; it cuts,
attenuateth, opens and disgests; It is good for the biting of venomous Beasts
and Poison, taken inwardly or applied outwardly. Bastard-Dirtany is hot and dry
in the second degree, and of a wasting, attenuating and opening quality, and is
good for the Stone in the Kidneys and Bladder. Dropwort or Filipendula is hot
and dry in the third degree, opening, cleansing and a little binding; All the
kinds of them have the same faculty, unless it be the pernicious Drop-wort;
they are good against pains in the Bladder, and break the Stone.
E.
Elder is of a drying quality, glewing and moderately disgesting; It purges
choler and phlegm, both the inward Rind and the Berries, and the Dropsey; the
Bark of the Root works more powerfully then either of them; it is good
against the biting of any venomous Beasts, the Juice of it asswageth the hot
Inflammations of the Eyes, and all manner of Burnings and Scaldings, being laid
to the grieved place. Dwarf-Elder called Dane-wort* and Wall-wort, it is of
Temperature hot and dry in the third degree, it does waste and consume by
Purging of Choler, and Phlegm and Water, and is more powerful then the common
Elder, and has all the Properties of it. The Elm-Tree, the Leaves and Bark of
it is moderately hot, with a cleansing Faculty, the Leaves bruised and applied
heals green Wounds, it is good to Cure a Scurf, Ruptures, broken Bones,
Swellings and Burnings. Endive and Succorie are cold and dry in the third
degree, and withal somewhat binding, it is a fine cooling and cleansing Plant;
the Garden Endive is colder, and not so dry and cleansing; the Juice or the
water of it is good to cool the excessive heat of the Stomach and Liver, or any
inflammation in any part of the Body, and being applied outwardly it is good
for Ulcers, hard Swellings and Pestilential Sores. Elecampane is hot and dry in
the third degree, especially when it is dry, for being green and full of Juice
it is full of superfluous moisture, which somewhat abateth the heat and dry
quality thereof; It is good for Colds and Coughs, and to warm a cold Stomach,
Wind, short-Windedness, Wheezing, Stone in the Bladder, resists Poison, the
Plague, Cramps, Convulsions, Worms, Cankers, Fistulaes. Ensula, or
Devils-Milk, is hot, sharp and drying, and draws choler from the Joints. Eringo
or Sea-holly, breeds Seed exceedingly, and is hot and moist, it is good for
the Yellows, Dropsey, Cholick, provokes Urine, expels the Stone; the Roots
bruised and applied outwardly is good for the Farcin, or taken inwardly for the
same disease; it is good for broken Bones, and to draw thorns out of the
Flesh; the Juice dropped into the Ears helps the Impostumes in them; the
distilled water of it is good for all the Purposes aforesaid. Eyebright is hot
and dry, but yet more hot then dry; the Juice or the Water of it is good to
help all Infirmities of the Eyes that cause dimness. Elusa is a Herb like a
Sponge, and is hot in the fourth degree; it dries and cleanses exceedingly,
and of some is called Wolfes Milk. Excrusion is that which we call Oxicration,
it is a certain Composition of Aceto and Water, and is good to allay Swellings
and Tumors. Eggs, the Whites are cold and the Yolks are hot, and does
strengthen and incarnate, the shells beaten to powder and given in Beer or Ale,
is very good to expel the Stone out of the Bladder.
F.
Fern, both the kinds of them, Male and Female, are hot and dry, and somewhat
binding, their Virtues are both alike; the Roots of them are good to kill
Worms, the green leaves purge the Belly of choleric Humors; An Ointment made
of the Roots, bruised with Hog's Grease is good for the Wounds in the flesh, the
powder of them is good to dry up moistures in malignant Ulcers. The Water Fern
or Osmond-Royal is hot and dry, but lesser then the former, and has all the
Virtues the other has, but more effectually, and is good for Wounds or
Bruises, and the like; the decoction thereof being drunk or boiled in an
Ointment or Oil, as a Balsam or Balm, is very good for Bruises, or Bones broken
and out of Joint; it is good for the Cholick, for Ruptures, The Decoction of
the Root in Wine provokes Urine exceedingly, and cleanses the Bladder and
Passages thereof. Featherfew heateth, it is hot in the third degree, and dry in
the second; it expels the Secundine being drunk. It is good for a Cough, and
to cleanse the Reins of the Bladder, and to expel the Stone out of it. It
purges phlegm and choler, is good for the Headache and Wind-cholick, and
performs all that bitter things can do. Fennel-seed is hot in the third
degree, and dry in the first; it opens Obstructions and stoppings of the
Bladder, and makes the Stone to avoid by Urine. It is good for all manner of
gross humors, and is good for the Liver and Lungs, and is of the same Nature as
Anniseeds are. Sow-Fennel, or Hogs-Fennel, the kinds of the Herbs, especially
the yellow sap of the Root, is hot in the second degree, and dry in the
beginning of the third; it is good against Wind in the Belly and Stomach; It
Loosneth the Belly gently, and purges Siege both by phlegm and choler.
Fennel-Gyant is hot in the third degree, and dry in the second, and is
Astringent and binding, and is good for the bloody Flux. Filipendula or
Dropwort, vide Dropwort. Green Figs serve to ripen Tumors, soften and consume
hard swellings, and are good for Pursiness, Coughs and Diseases of the Lungs,
the Decoction of the leaves, and the place washed with it, is a most excellent
Remedy for the Leprosy, Scurf, Scabs or Running Sores. Fuss-balls do dry, and
are good to lay to a Galled Back. The yellow Water-Flag or Flower-de-luce, and
all the kinds of them are very Astringent, cooling and drying, and helps all
Lasks and Fluxes, whether of Blood or Humors; it helps all foul Ulcers, the
Juice being applied to them. Flax-weed or Toad-Flax, all the kinds of them are
of the same Temperature with wild Snap-Dragons, whereof they are kinds; it
provokes Urine, opens the Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, helps the
Yellows, expels Poison, drives forth the dead* Foal, and is good to cleanse
soul and cankerous Ulcers and Fistulaes. Flea-wort, it is cold and dry, the
Fryed-seed taken stays the Flux and Lask of the Belly; the seed is good for
hot Agues and burning Fevers, and other Inflammations; It is good for the
diseases of the Breast and Lungs caused by heat; It is good for the Headache
and all hot Imposthumes, and breakings out of the Skin; it is good for old
pains in the Joints, etc. Flix-weed dries without any manifest sharpness of
heat; It is good for Lasks and bloody Fluxes, and for all Issues of Blood
whatsoever; it is good for broken bones to consolidate them together, it heals
all sores and putrified Ulcers. Flower-de-luce is hot and dry in the third
degree; it purges choler and tough Phlegm, helps the Yellows and Dropsey; it
eases the pains in the Belly, and is good for the Liver and Spleen; it is good
for Cramps, all manner of Poison, provokes Urine, helps the Cholick, and is
good to comfort all cold Joints and Sinews, and is good for Ulcers and
Fistulaes. Fluellin or Lluellin is of a binding quality, and is good for hot
Swellings, Wounds, Ulcers and Cankers, and is good to stop a Lask and bloody
Flux. Fox-Gloves, in that they are bitter are hot and dry, with a certain
cleansing quality; the Juice of it is good to heal green Wounds and old Sores,
to cleanse, dry and heal them; It purges the Body of tough Phlegm, and is good
to open Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, is good for the Farcin, and other
breakings out in the Skin. Fumitory is cold and somewhat dry of Operation, and
cleanses by Urine. It is good for the Liver and Spleen, Yellows, Stavers,
Plague, ^ore Mouths and Throat, and all manner of Breakings out in the Skin.
The Furz-bush, or Fuzen-bushes, are hot and dry of Complexion, and is good to
open Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen; the seeds are good to cleanse the
Reins from the Gravel or Stones, provokes Urine, and is good against the
Yellows. Frankincense has power to bind, says Dioscordes, it is good for
Wounds Old and New, and also for Ulcers. Flax or Line, the seed thereof is hot
and dry, and it ripeneth and molli^ieth. Fitches are hot in the first, and dry
in the second degree, and they do open and cleanse; see Oblibanum. Herb
Frankincense, the seeds and roots are hot and dry in the second degree, and are
of a digesting, dissolving and Mundifying quality. Feltwort or Baldmony, the
Roots are hot, cleansing and Scouring, some say it is likewise binding and of a
bitter Taste. Fennegr^ck is hot in the second degree, and dry in the first, and
is a Loosner of the Body, and is good for Colds, and a Killer of Worms.
G.
Gentian Felt-w^rt or Baldmony, there are two sorts of them, and both under the
dominion of Mars, they both resist Poison and Pestilence, strengthens the
Stomach, the powder of the dried Root is good against the biting of a mad Dog,
or any other venomous Beast, opens Obstructions of the Liver; it is good taken
inwardly against Bruises by Falls, provokes Urine exceedingly, is good for
Cramps, it expectorates tough Phlegm, and kills Scabs, and all manner of
fretting Sores and Ulcers, kills Worms, is good for the Farcy and Yellows
taken inwardly. The root made into the form of a Tent is good to open Sores,
being put therein. Garlic is very sharp, and hot and dry in the fourth degree,
it causes Urine, is good against the biting of a mad Dog, and any other
venomous creature, purges the Head from tough Phlegm, kills Worms, helps
the Lethargy, is a Preservative against the Plague, is good for foul Ulcers,
breaks Imposthumes and other Swellings, and for all those Diseases the Onion
is also effectual, but they are better applied outwardly then received
inwardly, because they have their Vices as well as their Virtues.
Clove-G^lliflowers are so temperate, that no excess, neither in heat, cold,
dryness nor moisture can be perceived in them; they are great Strengthners both
of the Brain and Heart, and are very good for to be put into Cordials for hot
Pestilential Fevers, and expel Poison. Stock G^lliflowers are referred to the
Wall-Flower, although in Virtue they are much inferior. Garden Ge^m^^der is of
thin parts, and has a cutting faculty; it is hot and dry almost in the third
degree; it opens and cleanses, for it opens the Obstructions of the Liver and
Spleen, and difficulty of Urine; It is good against Poison, Ulcers, Cramps,
Agues, Falling Sickness, Headache, Yellows and Worms. Water Germander is hot
and dry, and has a bitter taste, harsh and earthly. Stinking Gladwin is hot
and dry in the third degree, it purges choler and phlegm, the powder or Juice
of it put into the Head draws forth much corruption, and being given inwardly
is good for Cramps; It is good for the Strangury, provokes Urine; the Roots
are very good in Wounds, and draws forth Splinters or Thorns out of the
Flesh, the Roots boiled in Vinegar dissolveth any hard Swelling or Tumor; the
Juice of the Leaves and Roots heal the Mange, and all other running and
spreading Scabs. Golden Rod is hot and dry in the second degree, and cleanses
with a certain Astriction or binding quality, and is good for the Stone in the
Reins and Kidneys; it is good taken for inward bruises, and outwardly applied
for outward ones; it stays Bleeding in any part of the Body, and of Wounds
also, the Fluxes of Humors, the bloody Flux, Ruptures. It is an excellent
Wound-Herb, inferior to none, either taken inwardly, or outwardly applied, and
is good for all Sores and Ulcers whatsoever, whether they be in the Mouth or
Throat. Gout-wort Cures all manner of pain in the Hip or Joynt-aches. Gromel,
the seed of it is hot and dry in the second degree; it is good to break the
Stone, and to avoid it out of the Reins and Bladder by Urine, and helps the
Strangury. Gum Armoniack outwardly applied, dissolves hard Knots and Swellings
in any part of the Body, and inwardly given cures hard Milts, and frees from
Obstructions, moves Urine, and fetches forth Stones. Winter-Green is a very
good Wound-herb, and is good taken inwardly, being bruised for Ulcers in the
Kidneys or Neck of the Bladder; it stays also Fluxes whether of Blood or
Humors, as the Lask, bloody Flux, bleeding Wounds, and takes away
Inflammations, and is good for foul Ulcers, Cankers and Fistulaes. Groundsel
has mixed Faculties, it cools and disgesteth; it is a universal Medicine
coming from heat, whatsoever they be; it is good against the Yellows, Falling
Sickness, provokes Urine, expels Gravel in the Reins and Kidneys, is good for
Griping in the Bowels and Cholick, and dissolveth any hard Knobs and Kernels in
the Body. English Galingale has a heating quality, and some do reckon it to be
hot and dry in the second degree: the greater Galingale Roots are hot and dry
in the third degree, but the lesser are somewhat hotter; it is good for cold
Griefs in the Stomach, strengthens the Brain, and comfort the Sinews. Ginger
heateth and dries in the third degree, and is good for the Stomach, answering
the effects and qualities of long Pepper. Glass-wort is hot and dry, the Ashes
of it are both drier and hotter, even to the fourth degree, and have a Costick
and burning quality. Green-weed or base Brom are hot and dry in the second
degree; they are thought to be in virtue equal with the Broom, the Dyars use it
very much to dye withal. Galls are dry in the third and cold in the second;
they cleanse and m^ndifie, they keep back Rheums and such like Fluxes, and does
dry up the same, and are good to stop Lasks and bloody Fluxes, and the falling
out of the Fundament. Grains of Paradise are hot and dry in the third degree,
they comfort the weak, cold and feeble Stomach, and helps the Ague, Farcin
and Falling Sickness. Gum Lack is hot in the second degree, and comfort the
Heart and Liver, and opens Obstructions, expels Urine, and is good for the
Dropsey and Yellows, and expels the Stone out of the Reins and Bladder.
Fresh Grease is hot and moist in the first degree, and mollifieth, ripeneth and
heals Wounds, Imposthumes and Ulcers. Galbanum is a Gum which is hot in the
third degree, and dry in the second: it softeneth, stops and draws away
evil humors, and is good against Colds, the Fume taken up the Head, as also
for the Dizziness thereof.
H.
Hearts-ease is obscurely cold, but more evidently moist, and of a fat and
slimy Juice, like that of the Mallow, for which cause it moisteneth and
suppleth, but not so much as that, it is good for the Inflammations of the
Lungs and Breast, Scabs and Itch. Hearts-Tongue is of a binding drying Faculty,
strengthens the Liver, and is good for the Lask and bloody Flux, and is good
against the biting of Serpents. Hawk-weed, all the kinds of them are somewhat
dry, and somewhat binding, and is good for the heat of the Stomach, the Fits of
the Ague, the Wind, provokes Urine, is good for the biting of venomous Beasts,
the Dropsey, the Wind-Cholick, and is good to digest thin Phlegm from the Chest
and Lungs, it is good for Ulcers, Burnings, Inflammations and St. Anthonies
Fire, and being made into a Poultess, is good for Cramps and Pains in the
Joints. The Hawthorn-Berries are very binding, therefore are good to stop a
Lask, the Berries dried and drunk in White Wind is very good against the Stone
and Dropsey, the Seed bruised after it is cleared from the Down and drunk, is
good for the tormenting pains of the Belly. Hemp is hot, the Seed consumes
Wind, it is good for the Yellows, opens the Obstructions of the Liver and
Gall, and is good for hot Inflammations, the Seed Loosneth the Belly, strewed
amongst a Horses Provender, and allayeth the troublesome Humors of the Bowels.
Hedge-Hysop is drying, and is good outwardly applied to pains in the Hips or
Joints, and is good to cleanse old and filthy Ulcers. Herb-Robert is good for
the Stone, and to stay all inward Flowings of Blood, and is a great Healer of
green Wounds, and is good for old Ulcers. Herb True-love, or One-berry is
exceeding cold, and the Leaves or Berries is good to expel Poison of all sorts,
as also the Plague and Pestilence, is good for the Cholick, green Wounds, and
to cleanse old and filthy Ulcers, and is good to discuss all Swellings in any
part of the Body. Hore-hound the white and the black are hot in the second, and
dry in the third degree, it helps the Obstructions of the Liver, opens and
Purges, and is good against Colds, Consumptions, short-windedness, an Expeller
of Poison, and a Cleanser of old Sores and Ulcers, clears the Eyesight, and
snuffed up the Nostrils, is good for the Yellows. Horse-ta^l is of a binding
Faculty, and does moderately dry, and is good to Cure Wounds, nay, though the
Sinews be cut asunder, and is good not only for all inward Ulcers of the
Bladder, but all outward Sores, provokes Urine, helps the Stone and
Strangury, and is good for all Lasks and bloody Fluxes, and Pissing of Blood,
or Bleeding at the Nose. Housleek or Sengreen are of a cooling Nature, and is
good for all inward Heats as well as outward, as in the Eyes and other parts of
the Body, it cools all hot Inflammations, as St. Anthonies Fire, Scaldings
and Burnings, Cankers, Tetters, Ring-wormes, etc. Hounds-tongue, but especially
the Root is cold and dry, it is good for Coughs and short-windedness, the
biting of mad Dogs, and is good for green Wounds, and is good inwardly for the
Farcy. Holly-holm or Hulver bush, the Berries are hot and dry, and of thin
parts, they expel Wind, they purge the Body of gross and Phlegmatic Humors
eaten not dried, but if they be dried and beaten to powder and eaten, they bind
the Body, and stop Fluxes, and the Lask, the Bark of the Tree and Leaves are
good in Fomentations for broken Bones and Members out of Joint. Heath-bush has
a digesting Faculty, the Flowers and Leaves are good to lay upon the biting of
venomous Beasts, and the Bark and Leaves may be used for the same Causes as
Turmerick is. Hartshorn is dry, yet it strengthens very much, and expels
Poison. Honey is hot and dry in the second degree, it cleanses the Stomach and
Entrails, stops Humors and incarnateth Wounds, and cleanses also the Reins
and Bladder. Hyacinths do little cleanse and bind, the seeds are dry in the
third degree, but the Roots are dry and cold in the first. Hellebore, vide
Bears-foot.
I.
St. John's Wort is hot and dry, being of substance thin, and is a most
excellent Herb for inward Bruises, or Hurts, or outward Wounds, it is good to
open Obstructions, dissolve Swellings, and strengthen those Parts that are weak
and feeble, it is good for Bleedings inward or outward, for the biting of any
venomous Creature, and is good to cast forth the Stone in the Bladder by Urine.
Ivy that grows upon Walls or upon Trees, it has a certain binding and cold
substance, and somewhat biting, the Flower of it is good for the bloody Flux
and Lask; the Leaves or Flowers outwardly applied, is good for the Nerves and
Sinews; the yellow Berries of them are good for the Yellows, and kills the
Worms, is good for the Plague, provokes Urine, breaks the Stone; It is good
for to cleanse foul Ulcers, Sores and green Wounds, or for Burnings and
Scaldings; The Juice of the Berries and Leaves squirted up the Nose, purges
the Head from Rheum, and cures the Ulcers therein, and is good given for a
Surfeit. The ^uniper Bush is hot and dry in the third degree, the B^rries are
also hot but not so dry; they are good against Poison, Plague, the biting of
any venomous Creature, provokes Urine, is good for the Dropsey, strengthens the
Stomach, expels Wind; they are good for the Cough, Shortness of Breath,
Consumptions, Pains in the Belly, Ruptures, Cramps, and strengthens all the
Members of the Body; A Lie made of the Ashes of the Wood, and the Body Bathed
therewith, is good for the Mange, and all manner of Scabs, the Berries break
the Stone, and brings a Horse to a Stomach, and is good for the Falling
Sickness. Jack by the Hedge, or Sauce alone, is hot and dry, but much lesser
then Garlic, the seed boiled in Wine is a good Remedy against the Wind-Cholick
or Stone, the green Leaves are good to heal Ulcers. Iris is a Root that is hot
and dry, it cleanses and ripeneth, and is good against Colds, and purges
Ulcers. Iron-Rust is hot and dry in the second degree, it comfort and
retains evil Humors.
K.
Knot-Grass, all the kinds of them are cold in the second degree, and dry in
the third, and are of a binding quality, it is good to cool the heat of the
Stomach, and to stay any Flux of Blood or Humors, as Lask, bloody Flux, it is
good for the Falling of the Seed, provokes Urine, helps the Strangury, and
expels the Gravel and Stone, it kills Worms, is good to cool all manner
of Inflammations, and to expel the Poison or Venom of any venomous Creatures;
it helps Gangreens, Fistulaes, Cankers and Ulcers, and is good for fresh and
green Wounds, and to strengthen broken Joints and Ruptures. Kidney-wort, or
VVall-penny-royal, or VVall-penny-wort, the distilled water of it given* is
good to allay all hot Inflammations of the Stomach and Liver, or Bowels, and
being outwardly applied, is good for outward Heats, Inflammations and St.
Anthonies Fire, and heals ^ore Kidneys, torn and fretted by the Stone,
provokes Urine, is good for the Dropsey, it helps the bloody Flux, and
Cures green Wounds, and stays their Bleeding. Knape-weed helps to stay
Bleeding at the Mouth and Nose, and other outward parts, and all inward
Bleedings of Veins, and also the Flux of the Belly and inward Bruises, it is
good for Ruptures taken inwardly, or outwardly applied, it dries up the
noisture of all Cankerous and Running Sores, and heals them up gently.
Knee-holm or Butchers broom, the Roots which are chiefly used, are hot and
meanly dry with a thinness of Essence, the decoction of it provokes Urine,
breaks the Stone, and drives forth Gravel; It raises up tough Ph^egm that
sticks at the Chest and Lungs, and the Berries of it is good for the Yellows.
L.
Ladies Mantle is good for Inflammations and to stay Bleedings, Fluxes of all
sorts, and helps Ruptures and Bruises, it is one of the best Wound-herbs that
is both inwardly taken and outwardly applied. Lavender is hot in the first, and
dry in the second degree, it is good for all the Griefs of the Head and Brain,
that proceed of a cold cause, it strengthens the Stomach, and freeth the Liver
and Spleen from Obstructions, expels the dead Foal and Secundine, the
Flowers distilled and so used, are good to cause Urine, and to ease the pain of
the Cholick, it is good for the Falling Sickness. French Lavender has a cold
and earthly substance, by reason whereof it binds, it is of force to take
away Obstructions, to extenuate and make thin, to cleanse and to strengthen not
only all the Entrails, but the whole Body also. Sea Lavender is very Astringent
or Binding, the Seed beaten to powder, and given in Wine or Beer helps the
Cholick and Strangury, and stays all Fluxes of Blood. Lavender-Cotton is hot
and dry in the third degree, it resists Poison, and helps the biting of any
venomous Creature, the Powder of it is good for the Mattering of the Yard, it
kills the Worms and Scabs. Ladies Smecks or Cuckoc-Flowers, all the sorts of
them are hot and dry in the second degree, they differ not much from the
Watercresses, they provoke Urine, break the Stone, and warm a cold Stomach.
L^ttice is a cold and moist Herb, but not in the extreme degree of Cold; they
Loosen the Belly being boiled. It is good for the pains of the Bowels coming by
choler, they are naught for short-Windedness and the Lungs. Water-Lilly, the
seed of it has a drying force, the leaves and flowers of it are cold and
moist, and cool all Inflammations both inward and outward; the Seed as well as
the Fruit stays Fluxes of Blood or Humors, either inward or outward, and is
good for the Mattering of the Yard. Lilly of the Valley, called Conval-Lilly or
May-Lilly, the distilled water of it helps all Inflammations in the Eyes, and
the Pin and Web. White Lillies, which are the Garden Lillies are hot, and
partly of a subtle substance; but the root is dry in the first degree, and hot
in the second, they expel Poison, and are very good in Pestilent Fevers. An
Ointment made of the Roots with Hog's Grease is good for Scabs, and unites
Sinews when they are Cut, and is a great Clenser of Ulcers, the Oil of it is
good to bring any Head-swelling to ripeness to break. Licoris is very familiar
to the Body of Man or Beast. It has a certain binding quality, which warmeth
and comes nearest of all to a mean temperature, and because it is sweet it is
meanly moist. It is good for a Cough, shortness of Breath, and for all the
Griefs of the Breast and Lungs; And for the Diseases of the Kidneys and Ulcers
in the Bladder; It is good for the Strangury; Heat of Urine, the fine Powder of
it blown into the Eye helps the Pin and Web. Common Liver-wort is good for
all the Diseases of the Liver, both to cool and to cleanse it, and helps all
Inflammations in any part of the Body; the Yellows, Mattering of the Yard; it
is good for Tettars, Sores and Scabs. Loose-strife or Willow-herb is good for
all manner of Bleedings inward and outward, as bloody Fluxes and bleeding
Wounds. Lovage is hot and dry in the third degree. It opens and disgesteth
Humors, provokes Urine, warmeth a cold Stomach, is good for the pain in the
Belly coming by Wind, resists Poison, is good for the Quinsey, takes away
the redness of the Eyes. Lung-wort, which is a kind of Moss growing on sundry
sorts of Trees, is good for Coughs, Diseases of the Lungs both in Man and
Beast, and is a most excellent Remedy boiled in Beer for broken-winded Horses.
Leeks, Scallions or Onions are hot and dry, and do attenuate and make thin, and
Loosen all evil Humors in the Body. Vnslack^ Lime is hot and dry in the fourth
degree, it dries and corrodeth. Laurel and Bays are hot and dry, they cleanse
and mundifie. Lee is hot and dry in the fourth degree; it is very adustine,
cleansing and piercing. Lithargirto is of two Kinds, one of the color of Gold,
the other of Silver; it is dry and binds, softneth, incarnateth, cools and
closes up Wounds. The golden Color is the best.
M.
The Root Madder, which the Physicians and Diars use, is disputed whether it
bind or open; As it is of an obscure binding force, so it is of nature and
temperature cold and dry; it is of diverse thin parts, by reason whereof the
color does easily pierce; it is good for inward Bruises, or outward Bruises;
It is good for the bloody Flux, provokes Urine, Cures the Yellows, by opening
the Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen; And anointed with Vinegar Cures the
Tettar or Ring-worm. White Maidenhair, all the kinds of them are dry, and
makes thin, and is between heat and coldness; it is good for a Cough,
shortness of Breath, the Yellows, Diseases of the Spleen, stoppage of Urine and
Stone, (In all which Diseases the Wall-Rue is as effectual) stays both
Bleedings and Fluxes of the Stomach and Belly, being green it Loosneth the
Belly, and avoideth choler and phlegm from the Stomach and Liver, cleanses the
Lungs and Blood, and being boiled with Camomil, dissolves knots, allayeth
swellings, and dries up moist Ulcers; the Lie made thereof is good to cleanse
the Skin from Scabs, and from dry and Running Sores. Golden Maidenhair has
all the Virtues of the former. Of Mallows and Marsh-Mallowes, either of them
has a certain heat and moisture, and the leaves and roots of them boiled in
water with Parsley and Fennel-roots opens the Belly, and are good for hot
Agues, they are used in Glisters, the Juice of them given is good for the
Falling Sickness; the leaves bruised with Honey, and laid to the Eyes, takes
away the inflammation of them; it is good against Poison: A Poultess made of
them, and applied, is good for all hard Tumors, Inflammations, Impostumes and
Swellings; it is good for Scaldings and Burnings, and for St. Anthonies Fire.
Marshmallows are more effectual in all the Diseases before mentioned, and in
Decoctions and Glisters, to ease all pains of the Body, making the Passages
slippery for the Stone to descend. Maple-t^e^, the Decoction of the Leaves and
Bark strengthens the Liver, and to open Obstructions of it and the Spleen, and
to ease the pain proce^ding thence. Myrobala^s p^rge gently Melancholy, and
comfort the Heart and Liver. VVilde Ma^jore^ does cut, attenuate and make
thin, dry and heat, and that in the third degree, strengthens the Stomach,
helps the Cough, Consumption of the Lungs, cleanses the Body of Choler,
expels Poison, and is good for the biting of venomous Beasts, helps the
Dropsey, Scabs, Mange, Yellows. Sweet Marjoreni is excellent good for all the
infirmities of the Head* squirted up the Nose, and taken inwardly, is good for
to comfort a cold Stomach, and the Diseases thereunto belonging, and being
outwardly applied is good for the Obstructions of the Liver, and being put into
an Ointment, it warmeth and comfort the outward parts, as the Joints and
Sinews, for Swellings, and for places out of Joint. Marigolds are hot almost in
the second degree, especially when they be dry, and are much of the Nature of
Saffron, the Juice of the Leaves mingled with Vinegar, and anoint a hot
swelling with it asswageth it, they comfort the Heart and Spirits, and
expels any Pestilent or Malignant quality that may annoy them. Master-wort,
the Root is hotter then Pepper, and therefore good in all cold Diseases, or
Griefs of the Stomach and Body; it is good for Rheum, shortness of Breath, and
expels the Stone by Urine, casts out the dead Foal, it is good for the
Dropsey, Cramps, Falling Sickness, Poison, provokes Sweat, it cleanses and
heals all green Wounds. Sweet Maudlin, the Virtues of it is the same with
Cost-mary, or Alecost, and therefore I refer you unto Costmary for
satisfaction. Medlars are cold, dry and binding, the Leaves are of the same
Nature, they are good to stop all Fluxes of Blood inwardly given, and the dried
Leaves beaten to powder, and strowed upon bleeding Wounds, stays the bleeding
of them, and heals them up quickly; the Stones of them made into powder, and
given in White Wind, wherein Parsley Roots has layn, in^using all Night, does
break the Stone in the Kidneys, and help to expel it. Melilote or Kings Claver
is hot and dry in the first degree, it has a certain binding quality, besides
a wasting and ripening quality; it is good for spreading Ulcers; it is used to
be put into Glisters, the Flowers of it with Chamomel, to expel Wind, and into
Poultcsses to assuage Swellings, with the Juice of it with Oil, Wax* Rosin and
Turpentine, is made a most Sovereign drawing Emplaister, the Herb boiled in
Wine breaks the Stone. French and Dogs Mercury are hot and dry in the second
degree, and has a cleansing Faculty; the Juice of it purges choler and watery
humors, it is good for waterish Eyes; it cleanses the Breast and Lungs from
Phlegm; the Juice put up the Nostrils, purges the Head of Catarrhs and Rheums,
helps the Yellows; it helps all Running Scabs, Tettars, Ring-wormes, and
being applied as a Poultess allayeth all Swellings and Inflammations, and given
in Glisters it evacuates from the Belly all offensive humors. The Dogs Mercury,
though it is less used, may serve to the same purposes to purge waterish
humors. Of all the Mints, Spear-Mint or Heart-Mint is the most wholesome, it
has a heating, binding and drying quality. The Juice taken in Vinegar stays
inward bleeding, dissolveth ^mpostumes being laid to with Barley Meal, and
applied with Salt, helps the biting of a mad Dog; it is good in all manner of
breakings out of the skin, and is good against Poison. Nep or Cat Mint has the
same faculties with the other. Horse-Mint is hot and dry, it dissolveth Wind in
the Stomach, helps the Cholick and short-windedness; it is good against the
biting of venomous Beasts; the Farcy taken inwardly, and squirted up the
Nostrils* purges the Head of evil humors. Misletoe, the Leaves and Berries are
hot and dry, and of subtle parts, the Bird-lime does mollisie hard Knobs,
Tumors and Impostumes, ripeneth and discusseth them, and being mixed with equal
parts of Rosin and Wax, heals old Ulcers and Sores; Missletoe bruised, and the
Juice put into the Ears, heals the Impostumes in them in a few days. The
Missletoe of the Oak being given inwardly, Cures the Falling Sickness, or hung
about his Neck. Money-wort, or Herb Twopence; it is moderately cold, it stays
Lasks and bloody Fluxes, Bleedings inwardly or outwardly, and is good for all
Wounds inward or outward. Moon-wort is cold and drying more then Adders Tongue,
and is good for all manner of Wounds both inward and outward; it stays all
inward Bleeding, as Veins broken, bloody Fluxes, and the like; it consolidateth
all Fractures and Dis^ocations; it is good for Ruptures; it is reported that it
will unlock Locks, and unshooe Horses that tread upon it. Tree-Moss is cold and
binding, and is the more binding according to the nature of the Tree it grows
upon; that of the Oak is the most binding, and is good to stay Fluxes and
inward Bleedings. Moss boiled in Milk, with the powder of Anniseeds, Elecampane
and Licoris, is a most excellent Medicine for a Cold or Cough. Mechoachan-Root
is hot and dry in the second degree, and purges filthy humors; It is very
safe, and is good for inveterate Coughs, Cholick, Dolor and the Farcin.
Ground-Moss is dry and astringent, without any heat or cold; It breaks the
Stone, and drives it forth by Urine, being boiled in White Wind and given, and
being boiled in Water and applied, eases all Inflammations and pains coming of
a hot cause. Mother-wort is hot and dry in the second degree, by reason of the
cleansing and binding quality. It is a very great Comforter of the Heart,
provokes Urine, cleanses the Chest from cold Phlegm, and kills the Worms
in the Belly; it warmes and dries up the cold humors in the Body, and helps the
Cramp and Convulsions of the Sinews. Mouse-ear is hot and dry, of a binding
quality; it is good for the Yellows, it is good for the Stone and pains in the
Bowels, and is a very good Herb for inward or outward Wounds; it is good for
the Dropsey, and stays the Fluxes of Blood both outward and inward; the Juice
of it is good to stay the spreading of all fretting Cankers and Ulcers
whatsoever. Mugg-wort is hot and dry in the second degree, and somewhat
binding, it expels the dead Foal, it breaks the Stone, and is good for stoppage
of Urine; the Root made up with Hog's Grease to an Ointment* takes away Wens
and hard Knobs. The M^lbeerry-Tree; the Mulberry is of different parts, the
ripe Berries, by reason of their slippery moisture, does cleanse and open the
Body, the unripe fruit is cold and dry in the second degree; the Bark, but
chiefly the Root is hot and dry in the third degree; the unripe fruit being
binding, is good to stop Lasks and bloody Fluxes, the Bark of the Root kills
the broad Worms in the Belly; the Juice made of the Berries is good for
Inflammations and Sores in the Mouth or Throat. Mullein does dry, the Leaves
are of a digesting and cleansing quality, the Root is good against Lasks and
Fluxes of the Belly; it is good for Burstness, Cramps and Convulsions, for old
Coughs; the Decoction of the Root in red Wine, or in Water wherein Steel has
been quenched, does stop the bloody Flux; it opens the Obstructions of the
Bladder and Reins, the powder of the dried Flowers is good for the pain of the
Cholick; the Decoction of the Roots and Leaves are good to dissolve Tumors,
Inflammations or Swellings; the Seed bruised in Wine draws forth thorns and
splinters. Common Mustard Seed does heat and make thin, and is a Loosner of the
Belly; it also draws forth, and is hot and dry in the fourth degree, it
cleanses the Blood, strengthens a weak Stomach, and heats it if cold, and is
very good for the Head; it draws forth splinters and bones out of the Flesh,
provokes Urine, resists Poison; it is good applied outwardly, to fetch out
cold or any other pain of the Body or Joints, and is good for all Scurfs or
wild Scabs. Hedge Mustard is good for Diseases of the Chest and Lungs, and for
Coughs, shortness of Breath, Yel ows, and is used commonly in Glisters, the
seed is good against poison or venom. Millet is cold in the first degree and
dry in the third, and is of a thin substance, the Meal of it mixed with Tar,
and applied to the biting of any venomous Beast, is good to take out the venom.
The Myrtle Tree consists of contrary substances, a cold Earthliness, it has a
subtle heat and dries; the Leaves, Fruit and Juice does bind outwardly
applied, and inwardly taken stays all Issues of Blood. M^st^ck is good to
draw forth splints and nails out of the Flesh, it binds and strengthens weak
parts, and is good for old or new strains, and inwardly taken strengthens the
Stomach, and is good to stop the Distillation upon the Lungs. M^lva is cold and
moist, it stops, softneth and mitigateth pain. Malva vis^us is very dry, it
softneth, loosneth and mitigateth. Mace is dry in the third degree, without
heat, and only binds, it is a comforter of the Heart and Spirits. Ma^na is of
equal temper, hot and dry, it opens, mollifyeth and incarnateth. Mariaton or
Martiaton is a hot Unguent against all cold humors; it helps the grief of the
Sinews, purges cold watery matters, and ripeneth Tumors. Marrow, of what kind
soever, is cold and moist, and mollifieth Ulcers; Now the best Marrow is that
of a Heart or old Stag, the next that of a Calf, the next that of a Sheep, and
the last that of a Goat. Myrrh is a sovereign Gum, it is hot and dry in the
second degree, it conglutinateth, binds and cleanses Wounds; it is good
against all colds, it kills Worms, and helps Pursiness, for though it does
cleanse much, yet it does not exasperate the Arteries, also it does incarnate;
it helps all diseases of the Lungs, the cholick, stops Fluxes. Morcosita or
Marcasita is hot and dry, it comfort, binds and melts humors. The fruit
of the Myrtle-tree is dry in the third degree, it does bind good, and loosen
evil humors.
N.
Narlwort or VVhitlow-grass is good for Imposthumes in the Joints. Neepe or
Cat-mint, is good for the Head ach, coming of cold causes, all Catarrhs,
Rheumes; It is good for windiness of the Stomach and Belly, Colds, Coughs and
shortness of Breath; the Juice given inwardly is good for Bruises, the
Decoction of it is good to bathe Scabs with. Nettles are of temperature dry, a
little hot scarce in the first degree, they are of thin and subtle parts; the
^eed provokes Urine, and expels Gra^el and Stone out of the Reins and
Bladder; It is good against the biting of venomous Beasts, biting of mad Dogs;
the Juice of them is good to cleanfe Sores, Fistulaes and Wounds; and such as
are fre^ting, corroding and eating Scabs and Manginess; it is good for to
strengthen those Places that are out of Joint, and is good for Aches and
Defluctions of humors upon the Sinews. The seed of them is a most excellent
thing to fatten a Horse, being strowed amongst his Provender. Common
Nightshade is wholly used to cool hot Inflammations, either inwardly or
outwardly, and is no way dangerous to use as the other Night-shades are. It is
good to wash a sore Mouth with, as also all corroding and fretting Ulcers and
Fistulaes; A Cloth wet in the Juice, and applied to any swelling takes it
away; have a care you take not the deadly Nightshade for this; if you know it
not, you may let them both alone. The Roots of Narcissus or Daffadill are hot
and dry in the second degree, and are of such wonderful oualities in drying,
that they glue together great Wounds, either in the Flesh, Veins, Sinews or
Tendous; They have also a certain cleansing and attractive Faculty; It takes
away the aches and pains in the Joints, and stamped with Hog's Grease and
Leaven, brings to maturation hard Impostumes, and stamped with Darnel-meal
and Honey, draws forth thorns and scabs out of any part of the body; the
Juice of the Root drunk is good for the Cough and Cholick. Neesing-root or
Neesing-wort is hot and dry in the third degree, and has been taken for a
wild kind of Pellitory of the Wall. Navel-wort or Penny-wort of the Wall is of
a moist substance, somewhat cold, and of a certain obscure, binding quality. It
cools, repelleth and drives back, scoureth, consumes and wastes away.
Nutmeg is hot and dry in the second degree, and somewhat astringent; it
breaks Wind, and is good for all cold Diseases of the Body. Nutshells burnt
are hot and dry, and do skin and stop the Flux of Matter. Nasturiu^^ is hot and
dry in the fourth degree, it burns, draws, melts and kills Worms.
Nitrum is of the same Nature as Saltpeter is, and it mundifieth exceedingly.
O.
The Leaves and Bark of the Oak and Acorn-Cups do bind and dry in the third
degree, being somewhat cold withal; the powder of the Bark or Cups stays all
manner of Fluxes and Lasks, and stays the Mattering of the Yard; the Acorns
procure Urine, expel Poison; the distilled water of the Oaken Buds are good
taken inwardly, or outwardly applied, to assuage Inflammations, and stop all
manner of Fluxes. It is good in Pestilent and hot Fevers; it cools the heat
of the Liver, breaks the Stone of the Kidney, the Water found in old hollow
Oaks, is good to anoint ^oul Scabs. Oats are naturally dry, they do dry, bind,
cleanse and comfort all the inward parts, and is the only Simple that agrees
with the Composition of a Horses Body, and therefore the Oil of them is the
only absolute and perfect Medicine that can be Administered for any inward
Sickness; You are taught how to make it in my first Part. Oaken Apples are hot
and piercing, and much of the Nature of Galls. One berry-Herb, True-love, or
Herb-Paris is very cold, whereby it represseth the rage and force of poison,
both the Berries and powder of the Herb. One-blade, half a dram of the Powder
of the Roots is a Sovereign Remedy against the Plague, and is a very good
Wound-herb. Or^his, which is called Dogs-Stones, they are hot and moist of
operation, and provoke lust very much, and kill Worms. Onions are hot and dry
in the fourth degree, and do attenuate and make thin, they help the biting of a
mad Dog and other venomous creatures; used with Honey and Rue, they kill
Worms; the Juice of them is good for Burnings and Sc^ldings. Orpins are cold
and dry, and of subtle parts* and is seldom used inwardly, but is used
outwardly to cool all hear or inflammations upon any hurt or wound, and is good
for Scaldings and Burnings, the Juice of it and Sallet-Oyl being beaten
together and anoi^^ed therewith; And the Juice of it mixed with Honey, and
given down his Throat; you shall find it a better and sooner Cur^ then a
Dogs-turd. Orpiment^ is a kind of Metal, of which the Artificial is called
Arsnick, is hot in the third degree, and dry in the second, it Binds,
Corrodeth, Burns and Fretteth, and is a Corrosive. Opium is cold and dry in
the fourth degree, and is a Liquor made with Poppy, dried and mixed with
Saffron, and does astonish and provoke Sleep. Ol^banum is hot and dry in the
second degree, and warmeth, binds, closes and incarnateth Wounds. Oil of
Olives or S^llet-Oyl, is of a very temperate Nature, and changes its quality
according to the Nature of the Simples mixed with it, it is a Clean^er of the
Body by a gentle way of Purging from Molten-Grease, and expels Poison.
Opoponax is a Gum that is hot in the third, and dry in the second degree; It
purges thick Phlegm from the remote parts of the Body, viz. Brain, Joints,
Feet, Nerves and Breast, and strengthens all those parts if they be weak; It
helps also old rotten Coughs, Gouts, swellings of the Spleen, Strangury,
difficulty of Pissing; You may give six drams of it Corrected with Mastick, and
dissolved in Vinegar.
P.
Parsley is hot and dry, but the Seed is more hot and dry, which is hot in the
second degree and dry almost in the third, the Root is of moderate heat, it
provokes Urine, and breaks Wind in the Stomach and Bowels, and Loosneth the
Body by opening the Obstructions of the Liver, it breaks the Stone, expels
Poison, and is good for the Yellows. Parsley-Pi^rt or Parsley Break st^ne, is
hot and dry, and of a cutting quality, it provokes Urine, and break* the Stone,
and helps the Strangury. Parsnip-^oots are moderately hot, and more dry then
moist, it procures Lust though windy, provokes Urine; but the wild Parsnip
has a more cutting, attenuating, cleansing and opening quality, and is of more
use in Physic; it helps the biting of venomous Creatures, or dissolveth Wind
in the Stomach and Bowels, the Seed is of more use then the Root, the
Countrey-People call them Madneps. Cow-Parsnips, the Seed of them are of a
cutting quality, and is good for a Cough, short Windedness, Falling Sickness,
Yellows, the Root scraped upon a Fistula, takes away the hard skin growing
thereon, the Seed given cleanses the Belly from tough Phlegm. Pellitory of
Spain is very hot and burning, and is the best Purger of the Head that is from
pains, the Powder of it being blown up his Nostrils. Pellitory of the Wall
cleanses and binds, it is good for an old and dry Cough, short Windedness,
Stone, Gravel, Worms, and is put into Glisters to mitigate the pains coming by
Wind; it is good for the Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, it is good for a
sore Throat, it asswageth hot Swellings, Impostumes, Burnings and Scaldings by
Fire or Water, or all other hot Tumors or Inflammations, it cleanses foul
rotten Ulcers and Scabs. Pennyroyal, both the sorts of it are of a drying
Faculty and of subtle Parts, it makes thin tough Phlegm, and warmeth any cold
place where it is applied, it expels the dead Foal and Secundine; it helps
the biting of venomous Creatures, it cleanses soul Ulcers, it is good for
Cramps, Convulsions of the Sinews, the Cough, Dropsey and Yellows. P^ony Male
and Female does gently bind with a kind of sweetness, it is a little hot, but
it is dry and of subtle parts, it is good for the Falling Sickness, the Root
being hung about the Neck, and some of the Juice of it given inwardly, and is
good for the Nightmare. Pepper-wort or Dittander is good for old pains and
griefs in Joints; and for Scabs. Perwincle is hot in the second degree, and
somewhat dry and binding, it is good to stop Fluxes of Blood, and all manner of
Bleeding inwardly and outwardly. St. Peters-wort is of temperature hot and dry,
and is of the same Nature as St. John's Wort, but somewhat weaker, it purges
Choleric Humors* helps old Pains and Griefs, and Burnings by Fire.
Pimpernel, both the sorts of them are of a drying Faculty without biting, and
somewhat of adrawing Faculty, in so much that it will draw forth splints out of
the Flesh, and purges the Head put into the Nostrils, they are a great
Cleanser of Ulcers, and a Sodderer up of Wounds, it is good for the Plague, and
all Venom taken by Venomous Beasts, and Mad Dogs, it opens the Obstructions of
the Liver and Spleen, provokes Urine, expels the Stone and Gravel, the
Juice of it clears the Sight. Ground Pine or Cham^pitys is good for the
Strangury, and all Diseases of the Liver and Spleen, and gently opens the
Body, casts out the dead Foal; It is good for all Pains in the Joints,
Dropsey, Yellows, Poison, Falling Sickness, to cleanse foul Ulcers, and to
sodder up the Lips of green Wounds. Water Plantine is cold and dry of
Temperature, is good against Burnings or Scauldings, and is good to stay Fluxes
of Blood. Rib-wort Plantine is cold and dry in the second degree as are the
other Plantines, the Virtues are referred to the kinds of Plantine. Land
Plantine is of a mixed Temperature, for it has in it a certain waterish color,
with a little harshness and coldness, and is therefore cold and dry in the
second degree, the Juice of it is good for all pains in the Bowels, and stays
the Distillation, Rheum in the Head, and is good for all manner of Fluxes of
Blood, inwardly taken or outwardly applied, it is good for shortness of Breath,
and Consumption of the Lungs; the Seed is good for the Dropsey, Falling
Sickness, Yellows, Stoppings of the Liver, the distilled water of it is good to
cool the hot Inflammation of the Eyes, and takes away the Pin and Web; It is
good for all manner of Burnings and Scauldings, is good for ^ore Mouths, and is
good for all Ulcers and Cankders; it is good for all manner of Scabs, Tettars
and running Sores, and is a very good Wound-Herb, either inwardly taken or
outwardly applied. Polipody of the Oak, Polipody of Fern, Indian Polipody, are
dry without biting, it purges Choler and Phlegm, and is good for the Cholick,
it is good against a Cough, shortness of Breath, and distillations of thin
Rheums upon the Lungs. Poppies of all sorts are cold, it is a great causer of
Sleep, it stays the Flux of the Belly, the Leaves or Heads made with a little
Vinegar and brought to a Poultess with Barley-meal and Hog's Grease, cools
Inflammations and St. Anthonies Fire. Prim or Privet, the Leaves and Roots of
it are binding, and is good to wash sore Mouths, to cool Inflammations, and to
dry up Fluxes, and is good for Ulcers in the Mouth and Throat, and all
Swellings and Impostumes, and is good against all Fluxes of the Belly and
Stomach, and bloody Flux. Pepper is hot in the third degree. All the sorts of
them heateth, provokes Urine, digesteth, draws, disperseth and cleanses the
dimness of the Sight, and is good to be put into Medicaments for the Eyes; It
is an Expeller of Poison, and is good for all diseases of the Breast and Lungs,
helps Wind, is good for the Cholick. Pitch is drawn from the Pine Tree, by the
force of Fire, and is the last Running, and Tarr is the first, which is the
thinner; it is hot and dry, and Tarr more hot, and stone Pitch more drying, it
conglutiuateth and gathers together. Petrolium is a certain Oil made of Salt
Peter and Bitumen, and is hot and dry in the second degree, heals Wounds, and
comfort weak Members. Philonium, of which there are two kinds, Philonium
Romanum, and Philonium Persicum, and are excellent Positions, and most
comfortable in the loss of Blood. Pomegranat is cold and dry, provokes Urine,
and is good for the Stomach; the Rind, Seed or Flowers of them beaten to powder
and given, stop the Lask and all Issues of Blood. Pomecitron, the Rind of it is
good against all Poisons.
Q.
Queen of the Medows, Medow-sweet, or Mead-sweet, is cold, dry and binding, and
is good for all manner of inward or outward Bleedings; It helps the Cholick,
stays the Flux of the Belly, heals old Ulcers, Cankers and Fistulaes; the
distilled water of it is good for the Inflammation of the Eyes.
R.
Radish, Horseradish and Garden-Radish, are hot in the third degree, and dry
in the second; they drive forth the Gravel and Stone out of the Bladder by
Urine. Horseradish is hot and dry in the third degree, and has a drying and
cleansing quality; It kills Worms, and being bruised and laid to old Griefs
takes them away, and is a Provoker of Urine, and likewise good for the
Dropsey. Rag-wort is called St. James-wort or Stagger-wort, is hot and dry in
the second degree; It cleanses, disgesteth and discusseth; The Juice of it is
good for Ulcers in the Mouth or Throat* for hard Swellings, Imposthumations and
Quinsey; it is good to stay Catarrhs, thin Rheums and Distillations from the
Head into the Eyes, Nose or Lungs; the Juice is good to heal all green Wounds,
and to cleanse and heal all filthy Ulcers in any part of the Body; it is good
for all Pains and Aches in any part of the Body likewise. Rattle-Grass, there
is two sorts of it, the red and they yellow; the Red is good to heal up
Fistulaes and hollow Ulcers, and stay the Flux of Humors to them, and other
Fluxes of Blood, being boiled in red Wine and given. The yellow Rattle-grass is
good for a Cough, and dimness of Sight, the Seed being put therein. Rest-harrow
or C^ammoack, is hot in the third degree, it cutteth and makes thin; it
provokes Urine and drives forth the Stone, which the Bark of the Root does
very powerfully. It is good to open the Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen,
and is good for a Rupture. The wild Rochet is hot and dry in the third degree;
it provokes Urine exceedingly, expels Poison, kills Worms and other
noisome creatures that breed in the Body. Wint^r-Rochet or Cresses, is hot and
dry in the second degree, the Seed of them provokes Urine, helps the
Strangury, and expels Gravel and the Stone. It is a good Wound-herb inwardly
given, or outwardly applied: It cleanses* and heals foul Ulcers and Sores by
the drying quality they have. Roses of all sorts, the leaves and the flowers of
them consist of diverse parts, as binding, yet moist and watery, they come very
near to a mean temperature; the white and the red are very binding, and those
that are not full blown, do cool and bind more then those that are blown; they
being dried and b^aten to Powder, stays the Lask and Pissing of Blood, the
Red strengthens the Heart and Stomach, assuage inflammations, the Mattering of
the Yard and Fluxes of the Belly, the Beards of them are binding and cooling.
Rosa S^lis or Sun-dew, the water of it distilled helps a salt Rheum distilling
from the Lungs, Wheesing, shortness of Breath, the Cough, and to heal Ulcers in
the Lungs, comfort the Heart. Rosemary is hot and dry in the second degree,
and of a binding quality, and is good against all Flux, of Blood, and cold
diseases of the Head and Stomach; It is good for the Lethargy and Falling
Sickness; It opens the Obstructions of the Liver, and is good for Windedness of
the Belly; It is good for dim Eyes, Yellows, Cough, Consumption. Rubarb the
best, which is the Indian, has two contrary Natures, for if you either cut,
scrape or grate it, then it is a Loosner, for it dissolveth and opens the
Liver, and expels the Obstructions thereof; It expulseth all bad humors in
and about the Heart, Liver and Spleen; It cleanses the Body, and sends away
the peccant humors among the Excrements, and all such things as may annoy or
offend the Entrails. But if you shall pound and beat it in a Mortar, or
otherwise, the Spirit thereof being a subtle Body, will Trans^e and fly away,
whereby the Operation thereof will be to bind, and no way profitable. Garden
Patience or Monk^ Rhubarb, is a kind of dock bearing the Name of Rhubarb, for
the purging quality therein; It purges Choler and Phlegm, the Seed binds the
Belly and stays any Lask or bloody Flux, the distilled water of it is good to
^^eanse and heal soul Ulcers, and to allay the ^nflammation of them. Bastard
Rhubarb has all the Properties of the Monks Rhubarb, but more effectually for
inward and outward Diseases; It Cures the Yellows, the Seed boiled in Wine
helps the Farcin, the Stone, provokes Urine, helps the dimness of the
Sight; It is a Cleanser and Cooler of the Blood. The Properties of the English
Rhubarb is the same with the other, but much more effectual, and has all the
Properties of the Indian Rhubarb, except the force of Purging, wherein it has
but half the strength; it purges the Body from choler and phlegm; it cleanses
the Stomach, Liver and Blood, opening Obstructions, Curing the Yellows,
Dropsey, cleanses the Reins, being taken with Venice Turpentine. Meadow Rue
bruised is good for old Sores; It is a Loosner of the Body; It is good for the
Yellows and Plague. Garden Rue is hot and dry in the latter end of the third
degree, and the Wild in the ^ourth; it is of thin parts, it consumes Wind,
and disgesteth gross and tough Hamors, provokes Urine, is good against Poison,
the Plague, the pains and gripings of the Belly. It is good for the Cough,
Wind-cholick, Worms, Dropsey, stops Bleeding; It is good for the Farcin,
Scabs, Tettars and Ring-wormes. Rupture-wort is dry, closes up and fastneth;
It is good for the Ruptures, Fluxes, Mattering of the yard, Strangury, stopping
of Urine, Stone and Gravel. It is good for all Griping Pains in the Stomach and
Belly, Obstructions of the Liver, Yellows, Worms, Wounds. It stays the
defluctions of Rheums from the Head, and dries up the moisture of Fistulaes
and Ulcers. Reeds are hot and dry in the second degree; and are Drawers out of
splints and thorns out of the Flesh. Rye is hotter then Wheat, and is more
forcible in wasting and consuming away; It ripeneth Imposthumes, Boyles and
other Swellings. All the Rozins are hot and dry; the Rozin of the Cedar-tree is
the hotter, the Rozin of the Pitch-tree is not so sharp and biting, and
therefore not so hot; the Rozin of the Firr-tree is in a mean between both; the
liquid Rozin of the Pine is moister; The Rozins which are put in Plasters,
which is our common Rozin, stops, softneth, clea^seth, draws and purges
wounds; and is good against cold Causes. Risigallo is a Composition of old
Sulphur, or Orpiment and unslackt Lime, and is a most strong Corrosive.
S.
Saffron is binding, it is hot in the second, and dry in the first degree; It
strengthens the Heart, is good for the Consumption of the Lungs, and shortness
of Breath; it is an excellent thing in Epidemical diseases, as the Plague, and
is good for the Yellows. Garden Sage is hot and dry in the beginning of the
third degree, or in the latter end of the second. It is good for the Head and
Brain, strengthens the Sinews, restores Health; It is good for a Cough, biting
of Serpents, expels Wind, dries the Dropsey, and is a Cleanser of the
Blood. It is good to put into a Water to wash a sore Mouth withal, and is good
for old Cankers and Sores. Wood-Sage is hot and dry, yet less then the common
Sage, being hot and dry in the second degree. It disgesteth and discusseth
Swellings and Knots in the flesh. It is good for Ulcers, Sores, Burstness,
green Wounds, and provokes Urine. Solomon's Seal is binding, the Roots of it is
good in Wounds and Hurts, to cleanse them, and to dry and restrain Fluxes of
Humors and bloody Flux and Lask; It is good for Ruptures and Burstness taken
inwardly, or outwardly applied, and is good for inward and outward bruises.
Sanicle is bitter, and has a certain binding quality, so that it cleanses and
strengthens, and is hot and dry in the second degree, and in some Authors hot
in the third; It is a most excellent VVound-herb, either outwardly applied, or
inwardly given, and is good for Ulcers and Impostumes in any part of the Body.
It is good to stop a Lask and all Fluxes of Blood, either inwardly or
outwardly. It is good for the Ulceration of the Kidneys, and pains of the
Bowels and Ruptures. It is good in binding, restraining, heating, drying and
healing, as Comfrey, Bugle, Self-heal, or any other of the Consounds, or
Vulnerary Herbs whatsoever. Sarasens Consound or Sarasens Wound-wort, is dry in
the third degree, with some manifest heat; It is a good Wound-herb, and is good
for the Obstructions of the Liver and Gall, Yellows, Dropsey, for all Ulcers of
the Reins, or other inward Wounds and Bruises, and for Ulcers in the Mouth and
Throat, and pains in the Stomach. Sauce alone, vide Jack in the Hedge. VVinter
Savory and Summer-Savory is very good for the Cholick, the Summer-kind is the
best; it expels Wind in the Stomach and Bowels; it provokes Urine, it
cutteth tough Phlegm in the Chest and Lungs; the Juice dropped into the Eyes
clears the Sight, if it proceed of thin cold humors, distilling from the
Brain, and being used in a Poultess is good for old Aches and Pains in the Hips
and Joints coming of cold. Savin is hot and dry in the third degree, of subtle
parts; It cleanses old Ulcers, being dried and mixed with Honey; It is good to
break Carbuncles, Plague-Sores, Farcin, Worms, Scabs, Itch and Running Sores,
Cankers, Tettars, Ring Worms; it kills the quick Foal, and expels the dead.
Common Saxafrage, the Root and seed thereof is of a warm and hot Composition,
it cleanses the Reins and Bladder, and dissolveth the Stone, and expels the
Gravel by Urine, helps the Strangury, cleanses the Stomach and Lungs from
phlegm. B^rnet Saxafrage, the Seed, Leaves and Roots of the great and small,
are hot and dry in the third degree, and of thin and subtle parts, they have
the same Properties as Parsley has in provoking Urine, and eases the pains of
the Cholick, breaks and avoids the Stone by Urine, and is good against Venom,
and is good for Cramps and Convulsions, the Juice of it dipped into Wounds
dries up the moisture of them. Scabius. three sorts there are of it, though
there be many others, yet these be most Familiar, and the Virtues of these and
the rest are much alike, it is hot and dry in the latter end of the second
degree, or near hand in the third, and of thin and subtle parts. It is good for
Coughs, short Windedness, and all other Diseases of the Breast and Lungs,
ripening and digesting cold phlegm, and other tough Humors, it ripeneth also
all inward Ulcers and Impostumes, it is good for running and spreading Scabs,
Tetters and Ring-wormes. English S^urvey-Grass is evidently hot and dry, very
like in taste and quality to the Garden-Cresses, it opens and cleanses the
Blood, the Liver and Spleen; it opens Obstructions, and Evacuateth cold,
clammy and Phlegmatic Humors both from the Liver and Spleen, the Juice of it
is good for soul Sores in the Mouth. Self-^eal is of the temperature of Bugle,
moderately hot, dry and something binding; It is a most excellent Herb for
inward and outward Wounds or Bruises in any part of the Body, it stays the
Flux of Blood in any Wound, and cleanses soul Ulcers and Sores. The
Service-Tree, the Berries are cold and binding, it is good to stay bleedings of
Wounds, Lasks and Fluxes of Blood. Shepherds Parse is cold, dry and very much
binding, it help all Fluxes of Blood, either caused by inward or outward
Wounds, and also Flux of the Belly, and bloody Flux, or Pissing of Blood, is
good for the Yellows, and being made into a Poultess helps Inflammations, and
St. Anthonies Fire, an Ointment being made thereof is good for all Wounds in
the Head. Smallege is hotter, drier, and much more Medicinable then Parsley, it
opens the Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, cleanses the Blood, provokes
Urine, helps the Yellows, Agues, the Juice is good for sore Mouths and Throats,
cleanses all the foul Ulcers and Cankders, being washed therewith; The Seed is
good to expel Wind, kill Worms, the Roots are effectual to all the Purposes
aforesaid, and is stronger then the Herb. Sope-wort or Bruise-wort is hot and
dry, and a little Scouring; the Juice is good to heal up green Wounds; it
provokes Urine, expels the Gravel and Stone, and is good for the Dropsey. The
Sorrels are moderately cold, dry and binding; the common Sorrel is good to cool
hot Diseases, Inflammations or heat of Blood, for it puri^ieth it, it kills
Worms, and is a Cordial to the Heart, which the Seed does more effectually,
being more drying and binding, and therefore stays the humors of the bloody
Flux, and Flux of the Stomach; It is good to resist Poison, expels the
Gravel and Stone, helps the Yellows. The Juice of it with Vinegar kills the
Itch, Scabs, Tettars, Ring*wormes and the like. VVood-Sorrel is cold and dry,
like Sorrel, and serves for all the Purposes that the other Sorrels do, and is
more effectual in hindering the Putresaction of Blood, and Ulcers in the Mouth
and Body, and cools Heats* Inflammations and Pestilential Fevers, or other
contagious Sickness. Sow-Thistles are of a mixed temperature, for they consist
of a waterish substance, cold and binding; the Milk of them is good for short
windedness, and causes the Stone and Gravel to be avoided by Urine; it helps
the Strangury, it causes Milk in Cattle. Southern-VVood is hot and dry in the
third degree; the Seed is an Antidote against all deadly Poison, and is good to
kill Worms; it is good to draw forth thorns out of the Flesh; the Ashes of
it dries up old Ulcers that are without Inflammation. Spignel provokes Urine,
helps the Strangury, and all Joint Aches, the powder of the Root with Honey
breaks tough Phlegm, and dries up the phlegm that fasteneth upon the Lungs;
the Roots are good against the biting and stinging of venomous Beasts.
Spleen-worts are of thin parts, and are in a mean temper; it is good for the
Spleen, helps the Strangury, wastes the Stone in the Bladder, and is good
for the Yellows. Straw-berry leaves do cool and dry with a binding quality,
they are good for all hot inflammations and swellings, applied outwardly, and
being inwardly given, after they have been boiled in Vinegar, does cool the
Liver and Blood, and assuage all inflammations in the Reins, provokes Urine,
and allayeth the heat and sharpness thereof, stays the bloody Flux. The Juice
of the leaves are good to make a Lotion for a sore Mouth or Ulcerstherein.
Succory and Endive are cold and dry in the second degree, and withal somewhat
binding, they cleanse phlegmatic and waterish humors out of the Stomach, opens
the Obstructions of the Liver, Gall and Spleen, is good for the Yellows, heat
of the Reins, Urine and Dropsey; the water or the Juice of the bruised leaves
applied outwardly, allay swellings, inflammations and St. Anthonies Fire, and
to wash Pestilential sores. Wild Succory agrees in nature and temperature with
the Garden Succory, and as it is more bitter, so it does more strengthen the
Stomach and Liver. Stone-crop, Prick Madum* or small Housleek, grows upon the
ground with diverse branches, with thick and whitish green leaves; it is cold in
quality, and somewhat binding, and therefore very good to stay defluctions that
flow from the Eyes; it stops Bleeding both inward and outward, helps Cankers
and all fretting Sores and Ulcers; it abates the heat of Choler, expels Poison,
resists Pestilent Fevers, and is good for Agues, you may take it inwardly
for all these Diseases. It is good likewise for the Farcin. Snap-Dragon, all
the sorts of them are hot and dry, and of subtle parts. Star-wort is of a mean
temperature in cooling and drying; it is good for the falling of the Gut by the
Inflammation of the Fundament, and is good for the Falling Sickness. White
Satin Flower, the seed of it is hot, dry and sharp of Taste, the seed of it is
good for the Falling Sickness; There may be made of it an excellent Ointment of
the leaves of it, and Sanicle stamped together, adding thereunto Oil and Wax.
Sea Star-wort is hot and dry in the third degree; the roots of it given in
White Wind, drives forth by Urine watery and gross humors, and therefore it is
good for the Dropsey and Poison, and is good for all inward and outward Wounds.
S^aves-Acre, the seed of it is extreme hot, almost in the fourth degree, being
beaten to Powder, and mixed with Oil or Lard, kills Lice, Itch or Mange in Man
or Beast. It is dangerous to give it inwardly. Sncese-wort, all the kinds of
them are hot and dry in the third degree. Star of Bethlehem, the kinds of them
are temperate in heat and dryness, the Roots of them roasted and applied with
Honey in the manner of a Poultiss, heals old eating Ulcers, and softneth and
discusseth hard Tumors. Spinach is cold and moist almost in the second degree,
but rather moist, it Loosneth the Belly, but makes it windy. Set-well, vide
Valerian. Seen is of a mean Temperature, neither hot nor cold, yet inclining to
heat, and dry almost in the third degree; It is of a purging faculty, and that
in such sort that it is not troublesome, having withal a certain binding
quality, which it leaves after the Purging. All Spurges are hot and dry almost
in the fourth degree, of a sharp and biting quality, fretting and consuming;
the Milk and Sap is in more special use then the fruit and leaves, the Root is
of least strength, the strongest is that of the Sea. Scammony, the Juice does
mightily purge, and is the strongest Purger whatsoever, and is very hurtful to
the Stomach, if you mix it not with All^es, or some other things, to correct
the evil qualities of it. The Sycamore-tree, the fruit of it is somewhat sweet
of taste, and is of temperature moist after a sort, and cold, as be the
Mulberries. The Liquor that issues out of the Bark of this Tree, in the
beginning of the Spring, before the Fruit appears, taken up with a Spoon or
Sponge, and dried or made up into a Cake, and kept in a Gally-pot, mollifieth
and closes Wounds together, and dissolveth gross humors, and is good inwardly
given, or applied outwardly against the biting of Serpents; it does soon
putrify. Storax or Stirax is a sweet Gum, which is of a heating, mollifying
and concocting quality; It is an excellent Perfume for the Head, and draws
many evil humors from thence, as Colds and other Sicknesses in the Head.
Sanguis Draconis is supposed to come from the Dragon-tree, it has an
Astringent faculty, and is good to stay Fluxes of Blood. Sloes, vide black
Thorn. Scallions are hot and dry in the second degree, they are good for Scabs,
and for the Lungs. Sarsafras or Ague-Tree, the boughs and branches thereof are
hot and dry in the second degree; the Rind is hotter, the Root is the best part
of it, it procures the same effects as Cinnamon does. Sanders white, red and
yellow, are all cold and dry in the second ^r third degree; They are of an
Astringent and strengthening ^uality. They drive back Humors, and stop
Defluctions from any part, helps Inflammations, and cools the Heat of Fevers.
The yellow is accounted the best. Sna^ls with shells are of the same Nature as
Snails without Shells are. Snails without shells do conglutinate very much, and
is good to put in Medicines for Ruptures; the distilled water of them is good
for a Consumption. Sandevoir is most excellent for dim or Rheumatick Eyes,
being laid asteep in Running Water. Soap is hot, it draws ^orth Splinters and
Nails; it mollisieth, dries, cleanses and purges. Salnitre, some use for
this Salt Peter, it is hot and dry, and evaporateth; it comfort Sinews, and
takes away tiredness and weariness. Salgemma is a kind of Salt which is hot
and dry, it cleanses and binds. Sallows or VVillows binds and dries
vehemently. Sal^ is hot and dry in the second degree, cleanses and kills
Worms. Sagina, or Saggina, or Sorge, of some called Pannicum Indicum, is only
hot and dry. S^lmoniack is hot and dry in the fourth degree, and cleanses.
Sarcocolla is a Gum of the kind of Euphorbium, and is hot and dry in the second
degree; it cleanses, incarnateth and comfort wounds. Sevadalce is hot in
the second, and dry in the first degree, it cleanses and opens. Serapino is
a Gum of Ferula, it is hot in the third, and dry in the second degree; it
mollifieth, loosneth and is good for Colds.
T.
Tar is drawn out of the Pine Tree, and is the first Running, Pitch is the
second, it is hot and dry in the second degree; it is good against Colds or
evil Humors gathered together in the Breast, and draws Wounds. It is
outwardly applied with other Ingredients to the Scratches, and is good to
anoint a Horses Nose with, to keep the Infection of the Plague from him.
English Tobaccho kills Worms, a little of it chopped small or beaten to
Powder, after it is very dry, and put amongst other Medicines. It is good for
the Stone in the Kidneys to help the Pain, and to expel the Gravel; It is good
boiled, in Chamberly with Brimstone, Allom and green Copperas, to kill the
Mange or all manner of Scabs; the Oil of it is good for all manner of Aches,
Cramps and Convulsions; a Pipe filled with it, and put into a Horses Fundament,
which the wind of his Body will draw it out, is a very good Glister for all
manner of Worms there, and to cleanse his Body. Tam^^inds are cold in the
third degree, and dry in the second; they are very temperate, and gently purge
adust Humors. The Tamarisk*Tree has a cleansing and cutting Faculty, with a
manifest dryness; it is somewhat binding, it is good for inward Bleedings,
Cholick, Yellows, biting of venomous Beasts, the decoction of it with some
Honey is good to stay Gangrenes, and fretting Sores and Ulcers, and to kill
Nits and Lice being washed therewith, the Wood or Bark is good for all the
Purposes aforesaid, as well as the Branches; it is good given to a Horse to
kill the Farcin. Garden Tansie that smells sweet, is hot in the second degree,
and dry in the third* and that without smell is hot and dry, and of a mean
Temperature, it is good to consume Phlegmatic Humors, the decoction of the
Common Tansie opens all Stoppings, is good for the Strangury, it expels Wind,
the Seed is good for the Worms, being boiled with Oil is good for shrunk
Sinews and Cramps. Wild Tansie is cold and dry almost in the third degree,
having a binding quality; It stays the Lask and all Fluxes whatsoever; it is
good for Burstness, and is good for all Joynt-Aches or Pains; it is good for
inward or outward Wounds, and to heal Running Sores, it cools the hot Fits of
the Ague be it never so violent, the distilled water of it dropped into the
Eyes, or a Cloth wet therein, takes away the heat and inflammation of them. Of
Thistles in general, all of them provoke Urine, the Juice of them will cause
Hair to grow where it is fallen off. Treacle Mustard and Methridate Mustard
both purge the Body upwards and downwards, it breaks inward Imposthumes; It is
a very good Antidote against Poison, Venom and Putrefaction; it is also
available in many Cases, the Common Mustard is used, but somewhat weaker. The
Black-thorn or Slo-Bush, all the parts of it is cooling, and binding, and
drying, and good to stay Bleeding at the Mouth and Nose, stop the Lask of the
Belly or Stomach, bloody Flux, and to ease the pains of the Bowels and Guts,
that come by overmuch Scourings, the Leaves are good to put into Lotions, to
wash a sore Mouth or Throat with, wherein are Sores or Kernels, and to stay the
defluctions of Rheums to the Eyes or other parts, and to cool the heat of them.
Thorough-wax or Thorough-leaf is of a dry Complexion, and is good for all sorts
of Bruises and Wounds inward and outward, and old Ulcers and Sores likewise;
the decoction of the Herb or the Powder of it taken inwardly, and the leaves
bruised and applied outwardly, is good to Cure Ruptures and Burstings. Thyme is
hot and dry in the third degree, it is a great Strengthner of the Lungs, it
purges the Body of Phlegm, and is good for short-windedness, an Ointment made
with it is good for hot swellings, it comfort the Stomach, and expels Wind.
VVilde Thime or Mother of Thime, is of Temperature hot and dry in the third
degree, it is of thin and subtle parts, cutting and much biting, provokes
Urine, eases the Griping pains in the Belly coming by Wind; it is good for
Cramps, Ruptures and Inflammations of the Liver, it is good for the Lethargy,
Pissing of Blood, Coughing, strengthens the Stomach, expels Wind, and breaks
the Stone. Turmentil or Serfoyl is binding, and therefore good to stay all
Fluxes of Blood or Humors, whether at the Nose or Mouth, or any Wound in the
Veins or elsewhere; It resists Poison, Plague, Pestilential Fevers, and
contagious diseases, and expels the Venom from the Heart by Sweating, there
is not found any Root more effectual to help any Flux of the Belly, Stomach,
Spleen or Blood, then this taken inwardly or applied outwardly; it opens the
Obstructions of the Liver, helps the Yellows, it is good made into a Plaster
to strengthen the Reins of the Back; it is good for Ruptures and Bruises by
Falls taken inwardly or applied outwardly; and it is a most excellent Wound-herb
applied outwardly to rotten Sores and Ulcers any where of the Body, or for any
inward Wound, it dissolves hard knots and kernels any where about the Body.
Turnsole or Heliotropium purges Choler and Phlegm boiled with water and given,
and being boiled with Cummin helps the Stone of the Reins or Bladder,
provokes Urine, the Herb bruised and laid to any old Pain in the Joints takes
it away, the Juice of it is good to take away Wenns, and to dissolve hard
kernels or knobs in the Flesh. Meadow Trefoyl or Honey-suckles is cold and dry,
and are good to put into Glisters, it is good in a Poultess for Inflammations
and Swellings, the Juice dropped into the Eye takes away the Pin and Web, and
takes away the Blood-shotten of them* Hart-trefoyl is a great Strengthner of
the Heart, fortifieth it against Poison and Pestilence, and defending it from
the noisome vapors of the Spleen. Pearl-Trefoyl, it differs not from the
Common*sort, save only it has a white spot in the Leaf like a Pearl, and is of
great Virtue against the Pin and Web in the Eyes. Tu^bich is a Root that is hot
and dry, and purges by moderate drawing, (f it be corrected,) gross, viscid
and putrid Phlegm from the Brain, Breast, and remote Parts and Junctures.
Tutsan or Park-leaves, the faculties are such as St. Peters-wort, which
declares it to be hot and dry; it purges humors, it is good for burnings by
Fire; it is a very good Wound-herb, either inwardly given or outwardly applied.
Tartar is the Excrement of Wine which sticks to the Vessel, and is hot and dry
in the third degree, and only cleanses. Turpentine is hot in the second and
dry in the first, it does draw, skin, incarnate and conglutinateth things
together, and is good for the Mattering of the Yard given inwardly, being made
up by Art into Balls, with Flower and bole-Armoniack. Thuris Cortex is dry in
the second degree and binds. Trifora Magna is a certain Composition which
will provoke Sweat, helps Griefs in the Stomach, and takes away all cold
Rhumes. Tutia Preparata is a certain Mineral that is cold in the first, and dry
in the second degree, and is very good for sore Eyes. Turmerick is hot in the
third degree, and opens Obstructions, it is good against the Yellows, and all
cold Distempers of the Liver and Spleen, and Fattens by a certain hidden
quality. Tastil wild is cold in the third and dry in the first degree, and
comfort and binds.
V.
Garden Valerian is hot but not much, provokes Urine, being dried and given,
helps the Strangury, it is good for short Windedness, the Roots of it being
boiled with Licoris, Raisins and Anniseeds, helps to open the Passages* and
expectorates the Phlegm easily; it is good for the Plague, and those that are
bitten and stung by any venomous creature; it expels Wind, and being boiled
in White Wind and dropped into the Eyes, takes away the dimness of Sight, or
any Pin and Web; it heals any inward sores and wounds, and also all outward
wounds and hurts, and draws out splinters and thorns out of the Flesh, the
Herb being bruised, and laid to the place grieved. VVilde Valerian some hold,
that being dried and beaten to Powder, purges upwards and downwards. Both the
Vervaines are very dry, and do meanly bind and cool; it is an excellent Herb
for the Womb, and all the cold Griefs belonging thereunto, as Plantain does the
hot. It is hot, dry and bitter, opening Obstructions, cleansing and healing; It
is good for the Yellows, Dropsey, the defects of the Reins and Lungs, and all
inward pains and torments of the Body; it is good against the Plague, and the
venom of venomous Beasts, against Agues, the Worms, the diseases of the Liver
and Spleen, and all diseases of the Stomach and Lungs, Coughs, shortness of
Breath, and to cleanse the Bladder from all evil humors, that engender the
Stone, it heals all Wounds both inward and outward, stays Bleeding, and
heals old Ulcers in any part of the Body being used with Honey; It is good
for Swellings used with Hog's Grease, the distilled water of the Herb or ^uice
dropped into the Eyes, cleanses them from Films. The Branches of the Vine and
the Leaves do cool and mightily bind, and stays Bleeding in any part of the
Body, and are good to stop a Lask and bloody Flux, the Leaves are put into
Lotions for sore Mouths, and being put into a Poultess with Barley-Meal, cools
^nflammations of Wounds. All the Violets are cold and moist while they are
fresh and green, and will cool any heat and distemper in the Body, either
inwardly given, or outwardly applied, Impostumes* also and hot Swellings, they
purge the Body of Choleric Humors, the Powder of the Purple Flower helps the
Quinsey and Falling Sickness; it is good for the Liver, Yellows and hot Agues.
The sorts of Vipers Grass, are hot and moist as are the Goats-beards, it is
very good for the Plague, poison of venomous Creatures, falling Sickness* Of
Wall or Vipers Bugl^ss, the several sorts of them are cold and dry of
Complexion, it is good against the biting of Vipers or any other venomous
Beasts, and also against poison or any poisonous Herbs, the Roots comfort the
Heart, tempers the Blood, allays the hot Fits of Agues. Vinegar, especially if
it be of Wine, is cold and piercing, to wit, cold in the first, and dry in the
third degree, it cuts Phlegm. Vermilion is a certain Metal drawn from Quick
sulphur, and Quicksilver, it draws, heals, incarnateth, binds and
comfort Ulcers. Verdegrease is hot and dry in the third degree, and is a
Corrasive that eats away dead and proud Flesh, and is good to be put into
Ointments for green Wounds, or for the Scratches. Green and white Vitriol may
be taken inwardly, a few drops of it with other things for the Farcin, and
outwardly applied to take away Wenns or hard Kernels, or to eat away a
Quitter-bone or Splint, or to take off Warts from the hands; if you will stay
the eating of it, or that you will have it eat no further then where you lay
it, wet all round where you lay it with water, you must take it out of the
Glass with a Feather, or a piece of Silk Tied to a stick, for it will eat both
Linen and Woollen. The white is the strongest, but the green is most safe for
any use. Vitriola Caleanthum is reckoned amongst Metals, and is a kind of Inkey
Earth, it draws and fretteth. Vitriola Herba is an Herb that grows on the
Wall, and is taken for Pellitory on the Wall.
W.
Wall*flower or Winter-Gilliflower, all the kinds of them are of a cleansing
faculty, and of thin parts. The yellow kind works more powerfully, and are of
more use in Physic; it cleanses the Blood, and freeth the Liver from
Obstructions, expels the Secundine and dead Foal, stays Inflammations and
Swellings, comfort and strengthens any weak part out of Joint, cleanses
the Eyes from Films, and cleanses also filthy Ulcers in the Mouth, and is a
good Remedy for all Aches and Pains in the Joints and Sinews, and is good for
the Farcin. The VVallnut-Tree, the Bark of it does bind and dry very much, and
the leaves are much of the same*Temperature, they kill the Worms in the
Belly, with other things put to them; they help the biting of a mad Dog, or the
venom or poison of any Creature; the Kernels of them when they are old are very
Astringent, and will stop a Lask; the Oil of the Kernels taken inwardly helps
the Cholick, and expels VVind; the distilled water of the green husks, before
they be ripe, is good to cool the heat of Agues, as also to resist the
Infection of the Plague, being applied to the sores; it cools also the heat
of green VVounds and old Ulcers, being Bathed therewith. Would, Weld, or
Dyars-weed, is hot and dry of Temperature, also the whole Herb heats and dries
in the third degree; it cuts, attenuates, resolves, opens, disgests; it is
good taken inwardly, or applied outwardly against the venom of venomous Beasts,
as also for the Plague or Pestilence, and is good for green Wounds. Wheat is
hot and dry in the first degree; it has a certain clammy, stopping quality;
the Oil of it pressed out between two thick Plates of Iron, heals all Tettars
and Ring-wormes, used warm. The green Corn chewed and applied to the place
bitten by a mad Dog heals it; Sliced Wheat-bread, soaked in Red Rose Water or
Spring Water, and applied to the Eyes that are hot, red and inflamed, or
blood-shotten helps them. And hot Bread applied to the Kernels of the Throat,
heals the Kernels thereof; the Flower of it mixed with the Juice of Henbane
stays the Flux of Humors to the Joints, and being boiled in Vinegar helps
the shrinking of the Sinews, the Flower of it mixed with the Yolk of an Egg,
Honey and Turpentine, does draw, cleanse and heal any Bile, Plague Sore or foul
Ulcer; the Decoction of Wheat-bran is good to Bath those Places that are
bursten by a Rupture, and the said Bran boiled in Vinegar, helps all
Swellings and Inflammations, it helps the biting of Vipers and all other
venomous Creatures. Wasers put in water and given, stays the Lask and bloody
Flux. The Willow-tree, the Leaves, Flowers, Seed and Bark, are cold and dry in
the second degree, and binding; they are used to stay bleeding of VVounds, and
all other Fluxes of Blood; it helps to stay all thin, hot and sharp
distillations upon the Lungs; the Leaves bruised with some Pepper is good for
the VVind-cholick. The water of the VVillow-tree received of a Branch cut, is
good for dimness of Sight, for Films, and to stay the Rheumes that fall into
them, provokes Urine being stopped; the Flowers of it boiled in white-VVine
has an admirable faculty in drying up of humors. The Bark works the same
effect. VVoad is dry and without sharpness, the wild VVoad dries more, and is
more sharp and biting; it is so dry and binding, that it is hardly fit to be
Given inwardly; an Ointment made thereof stancheth bleeding, and is good in
such Ulcers as are bound with moisture, for it takes away the corroding and
fretting humors; it cools Inflammations, quenches St. Anthonies Fire, and
stays defluctions of Blood in any part of the Body. VVood-bind or
Honey-suckles are cleansing, consuming and disgesting; the Flowers are good for
the Lungs, provokes Urine, helps Cramps, Convulsions, Palseys, and whatsoever
Grief comes of Cold or Stopping; the Flowers are more effectual then the
Leaves, and the Seed is as effectual as the Leaves. Pond-weed does bind and
cool like as does Knot-grass, but his Essence is thicker then that; it is good
against consuming and eating Ulcers, and all hot Inflammations. Wormwood is
hot and dry in the first degree, just as hot as the Blood; it remedies Choler,
provokes Urine, helps Surfeits, Swellings in the Belly, and is the best Herb
for the Yellows that is; Take of the Flowers of Wormwood, Rosemary and black
Thorn, of each a like quantity, half that quantity of Saffron boiled in Beer or
Ale, and this now and then used will keep a Horse in perfect Health; Wormwood
is good against Poison, Quinsey, biting and stinging of venomous Creatures,
Cholick, Worms, and to keep Clothes from the Moths; it helps the Spleen,
strengthens the Heart, and heats the Stomach. VVillow-Herb, vide Loose-strife.
Wallwort, or Danewort, vide Dwarf-Elder. Woodroff is of Temperature like unto
our Ladies Bed-straw, but not so strong, being in a mean between heat and
dryness; it prevails in Wounds, as Cruciata and other vulneary Herbs does.
The Leaves and Berries of the Wafering Tree are cold and dry, and of a binding
quality; the Decoction of the Leaves is good to Seringe a sore Mouth with, and
is good for the Diseases of the Gums, and fastneth loose Teeth. Worms do
conglutinate and comfort Sinews. White Lead is a great drier and shealer of
Scabs, and is good put into Medicines, for Scratches, and for Sellanders and
Mallenders.
Y.
Yarrow, called also Nose-bleed, Milfoyl and Thousand-leaf, it cleanses and is
meanly cold, but it most of all binds; An Ointment of it Cures wounds, and
is good for Inflammations; It is good for the bloody Flux. The Ointment is good
not only for VVounds, but Ulcers likewise and Fistulaes, especially such as are
bound with moisture. The Hair being washed with the Decoction, stays the
shedding of it, taken inwardly is good for the Mattering of the Yard, and the
Juice of it is most excellent, or the decoction of it injected into the Yard
with a Syringe, to stop the extreme flowing of the Seed, although the Issue
dorh cause Inflammation and Swelling of the secret parts, and though the
Spermatick Matter do come down in great quantity, as has been very well
proved. Water Yarrow is of a dry Faculty, by reason it takes away hot
Inflammations and Swellings.
Z.
Zuche, which are called G^urds* are cold and moist in the second degree, and
allayeth all manner of Inflammations, or hot Swellings. Softning or dissolving
Herbs are Four, viz. Mallows, Marshmallows, black Violet and Bears-breech.
THE EXPERIENCED FARRIER.
The Second Part.

Before you Enter upon the Drenching and Physicking of Horses; Take these
Directions with you.
I. THAT all Diseases are Cured by their Contraries, and all parts of the Body
are maintained by their like, viz. If Heat be the Cause of the Distemper, then
appropriate those Medicin^s that are cold to it; If cold, then give hot; If
Wind be the cause of Illness, then find out in your Table of Simples proper
Medicines for that Disease, and use them according to Directions.

II. Apply not the Medicines to one part of the Body, that are appropriated to
another part, viz. If the Brain be overheated, use not such Medicines as cool
the Heart and Liver.

III. If you give distilled Waters for the Disease you intend to Cure; Give
such Water as is distilled out of the Herb proper for that Disease, and sweeten
it with the same quantity of Syrup as you give Water, made also of the same
Herb, or some other proper for the Disease.

IV. If the Disease of the Body lie remote from the Stomach and Bowels, then
use Pills or Balls, which is the most proper Physic for the Distemper, because
they are longest in digestion, and therefore the most fit to carry off the
Disease by degrees.

V. Rather be found faulty on the safer side, by giving your Physic too weak
then too strong.

VI. Consider the natural temper of your Horses Body that is afflicted, and
support it in that, or else you weaken and destroy Nature, in stead of
Repairing it; as the Heart is hot, the Brain cold, so apply your Simples
accordingly.

7. Those Medicines that are hot in the first degree, are just of the heat and
temper of the Blood, and therefore most wholesome and proper for the Body.

VIII. All Medicines that are opening and provoke Urine, are best given in
White Wind or Ale, for they are of an opening Nature, and a great Strengthner
of the Reins.

IX. All Medicines that are given to stop any Looseness or Scouring, let him
fast three hours or more before he receive them.

X. Let your Medicines be proper to the humor offending* or else you will
weaken Nature, not the Disease.

XI. If the Humor offending be thin, that you intend to remove, then let your
Medicine be gentle; but if it be thick and tough, then give him some cutting
and opening thing the Night before, to prepare his Body the better for his
Purge the next day.

XII. Have a care how you use binding Medicines, when you purge tough humors.

XIII. If your Horse be bound in his Body, either Rake him with your Hand,
(being first anointed with Sallet Oil, Hog's Grease or sweet Butter, before you
pull his baked or hard dung from him) or else give him a Glister before you
give him a Purge.

XIV. You must consider the strength and stature of your Horse, and accordingly
prepare your Medicines, either stronger or weaker.

XV. If you give your Horse a Drench for a Cold, you usually give him of these
sorts of Powders. viz. Fennegreek, Liquoris, Bay berries, Anniseeds,
Cummin-seeds, Grains of Paradise, Long Pepper, Elecampane, Turmerick, etc. But
be sure you exceed not above three Ounces of them in his Drench at one time.

XVI. If you give a Horse a Scouring that is very strong and lusty, you may
venture to give him with safety an Ounce or more of the best Barbados Alloes,
(which is the strongest sort of Aloes that is) powdered and made up into Balls
with fresh Butter, as you have Directions afterward.

XVII. If you give Aloes Succotrina, you may give an Ounce and an half of it.
(because it is of a weaker Nature than the other) dissolved on the Fire in half
a Pint of White Wind, and brewed afterward in a quart of strong Beer, with
about two Ounces of fresh Butter put into it, which by reason of the Loosning
and Opening quality it has, will cause the Aloes to work so much the sooner
and better. This Proportion is to be given only to a large and strong
constitutioned Horse, a less quantity will serve a smaller.


An Advertisement about the several sorts of Aloes, and how you may know not
only their Goodness, but also distinguish them one from another.
There are four several sorts of them, and differ only in Purity, viz. Aloes
Caballina, Aloes Hepatica, Aloes Barbados, and Aloes Succotrina.

1. Aloes Caballina is a yellowish sort of Aloes, much of the color of a
boiled Liver, and is somewhat dearer, stronger and better then Aloes Hepatica.
This is seldom sold by it self, but kept only to mix amongst the black and
courser sort of Aloes, to give them a good color.

2. Al^es Hepatica is much of the same kind with the Caballina (for they come
over mixed together) but is of a blackish Roziny color when Refined, which is
accounted the best color.

3. Aloes of Barbados is found out but of late years, but is accounted the
strongest sort of all the kinds of them; If it be of a duskish sad brown, and
has an Eye of yellow amongst it, you may conclude it to be good; but the most
common color is black like unto Pitch; An Ounce of either of these three is a
Purge strong enough for most reasonable Horses.

4. Aloes Succotrina is the weakest, but best of all the kinds of them; If you
break it thin, and find it of a clear Roziny color, and transparent, you may
be satisfied it is the very best. This is four times dearer then the other
sorts, and is also Given to Horses, (but in a larger quantity) by those that
value not their Purses.

XVIII. If you make your Balls of the Powder of Aloes and Butter, mix it not
all at once with the Butter, but work it up in a little at first, and then
divide it into three equal parts, and cover every part over with fresh Butter,
about the bigness of a small Wash-ball, which will prevent the bitter taste of
the Aloes from offending him when you give them, give him a Horn-full of warm
Beer after every one of them, not only to prevent sticking, but to clear his
Passage, the better for the remaining Balls. But the best Way of making of
Balls of Aloes for a Scouring you may find after the best Receipt for the
Glanders, within a leaf of the latter end of the Book.

XIX. If you put London-Treacle at any time into your Horses Drinks, put not
above one Ounce of it at a time where there are other Ingredients, but if you
give it by it self, you may give him two Ounces of it dissolved in a pint of
Sack, or for want of that a quart of good Ale or Beer.

XX. When you physic your Horse at any time, give him his Hay so sparingly
overnight, that he may stand two or three hours at the Rackstaves, and let
him fast three or four hours after he has taken it.

XXI. It Is good to stir him a little after he has taken his Drink, which will
make his physic work so much the better.

XXII. If you are about the Cure of any outward Wound or Sore, the best way to
Expedite it, is to keep the place warm* which is done by clapping a plaster of
Burguna^-P^tch over the Medicine, which will be a means to de^end the grieved
part from the Air or VVind.

XXIII. If a Horse has swoll^n, or Gourded Legs, and has been poisoned with
the Medicines of other Farriers, and is fallen into your hands for Cure; then
be sure before you undertake to meddle with him, to wash his Legs very well
with warm* Whey, (or for want of that, Milk, but Whey is best) for this will
clear off the venom and poison of their Medicines, and make the Cure more
facile and easy to be effected.


Directions how to Order a sick Horse.
Whenever you find your Horse sick at any time, either of Fever, Farcy,
Molten-grease, Cold, or any other Distempers, etc. and that you have given him
something in Order to his Cure, and yet you find his Stomach so bad, that he
falls from his Meat, then to recover it again, and to strengthen and keep up
his weak and feeble spirits give him first, (to bring him to a Stomach) half a
Pint of White Wind, Vinegar or Verjuice lukewarm, sweetened with two or three
spoonfuls of Honey, well dissolved in it over the Fire. And about three or four
hours after it, give him the common Cordial for Horses, which is made of a
quart or three Pints of strong Beer, with a good big Toast of Household
Wheat-bread crumbed into it gross and well boied. Before you give it him, while
it is cooling, put into it two or three spoonfuls of Honey, and about two
Ounces of fresh or salt Butter, and let him have it lukewarm; Give him at
Night a Mash of Malt, or Oats, that are boiled till they are bursten. After he
has eaten them, let him feed upon Hay for about an hour or more, then give him
warm-VVater to drink, with a handful or two of VVheat-Bran stirred amongst it;
The next morning give him his Cordial again, and at Nine or Ten of the Clock
warm-VVater and Bran, and boiled Oats, and now and then a Cordial of
white-VVine and Honey, and moderate Exercise once or twice a day, (if he be not
too weak to walk.) This is the only Method that I know of that you can use for
the Recovery of a sick and weak Horse, and for to Remedy his Costiveness which
does usually attend Sicknesses.

2. The longer he Fasts after you have given him his Drink, (conditionally he
be in good heart and strength) the better effect it will have in working upon
the Disease for which it was given. For three or four hours is time long
enough to fast, but if he be a sick, feeble and weak Horse, then two hours is
enough.

3. After he has Fasted according to his strength, give him some comfortable
thing to Recruit his Spirits; a^ a* Mash of Malt, boiled Oats, s^al^ed Bran,
etc. which will be a means to put Heart and strength into him again, which his
Drench and Fasting may in some measure have weak^ed.

4 If you use your Horse to scalded Bran, Mashes of Malt, or boiled Oats, and
have boiled Fennegreek amongst them* or given him it at any time amongst his
Provender, he will be the more ready and willing to take his Oats thus
prepared, (which is very good after any Drench you have given him.) viz. To
boil a quarter of a pound of Fennegreek with half a peck of Oats till they
burst, and throw them into the Manger scaulding hot, and though he cannot well
eat them till they be somewhat cold, yet the steam that does arise from thence
is very wholesome to open and comfort his Head and Brain, and to free him from
Colds and Stuffings therein. If you find him nice and not willing to eat them,
decoy him with a little Wheat-Bran strowed upon them, which to the liking he
may have to that, possibly may cause him to lick them up both together; The
Water that is drained from his Oats put into a pale of cold Water by it self,
and give it him to drink lukewarm, after he has fed a little while upon Hay.

^
An Advertisement, not only touching the Usefulness of the general Simples, set
down in Order one after another, in the First and Second Part, for the Cur^ of
all inward and outward Diseases, but also of the Table of Simples.
Wherever you Meet with such Simples in the First and Second Part, imagine not
that they were put there to no other end nor purpose, then to blot or blur
Paper with, or that they were intended only to make the Book swell large and
big, to bring profit and advantage to the Bookseller. I confess to the ignorant
and unskilful it may appear so, by reason of their want of Knowledge and
Judgment, to discern and apprehend the several Uses for which they were
written. But if the ingenious and skilful in the Art of Farring, (to whom these
things were principally intended) consider them, and seriously weigh the Nature
and Virtue of every one of them, (as their Table of Simples will acquaint them
with) they will quickly come to understand their usefulness, and readily employ
them to the same end they were first designed and intended for, viz. Not only
to improve their Knowledge and Understanding in the Nature of them as to the
Autherick, but also as to the Practick, in bettering their skill in the
Physical Uses of them, conditionally they will be so ingenious as to compound
and fit up their several Juices or Powders into Medicaments according to Art,
as their Genius and Inclinations may lead them. Neither are they placed here
because there wants Receipts for the Cure of all Diseases, either inward or
outward; but for the general good of all (as I have said before) that will be
studious to divert and recreate themselves in compounding and making up of new
Medicines proper and suitable to the Diseases they intend them for; so that
here you see, that so long as you have this Magazin or Storehouse of Nature to
come to, this Book will never be old, but be always fresh and new, unto those
that will resort unto it for their Emprovement.


To make Oil of Camomil, which is very Sovereign for any Grief in the Limbs,
which proceeds from a cold Cause.
Take a good Hand^ul of Camomil, and bruise it in a Mortar, then put it into a
quart of Sallet-Oyl in some convenient Vessel ^it for your use* and let it
remain therein three days and three Nights, then strain out the Oil from the
Camomil, and put into it some fresh Herbs, and let them stand also the same
time, then change it twice more as you did before, and your Oil is made.


To make Oil of Spike, which is good for all manner of Sinew-strains, or Pains
or Aches in the Limbs.
Take the Flowers of Spike, and wash them in Sallet-Oyl, then stamp them well,
and put them into a Canvass Bag, and press out what Oil you can get, then put
it into a Glass and set it by, and it will clear of it self, and wax fair and
bright, and smell very strong of the Spike.

You may make Oil of other Herbs after this manner.


To make Oil of Mastick, which is good for any cold Grief.
Take two Ounces of Mastick, and two Ounces of Olibanum, and boil them in a
quart of Sallet-Oyl to a third part, then put it into a Canvass Bag, and press
out what Oil you can get as you did the other, and let it stand by you about
twelve or fourteen days, and it will be perfect.


Comp^^hensive Terms Explained*
1. The Five greater opening Roots are, Fennel, Smallage, Parsley, Sparagras
and Knee-holly. To which may be added, Garliek, Onions, Angelica, Liquoris,
Gentian, Cichoxy, Endive, Celandine, Squills and Master-wort.

2. The Five lesser opening Roots, are, Eringo, Grass, Capers, Rest-Harrow and
Madder. To which you may add, Turmerick, Birthwort, Elecampane, Horseradish,
and Pollipodium.

3. The Five softning Herbs, are Marsh-m^llows, Mallows, Mercury, Violet-leaves
and Beets; To which you may add, Pellitory of the Wall; Coleworts, A^rach,
Melliolet and white Lillies*

4 The Hairy Herbs are, Maidenhair, Wall-Ru^, Spleen-wort, Harts^orn and
Trichomanes; The greater are Peony, Lavender, Rosemary, Sage and Poppey.

5. The four Cordial Flowers are, Borrage, Bugloss, Roses and Violets. To which
you may add Saffron, Marigold, Spickn^^^, Rosemary, Clovegilliflowers and Poppy.

6. The four greater hot Seeds are, Annis, Cummin, Caraway and Fennel. To which
you may add Cardamoms, Grains of Paradise, Pepper and Mustard Seed.

7. The four lesser hot Seeds are, Amom^, Bishops-weed, Parsley and C^rro^s. To
which you may add, Cubebs, Di^b, Rochet, Smallage and Er^simum.

8. The four greater cold Seeds are, Cucumber, Gourd, Cit^ul and Millon; To
which you may add, Poppy, Henbane, Nightshade and Hemlock.

9. The four lesser cold Seeds are, Endive, Le^tice, Succ^ry and Purslain. To
which you may add Cm^kweed, Dandelion and Plantine.

10. The three hot Flowers are, Camomil, M^lilot Oris or Flower-deluce; to
which you may add, Saffron, Lavender and Rosemary.

11. The four hot Ointments are, Martiarum, Aragon, Althaea and Agrippae; to
which may be added, Nervinum, Laurinum, Anodynum and Amarum.

12. The four cold Ointments are, Rosarum, Album Camphorinum, Populeon,
R^frigerans Galeni; to which may be added, Sumach, Nightshade, Pomatum and
Diaphompholigos, which are all bought at the Apothecaries.


The Gold and Hot Ointments Repeated over again, with their Virtues belonging
to them.
1. Martiarum, is good for all cold Diseases of the Body, as Palseys,
Convulsions, Cramps, stiffness of the Nerves and Joints, Falling Sickness,
Lethargy, etc.

2. Aragon has all the Virtues of Martiarum.

3. Althaea softens, dissolves and asswages pains in any part of the Body, and
is good against stiffness and contracting of the Nerves, helps Palseys and
Convulsions, and is good to conglutinate and closeup the Mouth of Wounds.

4. Agrippae is very excellent for all watery Tumors in the outward parts, by
anointing them therewith; it kills Worms, and expels water by Purging.

5. Nervinum, is good for the Nerves, to comfort, strengthen and amend their
defects, proceeding from cold and dead Palseys, Convulsions, Cramps, Numbness,
Bruises and old Aches, etc.

6. La^rinum, is good for all cold and moist Diseases of the Brain, Nerves,
Stomach, Liver, Spleen, Reins and Joints; it helps weariness, and is good for
all old Aches and pains, and other Diseases.

7. Anodynum, is good to assuage Tumors, Inflammations, and eases pain in any
part of the Body.

8. Amarum, anointed on the Belly and Chest, and between the Shoulders, expells
water, and kills Worms, opens Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, provokes
Urine, the Shape being also anointed with it expels the Heam.

9. Rosatum, is of a fine cooling Nature, very useful for all Gaulings of the
Skin, and frettings accompanied with choleric Humors, Tettars, Ring-wormes,
and is good to mitigate Diseases of the Head coming of Heat.

10. Album Camphoratum, is an excellent cold Ointment to assuage pain, and is a
great Drier, and is good for Scabs, Burnings and hot Inflammations, Chasings,
Frettings or Gaulings of the Skin; it dries up Ulcers, and takes away their
Itching in the time of healing.

11. Popul^eum is very cooling Ointment, which softens and eases pains.

12. Refrigerans, cools and moistens, and is good to Cure Inflammations,
Tumors, Wounds and other Maladies, proceeding from hot and dry Diseases.

13. Sumach is good for the Falling of the Fundament, and helps Pain^ and
Weakness in the Back consolidates Ruptures, etc.

14. Nightshade, is a very cooling Ointment.

15. Poma^um, is a softning, cooling and asswaging, and comfort weary Limbs.

16. Di phompholigos, cools, dries, heals and skins, Wounds, Sores and Ulcers,
etc.

These are all very costly Ointments, and are to be used only by the Rich,
which value not their Purses; yet the honest and plain Farrier has far more
cheap, and every whit as good, proper and useful Medicines for the Cure of the
said Distempers as the others are, conditionally he takes the pains to look
them out, which he may here and there find scattered throughout the whole Work.


Of the Use of A^timony.
Crude Antimony is a Mineral much like unto Lead, the best coming from
Tra^silva^ia and Hungaria, and is known by its bright and long Flakes; It Is an
excellent thing to put into a Horses Provender, to cleanse and purify his
Blood, and to free his Body from ^olds, or other Distempers, that lie hid and
lurking therein to destroy him; The manner how you are to use it, is to beat it
very small, and then Sift it through a ^ine Sieve, then strew about a quarter
of an Ounce of it Morning and Evening, (for about a Month together) in a
quarter of a Peck of his Oats, being first wet with good Ale or Beer. It Is
sold at the Druggist for 6 d. the pound. The Filings of Steel Needles is also
very good for the said Distempers, used after this manner.


General things good for the Joints and Sinews, that has in them any Ach, or
Numbness, Weakness or Swelling.
If it proceed from a hot Cause, you must apply cooling things to it, but if
from a cold Cause, hot things.

The Oil that is pressed out of Almonds is a great Mitigater of Pain, and all
manner of Aches, Aquavitae, Archangel, Alh^al, Balsam, Burgundy Pitch spread
upon Leather, and said to the Place grieved, draws forth all manner of Pain*
Burnet, Brandy, Bay Leaves, Brank-ur^in, the Oil of Chamomel, the bruised Roots
of Comfrey, Cowslips, Chickweed, Centaury, Cow-Parsnips, Germander, Hawk-weed,
Mallows or Marshmallows, Mug-wort, Mullen Penney-royal, purslain, the great
Leaved Dock, Saxafrage, English Tobacco, Garden Tansie, wild Mother of Thyme,
Sow-Fennel, Flower-de luce, Turpentine, Rag weed, stamped very small, and
Boiled with some Hog's Grease, to the consumption of the Juice, and at the end
of the Boiling it, add to it Mastick and Olibanum* and anoint the place with
it. Pepper, Saffron, Garlic, Rosemary, Frankincense, Myrrh, Sciatica Cresses,
wild Tansie, Spignel, yellow Wall-Flower, Nep, Catmint, Herb Gerrard,
Mustard Seed, etc.

Particular Receipts for Aches.
Take Accopium and mix it well with Sack, and chase it very well in with your
Hand, and if it be of a cold Cause, it will take it away at three or four times
doing.

Another.
Take Brandy or Aquavitae, and Chafe and Bath the place grieved very well with
it, and dry it in with a hot Fire shovel, then take a Rag, and dip in the
Brandy or Aquavitae, and strew the inside of it all over with Pepper, finely
beaten and ^earced, and bind it to the place grieved, and swath it up with a
dry Rowler, and do it thus once every day till he become sound.

Another.
Take of sweet Butter half a pound, of Aquavitae a Gill, of Saffron hal^ a
dram, Pepper ^inely beaten and ^earced three drams, three Heads of Garlic
bruised, mix them altogether, and let them stew on the Fire, and not boil, till
it come to a Salve. This being chafed in very warm to the place grieved, and a
brown Paper wet in the same, and bind to it, with a dry Cloth upon that, and so
used Morning and Evening, will cure it.

Things good in General for St. Anthonies Fire.

The Juice of Houseleek tempered with white Lead, the Juice of the green Leaves
of Garden Nightshade mixed with Barley-Meal, is good for it and all hot
Inflammations. Alum put to the Juice of white Beets, the Roots of Cinquefoyl
boiled in Vinegar, the distilled water of Coltsfoot; with Elder Flowers and
Nightshade, and applied, Crabs-claws, the Juice of Wall penny-wort, with the
Leaves and Flowers of Feather-few is good for it, and all hot Inflammations and
Swellings, the Roots of Bugloss mixed with Sallet-Oyl and Barley-Meal, Water
sengreen or fresh water soldier, Ducks-meat, the leaves of the Goose-berry
bush, or Hawkweed bruised and applied with Salt. The Juice of Kidney-wort
applied also, takes away all outward Heat and Inflammations; the Juice of
Mallows or Marshmallows boiled in Sallet-Oyl, and applied, is very good; a
Poultess made of Barley-meal and Hog's Grease, with the green Heads of Garden
Poppy bruised and applied with Vinegar is also very good, so is the Juice of
Purslain; An Ointment made of the Juice of Garden Rue, with Oil of Roses,
Ceruse and a little Vinegar, and applied, is most excellent; the Juice of the
bruised leaves of Succory is good, so ^s an Ointment made of Woad, and the
place anointed with it. But because it is a Disease very rare to be found in
Horses, you shall have as strange a Cure. It Is this.

A particular Receipt for St. Anthonies Fire.
After you have cast him, slit the Skin of the fore head of the Horse under the
sore-top, and open the same round about with your Cornet, rounding it about an
^nch every way, which done take a Worm, which you shall find in a Fullers
Teasel, and blow it in alive with a Quill into the place, and have a care you
kill not the Worm in stitching up the Skin again, for in twenty days the Worm
will die, and in that time the Horse will be thoroughly cured. If you would know
the Nature of the Disease, you may find it hereafter, in a Table set down
Alphabetically, showing where the Diseases of a Horse do grow, and the causes
of them.


Things good in general for the Antichor or Heart-Sickness.
To let Blood* if you know he wants it, and to give him a Purgation of Sack,
Sallet-Oyl and Sugar Candy, or Sugar and Cinnamon given him in Sack or
Diapente, or Dr. Stephens Water, Butter-burr, Avens, etc.

A particular Receipt for the Anticor or Heart-Sickness.
After the Swelling appears, and you have taken a good quantity of Blood on
both sides of the Neck, give him the Drink of Diapente with B^er or Ale, which
you may find in my First Part, putting therein one Ounce of brown Sugar Candy,
and half an Ounce of London-Treacle, which will drive the Sickness and Grief
from his heart; which-done, anoint
the Swelling with this Ointment.

Ointment.
Take Hog's Grease, Boars Grease and Bas^licon, of each three Ounces,
Incorporate them well together, and anoint and rub the Swelling every day, till
it become soft, then open it, and let forth the Corruption, and wash the sore
with the Copperas water, which you may find in my First Part. And ^aint it with
your green Ointment, which you may sind as aforesaid, and it will be soon whole.

Things good in General for an Upper or Nether A^taint, or any hurt by
Overreaching.
Before you apply your Salve, lay the Place bare without hollowness, and wash
it with Beer and Salt, or Vinegar and Salt, and then what will Cure a Mallender
or Sellander will Cure this.

Particular Receipts good for an upper Attairt.
Take Venice-Turpentine one Ounce, and Brandy three spoonfuls, beat them well
together till they come to a Salve, and anoint the Sore very well therewith,
and heat it well in with a hot Iron, and do this three or four times, and it
will cure him.

Another.
Take of Sanguis Draconis three quarters of an Ounce, Bole-armoniack one Ounce,
Sallet Oil as much, Mastick three Ounces, Sewet as much, and as much
Hog's Grease, melt and mix all these together, and lay it to the swelling, and
it will take it away.

Another.
Take one or two Handfuls of Saexafrage, and all the Sewet of a Loyn of Mutton,
and a Pint of white Wine, chop the Herb, and Mince the Sewet very small, and
boil them all very well together, then take a good quantity of Horse-dung newly
made that goes to Grass, and mix with the other Ingredients, and work it to a
Salve, and apply it Plaister-wise hot to the place, renewing it every day so
long as you think convenient, and this is a very excellent Cure.

Another for the Nether Attaint.
Take a Piece of Filletting, and bind it about the Pastern Joint, pretty hard,
which will cause the blister or swelling the better to appear; then let out the
corrupt Jelly with your Incision-Knife, and crush it all out, then heal it up
with your Copperas water, and anoint it with the green Ointment.


Things good in General for the Stavers, Headache or Farcin.
To let Blood to hang about his Neek, the Root of Amara dulcis, the Juice of
Sow-Fennel or Hogs Fennel squirted up his Nose, or the Seed and Root of
Cow-Parsnip boiled in Oil, and his Head anointed therewith; The Seeds of
Brank-Cresses blown up his Nostrils, or Ducks-Meat applied to his Forehead made
into a Poultess; or his Head Bathed with the distilled water of common Elder,
takes it away if it comes of a cold cause; Flea-wort bruised and applied
after the same ^anner do h the like, so does Germander and Henbane bruised with
Vinegar and applied, the dust of Tobacco blown up his Head with a large Quill
or Kix, causes him to Neese, which eases him from the pain; the Root of
Pellitory of Spain dried and beaten to Powder, and used in the same manner,
does the like. The Juice of Cellendine put into his Ears, or Assa foetida
dissolved in Brandy, and put into his Ears, or Verjuice and Salt put into his
Ears; or Groundsel and Aqua vitae stamped together and put into his Ears, etc.

Particular Receipts for the Stavers.
After you have taken Blood from him, take the quantity of a Hazel-Nut of sweet
Butter and Salt* dissolve it in a Sawcer full of White Wind Vinegar, then take
Lint or fine Flax dipped therein, and so stop both his Ears therewith, and
stitch them up and let it remain there about twelve hours, and he will be
Cured.

Another.
Take of bitter Almonds an Ounce and a half, of the Gall of an Ox two drams, of
black Ellebore made into fine powder a half Penniworth, of Grains, Castoreum,
Vinegar and Varnish, of each five drams, boil all these together till the
Vinegar be consumed, then strain it and put it into his Ears, and do as you
did before.

Another.
Aqua vitae and Garlic so much as will suffice, and stamp them together* and
put into his Ears, doing as before.

Another.
Take the Seeds of Cressy, of Poppy, of Smallage, of Pursly, of Dill, (the
Seeds only of these Herbs) and take also Pepper and Saffron, of each two drams,
make them all into fine Powder, and put to them of Barleywater two quarts,
boiling hot from the Fire, and ^et it infuse therein three hours, and strain
it and give him one quart thereof, and his Hay sprinkled with water, and the
next day give him the other quart fasting, and let him drink no cold water for
four or five days after, but only white water, unless sometimes a sweet Mash,
and this will cure him. You must Note that in this Disease of the Stavers you
must be sure to let him Blood, before you give him any Medicine.


Another.



After you have sharpened a small and tough Oaken or Ashen stick, and made a
Notch at one end like a Fork, (to keep it from Running so far into his Head)
put it into his Nostrils, and Job it up and down to the top of his Head, which
will cause the Blood to descend freely; then in the Morning fasting give him
this Drink well brewed together, viz. One Ounce of the Powder of Turmerick,
with as much of the powder of Anniseeds in a quart of strong Beer or Ale, with
a pint of Verjuice, and a quarter of a pint of Brandy; and stop his Ears with
Aqua vitae and Herb-Grass beaten very well together. Put an equal quantity into
each Ear, and stop Flox or Hurds over it to keep it down, and stitch them up
with a Needle and Thread, and let it remain in for about twenty four hours,
then unstitch them and pull forth the Hurds, and the next day blood him in the
Neck, and give him his Blood with a handful of Salt put therein well stirred
together to keep it from clotting, and he is in a fair way to be cured.


Things good in general for the Yellows.
Agrimony, Water-Agrimony, the Bark of the black Elder Tree, Hops, Fennel,
Smallage, Endive, Succory-Roots, Garden-Arrach, Orach, Asarabacca, Ash-tree,
the Juice of Coleworts, the inner Rind of the Barberry Tree, or Berry,
Bay Berries, Burr-dock Roots, Wood-Bitony, Bistort or ^nakeweed, Red Beetes,
Burrage or Bugloss, Butchers-broom, Calamint or Montanie Mint, Camomel, Cardus
benedictus, Celandine, the Juice of Cinquefoyl, the Juice of Cleavers, the seed
of Columbines and Saffron boiled together, and given him, Dandelion, Dodder of
Thyme, Eringo, Flax-weed or Toad-Flax, the Juice of the Flower-de-luce
Fumitory, the Fuzz-bush, Garlic, Gentian, Feltwort or Baldmony, the seed of
Germander, Groundsel, the Roots of black Hellebore, the yellow berries of Ivy,
Liver-wort, Madder, Maidenhair, Wall-Rue, the seed both of the male and
female, Mercury, Wilde-marjorem, Wormwood, Mouse-Ear, Hedge-mustardseed, Cow
Parsnips, the Roots of Penny royal, the seed of Plantine, Bastard-Rubarb or the
great round leaved Dock, Rupture-wort, Sarasens Consound, or Sarasens
Wound-wort, Shepherds Purse, the Seeds and Roots of Sorrel, Spleen-wort,
Tamarisk, Turmentil or Setfoyl, Vervain, Ground Pine, Myrrh, Ivory or Hearts
horn, Long-Pepper, Licoris, Anniseeds, Ganders or Geese dung, Misle-toe* white
Thorn, the Roots of Parsley, Pimpernel, Chick-weed, Sheeps dung steeped in
Beer; You are to let him blood in the first place.

A particular Receipt for the Yellows.
Take an Ouuce of Mithridate, and dissolve it in a quart of Ale or Beer, and
give it him lukewarm. But if you have no Mithridate, give him two Ounces of
London Treacle, and for want of that two or three spoonfuls of common Treacle.

Another particular Receipt for the Yellows.
Take of Turmerick, Burr-dock Roots, long Pepper, of each about half an Ounce,
Anniseeds and Licoris in fine Powder and searced, of each, a spoonful,
Celandine the Leaves and Roots one handful, chopped small, and strain the
Celandine, and put them into a quart of strong Beer, and boil them a little on
the Fire, and in the Cooling sweeten it with London-Treacle, and put into it a
good piece of Butter, and give it him Bloodwarm, and give him white water, and
he will do well.

Another.
Take of the best Live Honey, half a pound of Saffron and Fennegreek made into
fine powder as much as will suffice, incorporate these with your Honey to a
stiff Paste, and so make thereof three Pills, and dipping them in Sallet-Oyl
give him them, and ride him and walk him gently an hour, and set him up warm.

Another.
After you have let him Blood, take a quart of Ale, and put an Ounce of
Saffron, and an Ounce of Turmerick into it, being first made into fine Powder,
and with the Juice of Sellandine so much as will suffice, and give it him
Blood-warm.


Another for the Yellows.
After you have blooded him on both sides the Neck, and third Bar on the Palate
of the Mouth; Give him Camomil, Elder leaves and Celandine, of each a small
handful chopped indifferent small, with a little of the inner Rind of the
Barberry Tree boiled in three Pints of strong Beer or Ale till they come to a
quart. Then strain the Herbs from the Liquor, and give it him lukewarm fasting
in the Morning, with a piece of sweet Butter melted in it, and sweetened with
two spoonfuls of Honey or Common Treacle; And Order him as you have Directions
in the Physicking of Horses.


Another for the Yellows.
To let Blood as before. Then give him Turmerick and Anniseeds beaten to
powder, of each an Ounce, with half an Ounce of the powder of the inner bark of
the Barberry tree, or for want of that a Gill of the Juice of Celandine; Give
him all these either in a Pint of white*Wine Vinegar, or in a quart of stale
Beer, and half a pint of Brandy lukewarm, fasting in the Morning; Give him
with it a spoonful of the Flower of Brimstone at the Mouth of the first Horn
you give him; but none with the rest; And Order him as you do usually sick
Horses.


Another for it.
After you have let Blood, as you must always do in this Disease, mix two
penniworth of Saffron beaten well to powder, and a Thimble-full or two of the
powder of Turm^rick with fre^h ^utter, and make it up into a small ^all, and
give it him for three or four Mornings together fasting, and it will cure him.


Simples that are good in Gener l for the Cure of the black ^aurdice or Yellows.
The Decoction of the Flowers of Sorrel made in White Wind or stale Beer, and
sweetened with Honey helps it given him often; the powder of the Leaves and
Bark of the Tamarisk Tree, is also good given him in beer, so is the Juice of
the leaves of Broom, a^ also the Seeds given him several Mornings together in
beer till you see Amendment; A Horn-full of it is enough to give it him at a
time.


A Particular Receipt which is very good for the Cure of it.
Take the Roots of red Docks, the Roots of burr-docks, and slice a good
quantity of them, and put them into a Bottle of Beer, with a little Mithridate,
close stopped, and give him a Horn or two full of it, in the Morning fasting.

Things good in General for the Falling-Evil* Planet-struck, Nightmare or
Palsy.
Fifteen of the Seeds of the single Peony given him in four Wine; to hang a
Flint-stone over his Head, or some old Sithe or old Iron, or to give him
exercise before and after water, and to mix Hemp Seed in his Provender* and to
enforce him to Sweat, Mis^etoe of the Oak given, Mustard Seed, the Seed of the
black Poplar, Cinquefoyl, Germander, Hysop, St. John's wort, etc.

Particular Receipts for the Nightmare.
Take a handful of Salt, half a pint of Sallet-Oyl, brown Sugar candy four
Ounces, mix them all very well together, and warm them on the Fire, and give it
him Blood-warm two Mornings together, and it will cure him.

Another.
Give him this purging Pill, take of Tarr three spoonfuls, of sweet Butter the
like quantity, beat them well together with the powder of Licoris, Anniseeds
and Sugar Candy till it be like Paste. Then make them into round Balls, and put
into each Ball two or three Cloves of Garlic, and so give it him, observing to
warm him before and after, and let him be fasting likewise two or three hours
before and after.


Things good in General f r Cramps, or Convulsion of the S^n^ws.
Rhub^rb taken inwardly, the Seed of Bastard St. John's wort given, the Oil
drawn from sweet Marjorem, and the grieved place anointed with it is good, for
all manner of Aches coming of a cold cause, Calamint given inwardly, Bitony,
Elecampane, Master-wort or the Herb Gerard given inwardly, the roots of
Valerian given, southern-wood, or the seeds of the Ladies Thistle given,
Juniper Berries given, Bay Berries, China-roots, Brank-Ursine taken inwardly,
or applied outwardly, the leaves of the Burrdock bruised, and laid to the place
grieved, Oil of Chamomel, Centaury applied to it, Costus, the Juice of
Chick-weed made up with Hog's Grease, and anoint the place grieved with it is
very good, or to force him to sweat by Clothes, or to bury him in a Horse
dunghill only with his Head out, Alheal or Centaury bruised and applied to them
is very good, so is sow-Fennel bruised with fallet-Oyl and Vinegar, and
applied, so is Gentian and Germander bruised and applied, the powder of
stinking Gladwin boiled in Ale or Beer and given is good, a Poultiss made of
Hawk-weed and Barley-meal, and said to the place offended is also good.
Lavender is good for them given inwardly, the roots and seeds of Marshmallows
boiled in the Grounds of Beer, and applied, is also good for them, so is a
decoction of Mugwort with Camomil and Agrimony, and the grieved place bathed
therewith warm, Pennyroyal applied with salt, honey and vinegar is also good,
Hermodactils and Venice-Turpentine given inwardly is also very good, the Juice
of the green herb of Tobaccho made into an Ointment and applied, is also very
good, etc.

Particular Receipts for the Cramp.
Chafe and rub the Member contracted, with Vinegar and common Oil, and then
wrap it all over with wet Hay or rotten Litter, or else with wet Woollen
Clothes, either of which is a present Remedy.

Another.
After you have sweated him well in a Horse dunghill, anoint him with this
Ointment, take of Hog's Grease one pound, of Turpentine a quarter of a pound, of
Pepper half a dram, of new Wax half a pound, of sallet Oil one pound, boil them
altogether and anoint him with it.

Another.
Take Pimpernel, Primrose-leaves, Chamomel, Crow-foot, Mallows, Fennel,
Rosemary, of each six handfuls steeped forty eight hours in fair water, and
boil them in it till they be tender, and Bath him therewith four days together,
Morning and Evening, and apply the herbs to the place with a Thumb-band of Hay
wet in the same Liquor, and anoint the said Member every day about Noon, with
Petroleum, Nerval, and Oil
of Spike mixed together.

Another.
Take two quarts of strong Ale, and of black soap two pounds, and boil them
together till they look like Tarr, with some Brandy, and anoint the place
grieved therewith.


Things good in General for all Colds or Coughs wet and dry, or for any
Consumption or Pu^refaction of the Lungs.
Agrimony, Bay berries, Elecampane, Licoris, Anniseeds, Long Pepper, Moss of an
Oaken-pale or Timber-stick boiled in Milk, Briony, a great purger which must be
Corrected, the Gum of the Cherry-tree dissolved in Ale, Coltsfoot* hawks-weed,
Hore-hound, Juniper berries, Pellitory of the Wall given him with honey and
brown sugar candy, penney royal boiled in Milk, Ground pine, the Juice of
purslain, the Juice of Jack by the hedge, Scabias, Vervan, Fennelseeds,
Fennegreek, Cardamum, Cumin, Ciliris Montany, Nutmegs, Cloves, Ginger, Linseed,
Brimstone, Germander is good for all moist Colds, hempseed, Raisins of the Sun,
sallet Oil, Garlic, Tarr given him in an Egg-shell, Sellendine, Mustard and
Alum boiled in Milk or Beer, Rubarb, Cassia, Myrrh, Herb-grass, Caraway seeds,
Marjorem, Currants, Millolet, Lions-foot, Ladies Mantle, Opoponax, Galbanum,
Storax, a hedge*Hog dried in an Oven and beaten to powder, and mixed with his
Provender, or Groundsel shred small with the powder of Anniseeds boiled in
Beer, Hysop, Water and Salt brayed together and given him, is good for a new
Cold, or Oil de Bay, Anniseeds and Licoris, of each alike made into fine
powder, and sowed in a Linen Cloth and fastened to his Bit, and to ride him
upon it, is good to break a new Cold, Ivy berries dried and beaten to powder
and given in Beer, the seed of bank Cresses, Feltwort or Baldmony, the Root of
Centaury boiled in Beer and sweetened with Treacle, the root of Mullin or
Long-wort, Ferula, Rosemary, bitter Almonds, Grains of Paradise, Lung-wort or
Wood Liver-wort, or take a Hen Egg after the white is taken out, and fill it up
with Butter, Tarr and salt, and put it down his Throat for three Mornings
together, is very good for an old Cough, the powder of Angelick taken in the
distilled water of Agarick and Wood-bitony mixed with common Treacle or Honey
is very good, the root of burrage or bugloss made into an Electuary and given
is also good, the Juice or the decoction of Cinquefoyl with Honey cures the
Cough of the Lungs, Featherfew with the Juice of sow Fennel put into an Egg,
(the White being taken out) with brown Sugar candy, or a little London Treacle
and given, is excellent, a syrup made of the green leaves of the fruit of the
Fig Tree is good for all the diseases of the Breast and Lungs, Hysop boiled
with Rue and Honey is good, so is Lungwort, Maidenhair, wild Rotchet, sugar
and sallet Oil is also very good, the Liquor of the wounded beech tree given in
the decoction of Coltsfoot is also very good for him, so is also Polipody with
sugar candy; Or any of these Juices with Honey and sugar candy made into a
paste, with the Flower of brimstone and Liquoris is very good, etc.

Particular Receipts for Colds.
Take the Moss that is growing upon an Oaken pale or Timber stick, one handful
or better, and boil it very well in three pints of new Milk, with a green Root
of Elecampane cut into thin and small slices with some Licor^s, and let it boil
till the Milk be half consumed, then strain it and press it thoroughly, and as
it is a cooling put into it a good piece of sweet Butter, and of ordinary
Treacle so much as will suffice, and so give it him Blood-warm. This is good
also for the Head ach, Frenzy, Stavers, Pose, Cold, Cough wet or dry, shortness
of Breath, rotten Lungs, Glanders, Lax, Leosness, bloody Flux, or the like
Diseases. You may boil them in Al^ or Beer, I mean the Ingredients you make up
your Drink with. Let him have this Drink three Mornings together, and it will
cure both his Cold and Cough wet and dry.

Another to take away a Cold, Poze or Rattling in the Fead, how violent soever
without giving any inward Medicine.
Take a small quantity of fresh or sweet Butter, and of Brimstone made into
fine powder, work them together till they be one entire body, and of a deep
yellow gold color, then take two long Goose-wing Feathers, and anoin^ them
herewith to the very Quills on either side, which done; roll them into more of
the powder of brimstone, and so put them up into either Nostril one, and at the
But end of the Quill put a strong packthread, which must be fastened over his
Pole, like to the Head-stall of a bridle, and ride him moderately after it
about an hour, and this will provoke him to snort and snuffle out of his Nose
and Head, much of congealed Filth which is in his head, then tie him to the
Rack for an hour after, and this will purge his head very clean, then draw
forth the Feathers and he will do well, keeping him warm, and giving him Mashes
or white Water for four or five days together. This you may safely use to a
Horse, that is ready to Hunt or Run for any great Wager, and the day is so near
that you durst not give him any inward drench.

Another very good, though short.
Take of Time one handful, boil it in a quar^ of strong Ale till it come to a
Pint, then strain it, add thereunto of ordinary Treac^e two spoon^uls, and give
it him Blood warm.

Another for a new taken Cold.
Take Water and Salt and brew them well together, and give it him blood-warm.

Another for a Cold newly taken.
Take a Hens Egg, and make a little hole on the top to take out the White and
Yolk; then take Tarr and Butter, of each alike, and put it into the Egg after
you have workt it very well together, and give it him three Mornings together.

Another which will Cure a long taken Cold, yea, though it be accompanied with
a dry Cough, and shortness of Breath or Pursiveness, and it has done Cures
that has been held very impossible to have been effected.
Take of the Conserve of Elecampane three quarters of an Ounce, and dissolve it
in a Pint and an half of sweet Sack, and give it him in the Morning fasting,
and ride him gently a little after, and thus do several times till you find the
Infirmity do decrease.

The kinds of this Conserve, and how to make it.
There are two kinds thereof* one is called particularly a Preserve, and the
other an absolute Conserve. The first is Simple, the other Compound, both very
Sovereign, but the Conserve is the best. They will keep a whole year close
stopped; The Simple you must preserve as you do all other green Roots, and keep
it close in a Gally Pot, in its own Syrup, and when you use it, beat it in a
Mortar together with its Syrup and refined Sugar made first into fine Powder.
Now your Compound or Conserve is thus made, first let your Roots of Elecampane
be neatly Candied, and made very dry and hard, and get the youngest Roots you
can, which must be kept also in a Gally-pot, or Glass, close stopped in a dry
and warm place, where they may not give again, and when you use it, beat so
much of it in a Mortar as you shall use, with the Syrup of Coltsfoot, and the
Powder of refined Sugar, still working it till you have brought it to a perfect
Conserve, and give it him in sweet Sack. The first of these two, which is the
Simple, helps any ordinary Cold or stopping, it comfort the Lungs,
enlarges his Wind, purges the Head from all filthy matter, and dissolveth
many other Obstructions as well in the Body as the Head. But the Compound or
Conserve works better effects in the Body of the Horse, espe^ially if the
Malady be old and dangerous, or if there he any Taint in the Lungs, Liver or
inward parts: This Conserve in time by the frequent use thereof will Cure all
dry Coughs which are held to be incurable. But if you have not these Conserves
take this other Receipt.

Another.
Take of the Syrup of Coltsfoot one Ounce, of Elecampane Roots dried,
Anniseeds and Licoris, of each half an Ounce, all made into fine powder, an
Ounce of brown Sugar Candy, which must be divided into two parts, then take
sweet Butter as much as will suffice, and so make this up into three Balls good
and stiff, which done, roll them in your other moiety of your powdered
Sugar Candy, and so give it him Fasting, and ride him gently for half an hour,
and so set him up warm, and let him fast three hours after it, and let him
drink no cold*Water, unless it be with Exercise, and sprinkle his Hay with
Water, and his Oats with Beer or Ale.

A Fume for a Horse that is stopped in the Head, and that he voideth Filth and
stinking Matter out of his Nose.
Take of Auripigmentum and of Coltsfoot made into powder, of each two drams,
with Venice-Turpentine, work them into a stiff Paste, and make them into small
Cakes the breadth of a sixpence, and dry them a little, and put one of these
Cakes into a Cha^ing-dish of coals, covered with a Tunnel, and so fume him, and
this not only during his Physic, but at other times after.

For a new Cold give him this Cawdle.
Take the Yolks of four new laid Eggs, and beat them well together, and
dissolve them with a quart of good Ale, then take three Nutmegs, with a little
Anniseeds and Licoris, made all into fine powder, and as much Pepper in fine
powder as you can put upon a sixpence, and put these in also with a piece of
sweet Butter, and two or three spoonfuls of ordinary Treacle, and of brown
Sugar Candy four*Ounces, warm them all upon the Fire till the Treacle and
Butter be molten, and give it him Blood-warm four or five Mornings together,
and this is an infallible Cure.

Another for a Cold.
Take four Ounces of Horse-Spice, half an Ounce of Diapente, one Ounce of the
powder of Elecampane Roots, half an Ounce of the Flower of Brimstone, one
penniworth of common Treacle, one penniworth of Honey, half a quarter of a Pint
of Sallet-Oyl; Take all these together with a little Wheat Flour to a Paste,
made up in a small Ball every Morning so long as it lasts, wrapped up in sweet
Butter.

Another, which Cures any Cold or dry Cough, shortness of Breath, Pursiveness,
or broken-Winded.
Take of Tarr and sweet Butter of each three spoonfuls, and work them well
together, with the fine Powder of Licoras, Anniseeds and Sugar Candy, till it
be brought to a hard Paste: then make it into three round Balls, and put into
each Ball four or five Cloves of Garlic, and so give him them, and warm him
before and after he has received them, and be sure that he be fasting before
he takes them, and let him fast three hours after them.

Another for the same Purpose.
Take of the white Fat or Lard of Bacon, a Piece four Fingers long, and almost
two Fingers thick both ways, then with your Knife make many holes in it, and
stop it with as many Cloves of Garlic as you can conveniently get into it,
then rolling it in the Powder of Licoras, Anniseeds, Sugar Candy and Brimstone,
of equal Proportions alike, and give it him in a Morning fasting, twice a Week,
till you find amendment, and Ride him after it, and sprinkle his Hay with Water.

Another.

Take a Red Herring, and take out the Bones, and roll it up in Tarr, and give
it him down his Throat, and it will Cure him.

Another.
Take of the Juice of Licoras, London-Treacle, Anniseeds, Turmerick, Fennegreek
and long Pepper, of each an Ounce, beat the hard Simples into powder, then put
to them two Ounces of English Honey, and as much of Sugar Candy, and
incorporate all together, and make thereof Balls as big as Pullets Eggs, and
give him two or three in a Morning Fasting, and give him two new laid Eggs
after them, and at Noon give him a Mash, keep him warm, and do this twice or
thrice.

Another for a desperate dry Cough.
Take a pint of burnt Sack, Sallet-Oyl and red Wine Vinegar, of both a quarter
of a pint, of Fennegreek, Turmerick, Long pepper, and Licoras, of each a
spoonful in powder, and give it him half at one Nostril* and half at another,
and do this twice a Week, and Ride him after it, and let him fast two hours,
and keep his Head and Breast warm.

Another for a Horse that ^ath a Rattling Cold in his Head.
Take a quarter of a pint of Mustard made with White Wind Vinegar, and put to
it more when it is made, another quarter of a Pint, to make it Liquid, then put
to it an Egg well beaten, and two Spoonfuls of Sallet-Oyl, then let it be
lukewarm, and work it very well together till it foams again, and give it him
in three Parts, one down his Mouth, and the other two at each Nostril.

Another for a Cold long Settled.
Take three Heads of Garlic and Roast them in Embers, then mix them with three
spoonfuls of Tarr, as much Powder-Sugar, and half a pound of Hog's Grease, then
with Anniseeds, Licoras, Elecampane, Fennegreek and Cumminseeds made into
Paste, and give as much at once as a Ducks Egg.

Another for a dry Cough or Ro^ten Lungs.
Take Elecampane, the Flour of Brimstone, Licoras, Fennel-seeds, Lins^ed, of
each an Ounce, and of Clarified Honey one pound, work the Powders and those
together, and to a Pint of sweet Wine put two Ounces of these, and give it him
Morning and Evening, and Ride him after it, and let him fast one hour after
Riding.

A Cordial Powd^r for any ordinary Cold, and to prepare a Horse before Travel,
and to Preserve him from Mischief after Travel.
Take of English Licoras, Elecampane Roots, of each an Ounce, of Sugar Candy an
Ounce and a half, and beat them into fine Powder, and ^earce them. Keep it in a
Box, and when you use it for a Cold, give him an Ounce in a Pint of Sack, if it
be in Travel, then give it in sweet Wine or strong Ale; but if in Ale, then
take a quart, and give it both before Travel, and in your Inn, or at home
immediately after Travel.

Another to break a Festered Cold, or dry up Glanders, and to heal the Ulcer
and Ci^ker in the Nose.
Take a Pint of Verjuice, and put to it so much strong Mustard made with
White Wind Vinegar as will make it strong, then take an Ounce of Roch*Allomin
Powder, and as you give this to the Horse, as you fill the Horn, put in some of
the Allom, and give him part at both Nostrils, but esp^cially at that Nostril
that runs most, and ride him after it, and set him up warm, and give no cold
water but with exercise. Thus do diverse Mornings.

If you would see the manner of making those Cordial Balls, which Cure any
violent Cold or Glanders, or for other Diseases; Look in my First Part for
Cordial Balls.


Another for a Cold and Surfeit.
Take two handfuls of Mallows, one of Sellandine, one of Herb of Grace or Rue,
one Pint of Hemp Seed beaten in a Mortar very fine, chop the Herbs, and boil
them in two quarts of Water, to one quart, then put into it a piece of Butter,
and give it him lukewarm, and order him as a Horse should be ordered after
drenching.


Another for a Cold or for any inward Disease.
Take two spoonfuls of Bay salt, two spoonfuls of Eng^ish Honey, two spoonfuls
of Tarr, as much black Soap as a Nutmeg, as much Diapente as will lie upon
Sixpence, and as much Turmerick beaten to Powder, as will work altogether
until the Salt be molten, then fill two Egg-shells with it* and give it him,
cracking the shells a little first, and ride him a little after it, and let him
fast two or three hours after it, then let him eat Hay, after you have first
given him a Mash.


Another.
Take a quart of White Wind Vinegar, four Heads o^ Garlic pilled clean, five
new laid Eggs, set it in a dunghill twenty four hours; then take out the Eggs
and wipe them clean, and strain the Vinegar from the Garlic, and put to it two
spoonfuls of Honey, three Ounces of Treacle of Jeane. These being thus mixed,
give him of it every Morning two Horn-fulls of it, and one Egg so long as it
lasts.


Another.
Take an Ounce of Elecampane beaten to powder, a spoonful of Treacle, a
spoonful of English Honey; put all these into a quart of new Milk, blood-warm.
This use twice a Week till the Cold is gone.


Another.
Take of the Powder of Diapente one Ounce, of the powder of Liquoris one Ounce,
of Aloes beaten to powder half an Ounce, eight Cloves of Garlic bruised and
peeled, and two spoonfuls of Sallet Oil, put all together in a quart of Beer,
and give him them in the Morning fasting, and keep him warm for a day or two
after it.


Another.
Take a quart of New Milk, and a handful of Sellandine with the Roots, Seethe
the Milk, and cut the Sellandine as small as you can, then boil them a little
while together, and put into it a good piece of sweet Butter, and give it him
lukewarm.


Another.
Take an Ounce of Rubarb, half an Ounce of Cassia, half an Ounce of Mirrh, one
penniworth of English Treacle, make them up into three Balls with fresh Butter,
and after roll them in Bran, and give him them fasting.

Another for a Cough or Glanders.
Take a little handful of Box, cut it very small, then take an Ounce of
Liquoris beaten, an Ounce of Anniseeds beaten, boil them all in a quart of Ale
or Beer to a Pint and a quarter, then put a quarter of a Pint of good
Sallet-Oyl, and a quarter of a Pint of Treacle, and give it him all at once,
and ride him moderately a mile or better, keep him warm covered four or five
days, and give him a Mash two hours after the drink, and after five days you
may ride him moderately, and if you find he requires the same Drink again, give
it him.


Another.
Take a handful of Rue, and shred it very small, and boil it in a quart of new
Milk, till a quarter-part be boiled away, then put into it two spoonfuls of
Anniseeds beaten very small, and the like quantity of Licoris, and two
spoonfuls of Treacle, and give it him lukewarm, but put first a piece of sweet
Butter into it. Let him fast two hours after it. Then give him a Mash of good
sweet Malt, and after that Hay.

A Receipt for a dry Husking Cough, which will make him throw out the Filth at
his Nostrils.
Take a whole Head of Garlic, and peel all the Cloves clean, then put them
into a Linen Cloth, and boil them in a quart of Milk till they become tender*
Then take out the Garlic, and squeeze out the substance with the Milk, and put
it a cooling, then put to it a pound of Honey, and half a pound of fresh Butter,
and give it him blood* warm.

Another.
If he Run at Grass, and has got a Cold, and you are minded to Drench him,
take him up over Night, for fear of catching Cold, and give him the Drink the
next Morning, and keep him in the House that day, and if it be warm Weather
turn him out the next, and take him up at Night, and the next day after turn
him out both Nig^^ and Day.


Another.
1. W.
Take Bay Berries, Fennegreek, Elecampane Roots, long Pepper, Licoris,
Anniseeds, Cummin-seeds, about three Ounces of them all beaten very well, and
boiled a little in a quart of strong Beer, then sweeten it with Treacle, and
put a good piece of Butter into it, and give it him lukewarm.


Another.
Take three or four Red Onions soft Roasted, chop and bruise them very small,
and mix them with about two spoonfuls of Mustard, and four spoonfuls of
Sallet*Oyl with these Powders well beaten, viz. Elecampane, Long Pepper,
Licoris and Fennegreek, of each a spoonful, made up into Balls with fresh
Butter, and give him three of them at a time for three Mornings together, and
Ride him after it.


Another.
Mingle as much Tarr, Honey and Powder of Liquoris, of equal parts alike, as
will make two pretty big Balls, and dissolve them in a Pint and a half of
strong Beer, and give him lukewarm, and exercise him after it.


Balls for a Cold.
Take about a quarter of an Ounce of Cloves, one Ounce of the Flowers of
Rosemary or Leaves dried, made into Powder, two Ounces of red Tarr, two Ounces
of Fennegreek, two Ounces of Diapente, two Ounces of Syrup of Coltsfoot, two
Ounces of English Honey, with a little Malt-flower, and work them up into a
Paste, and make Balls of it, and give him two of them at a time Fasting, for
three Mornings together, with exercise after it, and it will Cure him.


Another most excellent for a dry Husking Cough, or Consumption of the Lungs.
Take about three Ounces of the Fat of rusty Bacon, two Ounces of Tarr, one
Ounce and a half of good Honey, and half an Ounce of the Flower of Brimstone,
work all these up together into a stiff Paste, with a little Wheat Flour, and
give him a Ball or two of it for three Mornings together, and rest him two or
three days i^ there be occasion, repeat them again, and it will certainly cure
him.


Another for a Cold Old or New, or for a Cough wet or dry.
Stamp or chop a handful of Herb-Grace or Rue very small, and put to it an
Ounce of the Powder of Anniseeds, with a little of the Flower of Brimstone, and
make it up into Balls with fresh Butter and a little Honey, and give him a
large Ball of it dissolved in a Pint of warm strong Beer every third Morning,
for three Mornings together, and throw down after it two or three Hornfuls of
clear Beer, to take away the ill taste.


Another for a Summer-Cold, or when you find that he does not fill himself, but
looks gaunt and thin.
Dissolve about a quarter of a pound of red Stone-Sugar, in a Pint of Sack,
over the Fire, and when it is indifferent cold, put into it two spoonfuls of
the best Sallet Oil you can get, and give it him lukewarm, and Ride him after
it, and Order him as you do sick Horses, with Mashes, bursten Oats and warm
Water.


Another very good for a Cough of the Lungs.
After you have kept him very sparingly with Meat overnight, give him this
Drink in the Morning lukewarm, with exercise after it, viz. One spoonful of
the Flower of Brimstone, with half so much of the powder of Mechoachan, mixed
with a spoonful of the Syrup of Hore-hound, dissolved in near a quart of strong
Beer or Ale, lukewarm.


The Virtues of it.
It Is a great Enlarger of the Wind, and a Clearer of his Pipes, and drives away
his Cough from the Lungs.


Another for a Cough of the Lungs, strangling in the Guts, and to clear his
Pipes, and to enlarge his Breast.
If you intend your Horse either for Hunting or Running, and that you desire to
free him from those Infirmities above-written; then about a Week before you
design him for these Exercises, give him this ensuing Drench, viz. Two Balls
made up in this manner, Take as much of sweet or salt Butter, as contains the
bigness of a large* Turkey Egg, and mix and bray together with it a quarter of
an Ounce of the powder of Anniseeds, with the like quantity of the powder of
Liquoris, and a little of the Flower of Brimstone; Then divide it into three
equal parts, and hollow every part in the Nature of a Pie, and put into each
part half a spoonful of the Syrup of Hore-hound, and close them up close to
prevent the Syrup from getting ^orth, and they are made.

How you are to give them, and how to Order him after given.
Warm a quart of strong Beer, and fill a Hornfull of it, and put into it one of
your Balls, and throw it down his Throat with two Hornfuls of more Beer after
it, to prevent sticking, and to clear his Passage for the remaining Balls; Give
the rest after the same manner.

Observation.
As Coughs and Colds do generally come by Heats and Colds, so the best way to
send them away packing, is by the same means they came; Therefore I advise you,
that after you have given him his Balls, to Ride him upon a gentle Hand-Gallop
till he sweat, but bring him home cool by Riding him softly a mile or two
before you come home; When he is in the Stable, Tie him up to the empty Rack,
and Cloth and Litter him up warm, and Order him as you do commonly sick
Horses; But in case you find that this Drink has not wrought the wished
effects you expected, then about a Week after give him as you did before the
same Balls again. These Balls are very good to give your Horse a Week before
you turn him to Grass, and a Week after you have brought him home; And if you
give him them three or four times a year will keep him in good and perfect
Health, making him very thriving and Iusty. If this Drink at any time, or any
other, make him sick, Give him a Pint of warm Milk from the Cow, or warmed over
the Fire, and he will be well gain.


Things good in general for broken-Winded Horses.
To sprinkle Water upon all the Hay he eats is good, Maidenhair, ^eos, Ash,
Licoras, Fennegreek, Anniseeds, Cummin, Pepper, bitter ^lmonds, Borage,
Aristolochia, Galingale, Cardamum, Nutmegs, Saf^on, Coloquintida, Cardus
Benedictus, Fluellin, Dragons, Lung wort, ^ngelica, Mullet, Mullen or Horse
Lung-wort, Nettleseed, the Ashes of a Hedgehog strowed amongst his Provender,
Bay Berries, Saffron, Yolks of Eggs, Water, Agrimony, Briony, Lung-wort, which
grows upon rotten Oaks or Beech-Trees, or to let him drink ten days together of
the Water wherein Licoras has been sodden, mixed with Wine, or to let him drink
of the Water wherein has been boiled Cardus Benedictus, Dragons, Elecampane,
Penerial.

Particular Receipts for a broken-Winded Horse.
Take the Guts of a Hedgehog, and dry them and beat them to powder, and give
him two or three spoonfuls thereof in a pint of Wine or strong Ale, then the
rest mix with Anniseeds, Licoras and sweet Butter, and make round Balls or
Pills thereof, and give him two or three after his Drink, and let him fast two
or three hours after. Water-Agrimony is excellent good for it.

Another very good.
Take Wheat-Meal, the powder of Lung-wort, alias Mullet, Gentiana, Anniseeds,
Cummin-seeds, o^ each three drams, make them into fine Powder, and make them
into Paste with Honey and sweet Butter, of ^ach a like quantity, and put to it
the Yolks of two new laid Eggs, make this Paste into Balls, and every Morning
fasting give him three or four of them rolled up in the powder of Elecampane,
and the powder of Licoris, of each alike. These Pills preserve the wind of a
Horse marvellously, and keeps him always in breath.

Another.
Take the Excrements of a sucking Child, and put into it a Pint of white Wine,
let it boil till the one half be consumed, and so give it him blood-warm* This
will cause him to forsake his blowing for fifteen days, so as when he begins
again to blow give him the same Medicine, and so keep him with this from time
to time, as you shall find cause, and by this means you shall have his Wind
good. Put not too much of the Excrement in, for it will make him very sick.

Another, which is the best of all,
Take the leaves of Mullet, alias Mullen, alias Horse Lung-wort; and dry them,
and make them into fine Powder, and make them up in Balls with ordinary Honey;
the bigness of a Pigeons Egg, and give him three at a time fourteen or fifteen
days together, or longer, as you shall see cause, and let him not drink any
cold Water during the time, and let his Exercise be moderate, and his Hay
sprinkled with Water, and his Oats wet with good Ale or Beer, and in short time
he will be well and sound again.

Another very good.

Boars or Barrows dung dried and beaten to Powder, and a spoonful of it, with
aboat two Thimblefuls of the powder of Brimstone put into a quart of warm Milk,
and given him fasting in the Morning for four or five times, resting a day
between each taking, (to recruit his spirits) will very much help if not
altogether cure him. If you find that this Drink does not make him sick, you
may give him a larger Proportion, not exceeding two spoonfuls.

Some of the general Things for this Distemper mixed amongst his Provender,
will further it very much.


Things good in general for shortness of Breath, Pursiness, or Preservers of
the Wind.
Saffron, Wood-bitony. Butter-burr, Coltsfoot, Elecampane, Fennel, Anniseeds,
the ^uice of Sow-Fennel dissolved in Wine, and put into an Egg and given him,
Hore-hound, Juniper berries, Lung-wort that grows upon Oaks or Beeches, which
is a kind of Moss, with grayish tough leaves, Horse Lung-wort, the Roots of
Marshmallows, the Roots of Master-wort, Hedge M^stard-seed; the seeds of
Cow-Parsnips, Pellitory of the Wall, the Juice or Seeds of Purslain, Ro^a Solis
or Sun-dew, Scabeus, the Milk of Sow-Thistles given in Wine or Beer, Vervain,
Antimony, Southern-wood, the Kernels of Grapes, the Blood of a sucking Pig,
Venus Hair, Ireos, Ashen Skies, Fennegreek, Raisins, Pepper, Almonds, Burrage,
Nettle-seeds, Aristolochia, Coloquintida, Powder of Gentian, Nutm^gs, Cloves,
Gallingal, Grains of paradise, Calamint, Hounds-tongue, Filapendula or
Drop-wort, Time, the Root of Valerian boiled with Liquoris, Raisins and
Anniseeds, and given him; Caraway seeds, White Wind and Yolks of Eggs, the
Juice of VVatercresses, Frankincense, a Snake boiled and the Broth given him,
Agarick, Cardamum, Lightwort, Angelica, the green Bark of Elder Tree, red
Mints, red Fennel, primrose leaves, Brimstone, salt Nitre, Balm, Violet leaves,
Hysop, the Lungs of a Fox boiled or laid in Rose water, ordry them and beat
them to powder, and give him them in Beer, or strew them amongst his provender,
Bay Berries, white Hawthorn leaves, the Guts of a Hedgehog dried and beaten to
powder, and boiled in Beer and given, ^or mixed amongst his provender with
Anniseeds and Liquoris, or wet his Hay with water, and his Oats with Ale or
Beer, Oil of Frankincense, Fern Roots, Nightshade, Cassia, Mithridate,
Diacartamus, S^ne, Aloes, French Beans enlarge the Beast much, the powder of
Feather few given him in Ale or Beer, is also very good, etc.

Particular Receipts for shortness of Breath, or Pursiveness, or Preservers of
the Wind.
Take Anniseeds, Liquoris and Sugar Candy, all beaten into very fine powder,
and take four spoonfuls thereof, and brew it well in a pint of white Wine, and
half a pint of Sallet Oil, and use this ever after your Horses Travel, and a
day before he is traveled.

Another.
Take Wheat Flower four pounds, Elecampane and Gentian, of each an ounce,
Anniseeds, Fennegreek, Cummin, Brimstone and Liquoris, of each half a pound,
make them all into very fine powder and s^arced; then put into it of common
English Honey half a pound, and so much white Wine as will make all these into
a Cataplasm. Boil them till they become so thick, that they are fit to make up
into Balls, and give him three or four at a time, for six or eight Mornings
together, use it often, for it will keep him in health, and make him ^ound of
his Body, Wind and Courage. But if you do perceive a Taint in his Wind, then

Take a close ^arth^n Pot* and put thereunto three pints of the strongest Wine
vinegar, and four new laid Eggs unbroken, and four Heads of Garlic clean
pilled and bruised, then cover the Pot very close, and bury it in a dunghill
thirteen hours, then take it up, and take forth the Eggs, and use it as you do
the ^ame Receipt before-recited.

Things good in general for the Glanders.

Cummin seeds, Grains of Paradise, Fennegreek, Diahexaple, Sallet Oil,
Aquavitae, the Bark of Elder, Sugar candy, Garlic, Urine, White Wind, Bay
salt, Liquoris, Anniseeds, Hogs Grease boiled in water, and take the Fat off,
Ginger, Yolks of Eggs, Saffron, Cloves, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Moss boiled in Milk,
Cardamonium, Spikenard of Lavender, Gallingale, Honey, Euphorbium, Pepper,
Brimstone, Spikenard of Spain, Myrrh, Iris Illyrica, Smallage, Penny royal,
Aristolochia, Salt water, Oil of Oats, Tanners Oil. Auripigimentum and
Tussi^aginis beaten into powder, four drams of each beaten with Turpentine, and
make them into little Cakes* then put them upon a Chafing Dish of Coals, and a
Tunnel put over it, so let him take the Perfume of it up his Nose, Agarick,
Gentian, Bay Berries, Hore-hound, Gumma Guiatum, Amber, Coral, Arkanet,
Black-berries, the dust of Oaken Bark, Bramble-leaves, Knot-grass, wild Dazie
Roots, Muscadine Figs, Elecampane, Treacle, Box leaves, Coals of Ashen wood
quenched in Ale, and poured down his Nose.

Particular Receipts for the Glanders.
The first thing that is to be done in this Disease is to let him blood, then
for four or five days together give him scalded Bran, which will dry up his
moist and bad humors abounding in him, and prepare him the sooner for his Cure.
Take Honey as much as will suffice, and mingle it with his Oats, rubbing the
Oats and the Honey together betwixt your Hands, so as the Honey may be very
well mixed with your Oats, continue him with this manner of Feeding Morning and
Evening, till you find him leave Running at the Nose. This Receipt de Gray
declares he has Cured very many Horses with.

Another.
Take Sallet Oil and white Wine Vinegar, of each six spoonfuls, beat them well
together, and put it into both his Nostrils if they both run, and continue this
three Mornings together, and presently after you have given him this Medicine,
you are to put it up into that Nostril that runs, a long Goos feather dipped in
Oil de bay, stirring it up and down in his Nostrils, which will cause him to
sneeze and snuff so, that the viscous corruption which remains in his Head
may void; Keep him warm all the let his Drink be sweet Mashes.

Auother.
Take new made Chamberly, and of the best and strongest white Wine Vinegar, of
each half a Pint, then take of Mustard Seed two or three spoonfuls, and make
Mustard thereof with Vinegar, and let it be very well ground, that done, put
your Vinegar and Chamberly to the Mustard, and stir them well together, then
take of Tarr and Bay Salt* of each alike, incorporate them well together, and
convey so much thereof as three Egg-shells will hold, the Meat first taken
forth; and having first prepared these things, let the Horse be taken forth of
the Stable, (being kept that Night to a very spare Diet,) and ride him first
till he begin to sweat, then give him the three Egg-shells filled with the said
Tarr and Salt, and throw down presently after it a Hornfull of the Chamberly,
Vinegar and Mustard, and a half Horn of it at each Nostril, then ride him again
as you did before, then cloth him warm and litter him well, and let him stand
upon the Trench until three or four of the Clock, then give him a warm Mash,
and order him as you do Horses in Physic. Give him this Medicine every other
or third day three or four times, and you shall find it an infallible Cure.
Before you use this Medicine, you must prepare his Body with Bran prepared, and
after with a Glyster, and your Goose-feathers.

Another.
Take better then two handfuls of the Cankerous Moss, which grows upon an old
Oaken Pale, and boil it in two quarts of Milk to one, then strain it, and
squeeze the Moss well, and give it him lukewarm to drink; then take two
Goose-feathers, and take as much sweet Butter as contains a Wall-nut, and with
the powder of Brimstone finely beaten and s^arced, work them well together with
your Knife, till the Butter be brought to a high Gold Color; Then take two
Feathers, the longest you can get in a Gooses wing; and first at the Quills end
with a Needle fasten two long threads, then with your Salve anoint your
Feathers all over, which done roll them well in the powder of Brimstone, and
thrust them up into his Head, then fasten the thread on the top of the Horses
Head, and ride him abroad for an hour or two, Airing him in this manner Morning
and Evening; and when he has stood a pretty while in the Stable, after you
have brought him home again untie the threads, and draw forth the Feathers, and
wiping them very dry, lay them up till you have next occasion to use them. This
Disease comes not suddenly, but grows out of long process of time, and
therefore the Cure must be done by leisnre; therefore you must continue the
Medicine as your leisure will serve either every day, or at the least thrice a
week, if it be for four or five Months together, and be sure it will in the end
yield your desire.

Another which will Cure any high Running Glanders, called the Mourning of the
Chine.
Take Elecampane Roots, and boil them in Milk till they be soft, that you may
bring them to Pap, then with a Horn give them to the Horse with the Milk
lukewarm, being no more then will make the Roots liquid, and having anointed
your Goose-feathers, use him and ride him as you did before.

Another.
Take of Agri-pigimentum, and of Tussilaginis, beaten into powder, of each four
drams, then beating them with fine Turpentine, bring them into a Paste, then
make them up into little Cakes as broad as a Groat, and dry them. Then lay two
or three of them on a Chafing Dish of Coals, and cover them with a Tunnel, so
that the smoke may come up only at the end thereof, and so without auy loss
ascend up into the Horses Head through his Nostrils, then Ride him till he
begin to sweat, this do once every Morning, before water, till the Running be
stopped, which will be in a very short space, considering the greatness of this
Disease.

Another.
After you have purged him, two days before give him this Drink; Take of
Tanners Owes new made, wherein never came Hides, one pint, of Sallet Oil four
spoonfuls, two Heads of Garlic pilled and bruised, Feathersew and Sellandine,
of each one handful chopped very small, Anniseeds and Licoris, and Bay Berries,
all finely pulverized, of each one spoonful, boil all these a little, and give
it him blood-warm twice a week fasting, and being thus four times drenched,
will be perfectly cured, which seldom or never fails. The best Receipt for this
Disease is in my First Part.

Another.
Take Cummin-seeds, Grains of Paradise and Fennegreek in powder* of each half
an Ounce; of Diahexaple a quarter of an Ounce, beat this in a Mortar with a
quarter of a pint of Verjuice, three spoonfuls of Sallet-Oyl, and two spoonfuls
of Aqua vitae; then put altogether to a quart of old Ale, with a good slice of
sweet Butter, and set it on the Fire till it be ready to boil, then being
lukewarm give it him part at his Mouth, and part at both Nostrils; then ride
him pretty roundly for an hour, and set up warm; let him fast an hour, and if
you perceive Sickness, to grow, give him a pint of new Milk.


Another for the Glander*
Keep the Horse fasting for four or five hours, then give him this Drink here
under written, viz. Ten Cloves of Garlic peeled and bruised, half a handful of
Oaken Moss, and one handful of Pollipody For want of the Leaves ta^e the Root.
of the Oak, boil all these together upon a gentle Fire in three Pints of new
Milk till half be consumed, then strain out the Milk from the Moss and other
Ingredients, and put into it three quarters of an Ounce of the powder of
Elecampane Roots, one Ounce of the Flower of Brimstone, half an Ounce of the
Juice of Spanish Liquoris, and half an Ounce of the powder of Fennegreek well
mixed together; Then take two handfuls of the innermost Bark of green Elder* and
boil it in a quart of Spring water, till more then half be consumed; then
strain it forth and pour it into the other Ingredients* and stir them well
together, and give it him lukewarm, some at his Mouth, and some at his Nose;
exceed not above a pint of it at a time; warm him very well after it, but bring
him home cool, and Cloth and Litter him up warm, and let him fast three or
four hours after it, and Order him as you do sick Horses, with Mashes of Malt,
boiled Oats and white Water, etc.

Observations upon it.
This Disease is very difficult and hard to Cure, and therefore you must not
think that once or twice giving, it will get (...) Conquest over this sturdy
Disease, but it must be the work of a longer time, a Month or more at least,
viz.

Give it him two or three days together, and intermit a day or two between to
recruit his spirits, and so continue it till you have recovered him. But the
best and most certain Receipt for the Cure of this filthy and lothsom Disease,
is by a Receipt at the latter end of the Book, which I Refer you principally
unto, vide The best Receipts for the Cure of the Glanders.

Another to stay it for a time being incurable.
Take the green Bark of Elder, and beat it in a Mortar, and strain it till you
have a pint thereof. Then put that Juice to a pint of old Ale, and warm it on
the Fire with a good Lump of sweet Butter, and an Ounce of Sugar candy, and so
give it lukewarm, ride him after it, and let him fast an hour, and keep him
warm, do thus diverse Mornings. If you are minded to take a general Receipt to
Cure all Colds, Glanders, Heart sickness, and to purge away molten Grease; Look
in the First Part for B^lls Cordial to Cure any, etc.

Things good in General given inwardly to a Hide-bound Horse.
White Wind, Sallet Oil, Venice Turpentine, Mithridate, Loaf sugar, Cassia
prepared, milk of sweet Almonds, Verjuice given him, Muscadine, strong Ale,
Grunfel, Rue, Smallage, Rosemary, Bitony, Gum Dragagant, Garlic, sweet Butter
boiled to a pint and given him three several mornings together, the pint being
divided into three parts, and keep him very warm, and feed him with mashes and
white Water, or Fennel-seeds, Anniseeds, Licoris, Bay Berries, Elecampane,
Fennegreek, Turmerick, all made into fine Powder, infused in Ale and sallet
Oil, given him four mornings together, or Hog's Grease, Dragon-wort, Incense,
syrup of Roses dissolved in Tutsan, and given him Blood-warm, with moderate
Exercise till he sweat.

General outward Applications.
To let him Blood either on both sides the Neck, or on both the side-Veins,
then to take fair Water, mallows, smallage, Rosemary, Bay Leaves boiled in
Water till they be soft* and Bath his Body with it warm, and after he is dried
anoint him with this Ointment, Hog's Grease, Camomil, mallows, Grunsel* smallage
chopped small and boiled in the Grease, and anoint his Body with it, which will
Loosen his skin, or rub him against the H^ir all over, and lay upon him a Sack
well soaked in Water; and ^ers it is well drained a while, lay it upon him, and
over that so many Cloa^^^s as will bring him to a sweat, which will be the best
Cause to restore him, but let him not sweat above an hour at most, and cool
him by degrees.

Particular Receipts for a Hide-bound Horse.
After you have let him Blood, to give him three or four mornings together a
quart of new Milk, with two spoonfuls of Honey, and one Ounce of
London-Treacle, and let his food be warm Grains and Salt, or sodden Barley, or
sweet Mashes.

Another.
First, let him Blood in the Neck-Vein, then give him this Drink, Take two
Handfuls of Sellandine if it be in the Summer, the leaves and stalks will
serve; but if it be in the VVinter, take leaves, stalks, roots and all, chop
them small, then take a Handful of Wormwood, and a Handful of Rue, chop them
likewise, put them all into three quarts of Ale or Beer, and boil them to a
quart, then strain and squeeze the Herbs, and dissolve into it three Quices of
Treacle, and give it him lukewarm, and for a w^ek together, once a day rub the
Horses Body all over with Oil and Beer, or Butter and Beer against the hair,
and seed him with warm Mashes of Malt and Water, and for his Provender let him
have Barley sodden till it begin to break, provided you keep it not until it
sour.

Another.
Take Anniseeds, Licoris, Fennel-seeds, Bay Berries, Elecampane dried,
Fennegreek, Turmerick, of each alike, made into fine Powder, give him two
spoonfuls of this Powder mixed in Ale or Beer one quart, with two spoonfuls of
Sallet-Oyl, and give it him four Mornings together, and the first Morning you
are to give him two spoonfuls of the powder, and the other three Mornings but
one, keep him warm, and order him as a sick Horse, and he will certainly be
Cured.


Things good for a Tired Horse in general, either taken inwardly, or Applied
outwardly.
Powder of Elecampane, Cinnamon, Ginger, Nutmegs, Grains, Cloves, Anniseeds,
Fennel-seeds, Sage, Rosemary, Mint, Ru^, Camomil, Time, half an Ounce of either
of them, or all of them giv^n him in a quart of Beer or Ale, or apply outwardly
to his Back Ar^mart laid under his Saddle, and his Back rubbed therewith, and
if he has any life in him, this will make him go; Or to take three or four
round pebble stones, and put into his Ear, and Tie them fast in, and the noise
of them will make him go; Or to make a hole in the Flap of his Ear, and thrust
a long stick full of Nicks through the same, and to saw and fret him with it,
and while he has any life left him ^e will go, or to The a bunch of Penny
royal to his bit, and it will keep him from Tyring; An Ounce of the Powder of
Bitony mixed with Honey and Vinegar, given him, is very refreshing.


Simples that are good in general, for to comfort the Sinews, Arteries and
Joyn^s, after Travel, Cold or Pain.
A Poultess made of Pellitory of the Wall, with Mallows or Marshmallows,
boiled in the Grounds of strong Beer, with the Flower of Wheat and Bran, and
some Oil of Roses put thereto, and laid upon them hot, restores any bruised
Sinew, Tendon or Muscle to their strength again; A Decoction of Mug-wort with
Camomil and Agrimony, and his Limbs hathed therewith while it is warm, is a
very good help for them; so is the Herb Ladies bread, or the Flower made into a
Bath, and used as before is very good; so is Oaken Moss boiled in the Grounds
of Beer, and applied to them, etc.

Particular Receipts for a Tired Horse.
Take half an Ounce of Elecampane powdered, and give it him in a quart of Ale,
and Tie his Head to the Rack, and Provender him well at Night; Or a bunch of
Pennyroyal Tied to the Bit or Snaffle, is very comfortable to him, and will
cause him to Travel lustily.

Another.
Take the powder of Bay Berries, and mix it with Hog's Grease, and Bath his
Limbs very well with it, does wonderfully refresh him.

Of Purgation and their Uses, vide my First Part.

Scourings in general and in particular, vide my First Part.

Things good in general for a hot Stomach.

Bilberries, Barberries given inwardly, or to wash his Tongue with vinegar, or
to give him cold Water mingled with Vinegar, or to give him Mi^k and Wine
mingled together with some Mel Rosatum, the Decoction of Endive, Grunsel,
Hawkweed, Kidney-wort, Garden Sorrel, Sow-thistles, etc.


Things good in general for a cold Stomach.
Bay Berries, Angelica, Caraway-seeds, Garden Chervil, Clary, Mace, Cinnamon,
Grains of Paradise, Saffron, Pepper, Cloves, Ginger, Elecampane, two drams of
the dried Root of Lovage is good for it.

Particul^r Receipts for the Stomach.
If his Stomach be cold, give him Wine and Oil mixed together, diverse Mornings
together, or other Farriers give Wine Rue, Sage and Oil boiled together, or to
add to the former Compound, white Pepper and Mirrh, or to give him pilled
Onions Chopped, and Rochet-seed boiled in Wine; but to conclude, for general
forsaking and loathing of Meat, proceeding from hot or cold, then give him
Blades of Corn in good quantity.

Things good for a Blood-Spaven.
To Cure it, first shave away the hair on both side; the Swelling so far as it
goes, then take up the Thigh-Vein and let it Bleed well; which done, Tie the
Vein above the Orifice, and let the Vein bleed from below what it will; whereby
the Blood which was Assembled about the Spaven place, is by this means sent
away; Then with your Fleam, or Incision Knife, make two Incisions in the lower
part of the Swelling, and after prick two or three holes in each side of the
Hough where the ^pav^n is, that so the Medicine may take the better effect, and
when the Blood and Water has vented away so much, as it will do, bind ro^nd
about it Plaister-wise the Whites of Eggs and Bolearmoniack very well beaten
together, either upon Hurds or Linen Cloth, and make it fast about the Hough,
to keep on the Plaster; the next day take it off, and wash and Bath the
Sorrance with this Bath, Viz. Take Mallows and the tops of Nettles, and boil
them in water till they be soft, and therewith Bath him. Then take Mallow
Roots, Brancha Ursina* Oil, Wax, and white-VVine, so much as will suffice, and
boil them, and bind this warm to the Sorrance round about the Hough, and sow a
Cloth about it, and so let it remain three days more, and every Morning stroke
it downwards with your hand gently, to the end the bloody Humor may issue
forth, the fourth day Bath and wash it clean with the former Bath. That done,
take Gum Creana and Stone Pitch, of each an Ounce, and of Brimstone a quarter
of an Ounce, made into very fine powder, melt these on the Fire together, and
when it is almost ready to take off, put into it half an Ounce of Venice
Turpentine, and make a Plaster thereof, spreading it upon Leather, and apply
it to the place warm, round about the Hough, and let it remain till it fall
away of its own accord, but if it come off too soon, make another Plaster of
the same Ingredients, and lay to it, which is the best Cure I could ever know
for this Malady.

Another ^or it.
When the swelling does appear upon the inward part of the Hough, take up the
Thigh-Vein, and let it bleed from the nether part of the Leg, till it will
bleed no longer, and after give Fire to the Spaven both long-ways and
cross-ways, and then apply a restringent Charge to the place.

Things good to Cure a Bone Spaven.
Take up the Veins that feed it, (wherher Spaven or Curb) as well below as
above, then give it Fire, then charge the place with Pitch made hot, and clap
Flax upon it, then four days after you must dulcifie the Sorrance with the Oil
Pampilion, and fresh Butter molten together upon a gentle Fire, and when the
Scar shall be fallen away, apply unto it a kind of stuff which is called Blauco
or white, made of Jessoe, and so continue it until it be whole.

Another.
Take the Root of Elecampane well cleansed, and lap it in a Paper and roast it
soft, and after you have rubbed it and chafed it well, clap it on and bind it
on hard, but not so hot as to scald away the Hair, and at twice dressing it
will take it away, or if you anoint the place with Oil of Origanum Morning and
Evening, it will take it away. This is good for Curb, Spaven, Ring-bone, or any
Bony Excression.

Another.
Upon the top of the Excression; make a slit with your Knife the length of a
Barley-corn or more, then with a fine Cornet, raise the Skin from the Bone, and
hollow it round the Excression, and no more then dip some Lint in the Oil of
Origanum, and thrust it into the hole and cover the knob, and so let it bridle
till you see it rot, and that Nature casts out both the Medicine and Core.


Another to aba^e the Pain of the Bone Spaven.
Take two penniworth of the Oil of Camomel, and two penniworth of the Oil of
Turpentine, and mix them well together in a Glass Viol, and anoint the place
grieved with it.


Another.
Take a Pint of Anniseed water, and put into it one Ounce of Household Pepper
beaten to powder, with an Ounce of Roch Allom, and boil them together to the
Consumption of one half; then strain it and put it into a Class to keep for
your use, and apply it once or twice a day, when you have occasion.

Another for it, which will not only take that away, but also a Splint, Curb*
Ring-bone, or any Bony Excression.
The up the Horses Head, for ^ear of biting it away.
First, clip away the hair as far as the Excression goes, and a little more,
then take a piece of Allum'd Leather, made as big as the place you have Cured;
then take a little Shoo makers Wax and spread round about the very edge, or
verge of the same, leaving all the inward part empty and not touched with the
Wax; Then take the Herb Spear-grass, or Spear-wort, which has the virtue to
raise Blisters, and bruising it, lay some thereof upon the Leather in the empty
place, and bind it ^ast thereon, suffering it so to lie, (if it be in the
Summer time, when When you take off the P^aister, anoyn^ the place with Train
Oil (...).
the Herb has his full strength,) near half a day; but if it be in the Winter,
then it is not amiss (to renew the strength of the Herb) if you add to it a
drop or two of the Oil of Origanum and let it lie half a day fully, and be sure
to tie up his Head, for fear of biting it away; when you take away the Herb,
rab the place well, and anoint it with Train Oil varm, or else lay^on a
Diminium Plaster. But because this Dis^ase is not easily to be Cured, unless
you see some skilful Farrier do it before you; I shall show you therefore for
the prevention thereof (when you find a Swelling begin to arise) what you shall
use.

Take Natural Balsom, and having first shaved away the Hair, anoint the place
with it for two or three days, and after you shall repress the humors with
this Charge. Take three Ounces of the Oil of Roses, Bolearmoniack one Ounce,
Wheat Flour half an Ounce, and the white of an Egg; make all these into one
Body, and every day after you have anointed it with Balsom, lay on the said
Charge.

Things good in general for to take away a Splint,
Oil of Vitriol, unslackt Lime, Oil of Origanum, an Elecampane Root roasted and
laid to it, Oil of Peter, Spear-Grass, alias Spear-wort, Verdegrease,
Oyl-de-bay, Powder of Mercury, powder of Arsnick, ^row-foot, laid to it, etc.

Particular Receipts to Cure a Splint.
After you have washed the place and shaved away the hair, as you must do in
the Cure of all Splints and Bony Excressions. Knock and rub it with your blood
staff, or a Hazel-stick, then prick it with your Fleam; Then take Vervain and
Salt of each a handful, pound them together to an Ointment and apply it to the
place, and bind it up with a Rowler, and stitch it on fast, and let it so
remain twenty four hours, and then unbind it and it is cured.

Another,
Take Nerve Oil one Ounce, Cantharides the weight of six pence, and as much of
the Oil of Vipers, boil them easily, then anoint the Splint, with this cross
the hair and heat it in with a hot Iron, then Tie up the Horses Head to the
Rack for twenty four hours, then squeeze out the Corruption, and do this twice
or thrice.

For a Splint, and to dry up Wind-Galls.
First, heat the Sorrance with a hot pressing Iron, then vent it in several
places with your Fleam, then take a spoonful of salt, half a spoonful of Nerve
Oil, a penny weight of Verdegrease, and the white of an Egg, beat all to a
Salve, and dipping Flax Hurds* therein, apply it to the Grief.

Another to take off a Splint.

Take of the Oil of Vitriol, and dip a stick or feather into the Glass, and
touch the place with it, and it will eat it away. If you find it eat too much,
you may stop it by bathing it with cold water; Or if you boil some green
Copperas in water, and wash the sore with it, it will not only cleanse the Sore
from any piece of the remaining Splint, but soon heal it up likewise.


To take away a Splint and leave no Scar behind.
Take a red Hazel stick about the bigness of your Thumb, about a quarter of a
yard long, and after you have beaten and knocked the Splint very well with it,
then take and cut one end of it very smooth, and stick a Needle into the pith
of it, leaving so much of the point of it out as will prick through the Skin,
pricking it full of holes, then take some of the Oil of Peter, and rub all over
it, and bath it in with a hot Fireshovel, and do thus four or five days
together, and it will cure it.

Another.
First, wash the place with warm water, and shave away the hair, then slit a
Hole in the skin more then the length of a Barley-corn, and then convey into
the Hole so much Arsnick in the fourth part of a Hazel-Nut, and bound on with a
Bolster and Rowler of Linen, and made fast with a Needle and Thread, and so
let it remain for three whole days and Nights, in which time the Arsnick w^^l
eat and corrode clean away the Splint, then to kill the Fire anoint the place
with sweet fresh Butter eight or ten days after, being first molten, and it
will be whole.

Another.
Take the Root of Elecampane well washed and cleansed, and lap it in a brown
Paper, wet it and roast it in the hot Embers, as you do a Warden; then after
you have rubbed and cha^ed the Excression bind it fast on, but not so hot as to
scauld away the hair, this will consume it away in two or three dressings; or
if you anoint the Splint with the Oil of Origanum, Morning and Evening, it will
take it away, but not presently.

Observation.
You must stay the falling down of new humors to the place troubled, by
binding Plasters, as Pitch, Rozin, Mastick, red Lead, Oil, Bole-armon^ack, and
such like, then to draw forth matter, which is gathered with drawing Simples,
as Wax, Turpentine, and such like; And lastly, to dry up the Relics with
drying powders, as Honey and Lime, Oystershells, Soot and such like; and also
you must know, that all Splints, Spavens or Knobs, must either be taken away at
the beginning, or after the full of the Moon.

Another Receipt to take off a Splint, which though it seem difficult, yet de
Gray declares that he has taken off more then 100 Splin^s.
Take two Heads of Garlic and peel them, and cut them small, and do neither
stamp nor bruise them; then take the like quantity of Salt, and mix with them,
and divide them into two equal parts, and put them into two fine Linen Clouts,
and bind them upon the ends of two sticks, about a foot in length, of the
fashion of two short wooden foyls, but not so long, being not above twelve
inches a piece; Take then your Blood-stick, and rub, knock and beat the splint
therewith very well, to soften it, then prick it through the skin with your
Blood-staff and Fleam, then take of the Oil of Nuts one pint, and put it into a
small Pipkin, and set it upon the Fire with a Chasing-dish of Coals, and make
it boiling hot, and when it is ready to boil put in your short sticks or
^oyles, which has the Garlic and Salt fastened unto them, and first with the
foyl, and then with the other, (I mean by turns) apply them hot to the Splint,
and between whiles rub and stroke the Splint downwards with your Thumb, whereby
to bring forth the Blood, till having with the foyls very well mollified the
said Splint, you may the more easily crush forth the Blood whereof the Splint
is engendered and formed* and thus it is cured, only you must remember to anoint
the place two or three times after with sweet or fresh Butter.

Things good in general for a Curb.
Oil of Vitriol, Arsnick, Verdegrease, an Elecampane Root roasted and laid to
it, an Onyon roasted with unslackt Lime and laid to it, Mercury, Turpentine,
Nerval, green Gopperas, Tartar, etc.

Particular Receipts to Cure a Curb.
First, shave away the hair, then bind the Hough strait above the Joint, then
with a small stick beat, rub and Cha^e the Curb, like as you do in the Cure of
a Splint, then pierce the skin with your Fleam in two or three places, and so
with your Thumb thrust forth, and crush out the corrupt Blood, and after convey
so deep as you can get, into every hole, the bigness of two Barley corns of
Arsnick, and so bind up the place, and let it remain for the space of twenty
four hours, then open the place, and anoint it every day with fresh Butter
till it be whole; Oil of Vitriol used as you do to take away a Splint, will
take off a Curb also.

Note, that whatsoever Cures the Splint or Spaven Cures the Curb also.

Another Receipt.
Take White Wind Lees one Pint, a Porringer-full of Wheat Flower* of Cummin in
fine powder half an Ounce, mix all these well together, and being made warm
upon the Fire, charge the place therewith, renewing it once for three or four
days together; and when the swelling is almost gone, draw it with your hot
Iron, and charge the Burning with Pitch and Rosin molten together, which must
be applied warm, to the end the Charge may stick on the better, then presently
clap on Flox, and let it remain until it fall away of it self, and let it come
in no wet or water for the space of fourteen days.

Another.
Take a Bar of Iron, heat it red hot, and hold it near to the place till it
become warm, then with your Fleam prick six or seven holes through the skin,
and anoint the Sorrance with Nerval; then take a spoonful of salt, and a penny
weight of Verdegrease in ^ine powder, with the white of an Egg, incorporate
them well together, and wet some Flax in this Medicine, and bind it to the
place, renewing it every day once, and in a short time he will be perfectly
^u^ed. Or to ^alcinate Tartar, and dissolve it in water, and congeal it like
Salt, and mingle it with Soap like an Ointment, and dress it therewith, and
this will in forty hours heal any Mules, Pains and Scratches whatsoever.

Things good for the Mules, vide Scratches.

Things good for the Pains, vide Scratches.

Things good for Kib'd Heels, vide Scratches.

Things good for Crepances and Rats-tails, vide Scratches.

What Cures the Scratches Cures all these Diseases.

Things good in general for the Scratches.

These things boiled in Hogs Grease and Train-Oyl, viz. Tarr, white Lead,
Bol^armoniack, Verdegrease, green Copperas, Alum, Briumstone, Briar apples all
beaten to powder; the powder of Galls, Rue, Rosemary, Gunpowder, burnt
Oyster-shells, ^urpentine, Ginger, Red Herrings chopped small, Elecampane, etc.
or Lyme, Honey, Bay Salt, Urine, Vinegar, the Sperm of Frogs, Pepper, Garlic,
Mastard, Plantain, Rib-wort, Sage* Tobaccho, Elder, Mans-dung, Burr-dock roots
and Snails is good for them, etc.

Observations how to Order him in this Disease.
You are to take notice that in all the Cures of the Scratches, you must keep
his Legs from wet during the Cure, and likewise you must clipaway his hair from
off his heels very close, or else that will poison his Leg. And likewise before
you dress him with any of the Receipts following, you must scrape off his Scabs
first, and wash off the Blood that follows them with Chamberly and Salt, or
Brine.

When you have dressed him with any of the Receipts following, wash it clean
off with scalding Chamberly and Salt, or scalding Brine, before you dress him
again.

Particular Receipts for the Scratches.
Take brimstone, and make it into fine powder, and mix it with sweet Butter,
and anoint him therewith once a day.

Another.
Take unslackt Lyme, Salt and Soot, of each alike, all made into fine powder,
boiled in the strongest White Wind Vinegar you can get, till it be as thick as
a Poultess, then soften it with tried Hog's Grease, and so work it to an
Ointment, and anoint the places grieved till they be cured

Another.
Take the tender tops of Elder-buds, and the berries of the Brambles while they
be red, and before they be ripe, of each a handful, boil them in two quarts of
Wort, and put to it the quantity of an Egg full of Allom, and wash the Sorrance
very hot twice a day,

Another.
Take Verdegrease and make it into fine powder* and work that and common Honey
together, till they come to an Ointment, anoint the Sorrance with it, and it
will Cure them.

Another.
Take tried Hog's Grease and Gunpowder, of each as much as will suffice,
incorporate your Gunpowder very well with it, after it is well beaten to
powder, and anoint the place grieved with it once a day.

Another.
Take Honey, Verdegrease, Brimstone bruised small, green Copperas and Bay Salt,
of each a like quantity, boil all these with a double quantity of Hog's Grease,
and put to it a big Root of Elecampane, bruised in red Wine-Vineger, apply this
to the Sore very hot, and supple them by Bathing them with new Milk from the
Cow.

Another.
Take a hundred and twelve Snails, and put them in a Linnen-bag, and put to
them a handful of Bay salt, and hang them against the heat of the Fire, and
catch the Oil that shall drop from them, and keep it close in a Glass, and
chafe it into his Leg; when he is dry, and three or four Dressings will Cure
him. This must be made in May.

Another.
Take the spawn of Frogs, and distill it, and keep the water close stopped in a
Glass for your use, and wash and bath the places with it every day warm, and it
will cure him.

Another.
Take Honey and Pepper made into very fine Powder, and boil them together, and
anoint the Sorrance therewith, and they will soon heal and dry up.

Another for them being held incurable.
First, let him blood in the Shackle-Veins, the Spu^-Veins, and the fore
Toe-Veins, only let it be three days between the bleeding of the one Toe and
the other, then with a Thumb-Rope of Hay, rub the Sores till they be raw and
bleed* then take a quart of old Urine, and a quart of strong Brine, and put to
them half a pound of Allom, and boil it to a quart. With this hot wash the
Sores well, then take the Sperm of Frogs (in March) and put it into an earthen
pot, and in a Weeks time it will look like Oil, then take the Oil and the round
things you see in the Sperm, and spread it on a Cloth, and bind it to the
Sores, and do this diverse times.


Another.
A Piece of Bread sod in Vinegar to a Poultiss, and laid to them, will draw out
the cores, then take half an Ounce of Verdegrease, as much Brimstone in
quantity and bigness, not in weight, and as much Honey as will fill an
Egg-shell, boil them together till they look black, and anoint the sore places
with it, and this will heal them and c^re them; or Sees three or four Ounces
of Brimstone in a quart of White Wind Vinegar, till a fourth part be wasted,
and with a Clout put upon the end of a stick wash the sore Legs therewith as
hot as your Horse can endure it, the Hair being first cut close, and the sore
places and chops of his Heels made as clean and dry as you can.


Another.
Take two Ounces of green Copperas, and beat it to Powder, then take half a
pound of English Honey, and half a pound of black Soap, an Ounce of burnt
Oyster-shells, an Ounce of beaten Brimstone, boil them altogether to a Salve,
and anoint your Horses Heels with it cold.


Another.
Take two quarts of strong Ale, a Pint of old Malaga sack, a Handful of dried
Rosemary beaten to powder, a handful of dried red Sage, two handfuls of dried
Bay* leaves, and half a pound of Allom, boil them altogether till it be half
consumed, then strain it, and when you use it anoint your Horses Feet with it
every day warm till they be whole; Keep, him in the Stable during the Cure.

The Mirror of all Medicines for the Scratches, which never yet failed to Cure
them, though their Legs were as big as two Legs, and though they Run never so
much at the Heels, provided you follow these Directions; First, to draw Blood
from him, and a Week after to give him these Balls, which will Purge away the
evil Humors out of his Body.

The ^urge.
If he be a strong bodied Horse, and of a good stature, you may give him an
Ounce and a half of the best Aloes you can get, and pound it to a very ^ine
powder, then put some Butter to it, and word and mix it very well together with
your Knife, then divide it into three parts, and cover every part of them over
again with fresh Butter, and make them as big as a good Wash-Ball, then fasting
in the Morning give him them upon the point of a stick, and ride him a little
after it to warm them in his boyd, which will make them work the better, then
bring him into the Stable and keep him warm, and let him fast two or three
hours after it; then give him his Mash of Malt, and let him eat a little Hay,
and so ride him softly after that. After you have given him his Balls, put down
a Hornful or two of warm Beer after them. If you find him purge too much, so
that it takes him quite off his Stomach, give him two or three wild Briar
balls beaten to powder in a quart of warm Beer, and it will soon stay him; or
for want of them, boil some Cinnamon, Pepper, Nutmegs, Ginger and Bay Berries
in it. But if you find that he will not purge at all, which is very unlikely;
then ride him to some green Corn that is not Eared, (or for want of that some
four Grass) and let him ^eed thereon about a quarter of an hour, then ride him
gently home, and set him up warm, and you shall find him purge very kindly
without any danger.

The Receipt for the Scratches.

After you have thus purged him, clip off the Hair as close from his Heels as
you can, then scrape off all the scabs till they bleed, and wash them with
Brine, or Chamberly and Salt scalding hot. Then take a quarter of a pound of
Brimstone, half a quarter of a pound of green Copperas beaten to Powder, or a
quarter of a pound of Goose-grease, a penniworth of Tarr, boil all these
together in a very large Pipkin, or else they will boil over; let them boil
about a quarter of an hour, then take a Rag and Tie it to a stick, and dip it
into it, and put it all over the raw Places scalding hot, and dress it every
other day; making his Feet first clean by washing off the stuff with scalding
Brine, or Chamberly and Salt, and the Scabs picked off, and in three or four
Dressings it will Cure them, be they never so bad, provided you keep him out of
the Water during his Cure. If you find his Legs not very much swelled you need
not purge him.


Another very good, but not so certain, but more proper for the Killing and
shealing of all manner of Scabs growing about a Horses Legs.
After you have Clipped off the Hair of his Legs very close, and rubbed off the
Scabs with a Thumb-Rope of Hay, and washed them with scalding Chamberly and
Salt, or with scalding Brine, and when he is dry anoint him with this Ointment
here under written; When you come to use it mix with it as you use it, some
Oil of Turpentine, for it will be much the better. It Is this, take a pound of
tried Hogs Grease, with a quarter of a Pint of ^rain Oil, and boil these things
in it very well after they are beaten to fine powder, viz. Dyer-Galls five, of
Verdegrease, Bolearmoniack, green Copperas, Alum, Brimstone, two wild
Briar-Balls, a Red Herring chopped small, throe or four sprigs of Rosemary, and
as many of Rue, mix them as equally as you can, (I mean the rest of the
Ingredient^,) only Brimstone excepted, which you should have most of, about
half a pound weight of all of them together is enough. After your Hog's Grease
is melted, and the rest of the Ingredients boiled for some time in it, then put
in two or three penniworth of Tart, and boil that with it, which will take away
the ill Sent of all the rest of the Ingredients; when you have well boiled it,
strain it out into a Pot, and keep it for your use.

Observation upon it.
When you dress his Legs with it, anoint him well with it overnight, and rub
it off with a Thumb-Rope of Hay the next Morning very easily, for this Ointment
will sheal them off extraordinarily, then wash it with scalding Brine, and at
Night anoint him again with the same Ointment, keep him dry during the Cure.


Another that Cures not only the Scratches, but also all rotten and broken
Cuts, and pu^rified Sinews.
After you have Ordered him, as in Observations how to Order him in this
Disease; take half a pound of English Honey, one Ounce of black Pepper beaten,
about thirty Cloves of peeled Garlic, bruise and mix them very well together
in a wooden Bowl, or Stone Mortar, till they come to a Salve, and apply it to
the grieved place spread upon a brown Paper, doubled two or three times double,
and put over that a Linen Cloth, sowed fast to keep it from coming off; Bind
also over that a Thumb band of wet Hay, and about two or three days after take
all off, and make clean the grieved place very well with warm Beef-Broth; Do
this three or four times after this manner, and it will certainly Cure them,
conditionally you give him a Drench or two of the Drink that is called, A Drink
to Cure the most malignant Farcy that is.

The Virtues of this Salve.
It will not only kill this Disease, but also draw, cleanse and knit Sinews
together in a very strange and wonderful manner.


A most Excellent Water, not only good for this Infirmity, but also for sore
Heels, Sellender or Mallender, and to cleanse and heal any Wound or Sore, by
drying up the evil Humor that abounds therein.
After you have boiled a quart of Conduit or Spring Water, and scummed off the
filth that shall arise on the top, take it off the Fire, and put it up into a
Bottle, with two Ounces of white Copperas* and three Ounces of the powder of
burnt Alum; When you use it, shake the Glass to make it all alike, and apply
it warm to the place grieved, and wrap a Linen Rag dipped in Water about the
Mallender three or four times double. This Water will keep many years, for the
Older it is, the better.

Things good in general for Foundring.
First, pare all his Soles so thin, that you may see the quick, then let him
Blood at every Toe, and let them Bleed well; then stop the Vein with Tallow and
Roz^n, and having Tackt hollow Shoes on his Feet, stop them with Bran, Tarr
and Tallow as boiling hot as may be, and renew it once in two days for a Week
together, then exercise him much, and his Feet will come to their Use and
Nimbleness, or after he is pared thin, and let Blood at his Toes, stop his Feet
with Cowes-dung, Kitchins Fee, Tarr and Soot Boiled together, and poured
boiling hot into them. If you Travel your Horse, you must stop him with it
cold, and add unto it the white of an Egg or two, for that will take away the
heat of the former days Journey. Or to stop his Feet with Tow dipped in an
Ointment made of Turpentine, Sallet-Oyl, Verdegrease, Wax and Hog's Grease; If
he be newly Foundred, give him with a Horn a Pint of fair Water with a handful
of Salt in it; but if you stay three or four days, or longer, then give him of
Hellebore a spoonful, of Saffron a penniworth, of Ass^foetida and of Soap of
Venice two drams, a little of the Seed of Bay, all made into Powder, and given
him in a Pint of Vinegar blood-warm, and cover him with a wet Cloth, and Cloth
him warm, and Tie him up to the Rack, that he neither lie down nor Vomit, and
let him Sweat an Hour, and cool him by degrees.

Particular Receipts for the Cure of a Foundred Horse.
For a Horse Foundred in his Feet, let him Blood in the Neck, Breast and Spur
Veins, and take two quarts of Blood from him, with which make this Charge as
follows, Take the Blood and put into it eight new laid Eggs, shells and all,
beat them well together, and put to it half a pound of Bolearmoniack beaten to
powder, strong White Wind Vinegar one Pint, Sanguis drac^nis three Ounces in
fine powder, make this up with Wheat-Meal good and thick, with this Charge his
Back, Reins, Breast, Thighs, Fetlocks and Soles, and spread two Clothes
Plaister-wise, good and thick, and apply them to the Coffin of his Feet, and
bind the sore-Legs about the Knees good and straight, with broad Filleting or
Lists, then ride him two hours upon a hard way, which if it be Paved or Pitched
it is the better, his Feet being Pared reasonable near beforehand, and when
you do bring him into the Stable, let his Feet he stopped with this Charge*
Take Rye or Wheat-Bran, Ox or Cows-dung, Sheeps Suet, or Turpentine, (which
must be put in last) Mince your Sheeps Suet small, melt and heat all these upon
the Fire, stirring them very well, then put in your Bran to make it into a
stiff Paste, then put in your Turpentine and incorporate them all very well
together, and stop your Horses Feet with it, which being thus charged and
stopped three or four days together, ridden and kept warm, and not suffered to
drink cold water, but either Mashes or white Water, he will be sound in four or
six days If it be a dry Foundered by standing too long in the Stable, then Pare
him somewhat near, and let him Bleed well in the Toe Veins. Then take Eggs, and
roast them blew hard, and together with the Powder of Cummin stop his Feet
therewith so hot, as they may be taken out of the Embers, and put over the
Soles a piece of Leather, with Splints cross, to keep the Eggs from coming out.

Take then a great Onion, peel and stamp it, and let it inf^se twenty four
hours before in the strongest White Wind Vinegar you can get, and give it the
Horse presently, after you have stopped the Horses Feet, and cover him up warm,
and let him stand upon the Trench three hours, and then give him Meat and
white Water.

Another for Foundering a Month or more.
You must take out the Soles of his Feet, and have in a readiness these Things,
Viz. Take the tender tops of Hysop three handfuls, pound them together in a
Mortar to stench his Bleeding, then have this Receipt in a readiness.

Take Snails in the shells, and take them forth and reserve them, then take a
handful of Bay Salt, and two or three handfuls of the tender tops of the
angriest Nettles you can find, beat them with your Snails and Salt to a Salve,
then take out the Sole, and stench the bleeding with your Hysop, and when it
leaves Bleeding, apply this Medicine to it, and bind it up with Clothes, and
let it remain twenty four hours, then open it and heal it up with your green
Ointment, which you may find in my First Part, and in two days you shall see a
new Sole coming. But if he be but Hough-bound, then take Turpentine and Sheeps
Suet, of each half a pound, Wax a little, Sallet-Oyl half a Pint, boil
altogether, but put in the Turpentine last, and as they boil keep them with a
continual stirring, and anoint his Houghs once a day well.

For ^n ordinary Heat in his Feet.
Take Wheat-Bran and Hog's Grease, and make them into a Poultess, and apply it
as well to the Coffin as the Soles, and it will be well again.

Another for a Founder or Frettize wet or dry.
First, pare thin, open the Heels wide, and take good store of Blood from the
Toes, then Tack on a Shoo somewhat hollow, broad at the Heels, and the inside of
the Web, from the first Nail to the Heel turned inward toward the Frog, yet
not to touch any part thereof, or the Hough, so as he may tread on the
out-Verge of the Shoo, and not on the inward. Then take Burgundy Pitch, or
Frankincense, and Rolling it in a little fine Cotton-Wooll or Bombast, with a
hot Iron melt it into the Foot, betwixt the Shoo and the Toe, till the Orifice
where the Blood was taken be filled up; then take half a pound of Hog's Grease
and melt it, and mix it with Wheat-Bran till it be as thick as a Poultess, then
boiling hot stop up his Feet with it, then cover it with a piece of an old
Shoo, and splint it up, and so let him stand for three or four days, then if
occasion serve you may renew it, otherwise the Cure is wrought.

Observations on the Cure.
First, You shall not need to Remove or stir his Shoes, then after twenty four
hours rub off the Charge from his Back.

It. Take away his Gart^rs after twelve hours, and rub his Knees and Houghs
with your Hand, and with Wisps to take away the Numbness.

It. If you cannot get Wheat-Meal, take Oat-Meal.

It. If he will not Bleed in the Veins before-named, then bleed him in the
Neck-Vein.

Lastly, if you take him in Hand to Cure within twenty four hours after he is
Founded, he will be Cured in twenty four hours, but if he go longer the Cure
will be longer in doing.

Now if he be Foundred through streightness of his ^ho^e, which is not a
Founder but a Fr^ttizing* which is a degree less then Foundering. Then let him
Blood on the ^oes, and stop the place with bruised Sage, and tack his Shoo on
again, and stop it with Hog's Grease and Bran boiled together, as hot as
possible you can, and do this twice in a Fortnight* and give him rest and it
will help him.


An odd kind of Receipt to Cure a Foundred Horse,
Ride him so hard as to Sw^at, then Ride him up to the Knees in Water, and
there let him stand about half an hour* which will cause the humor to ascend
out of his Feet into his Body, then an hour after you come home, give him a
thorough Scouring, and ride him gently after it, and so bring him home, and
Cloth him up warm, and this will carry it out of his Body again. Probatum, by
Mr. Goodman. Give him the Purge as aforesaid.


Another for the taking out of his Sole.
If you find that none of the Receipts for this Disease, have had their wished
Effects in Order to his Cure, then follow these Directions for the taking out
of his Soles, and though it be not the common way that is practiced amongst our
Smiths, yet it is looked upon to be the best and safest; It Is this, First, The
about his Pastern a List or Cord so hard, as will keep up the Blood into his
Leg, that it fall not down to trouble you, then pare the Foot thin, and cut the
Hough round with your Incision Knife to the quick, as near to the inside of the
outward shell of the Hough as you can raise the ^ole at the Toe, then take hold
of it with a pair of Pinchers, and pluck it gently upwards toward the Heel,
for fear of breaking the Vein in the Foot. When you have so done tack on the
Shoo again somewhat hollow and broad, then untie the Cord, and knock round the
Hough with a Blood staff, and the Blood will descend very freely, which when
you think he has bled enough, stanch it with two or three hand^uls of Hysop
bruised with Salt, and put over it Flox Hurds or Tow, and over them a piece of
stiff Leather between the Hurds and the Shoo, to keep them in; Or you may put
two or three flat sticks, cross them in the room of the Leather; About twenty
four hours after or more, take away the Flox or Hurds, and bruise a handful or
two of the angri^st red Nettles you can get with Bay Salt, and apply them, and
cover them over with the Hurds and Splinters as you did before; About a Month
after or more open it again, and new dress it with Salt and Hog's Grease well
bruised and mixed together, and splint it up as you did before with Tow or
Flax, or some such like thing. Contrive this last Medicine during his Cure,
which will be perfected in two or three times dressing more at farthest; If you
find him somewhat sound, tack on a Shoo with a broad Web, and let it stand wide
and easy, and in twelve or thirteen days he will be fit to Ride an easy
Journey; When you Ride him at any time, when you bring him home at Night, apply
all over his Foot, both inside and outside, a Poultess made of about four
Ounces of Sheeps Su^t cut small, and White Wind Vinegar boiled together, and
keep it on with Hurds and Splints as you did before; Let this remain about
forty eight hours or more. This last Poultess used three or four times will
very much strengthen his Hough, and make him stand again.

Directions for the Ordering of him.
1. To let Blood, and keep him in during his Cure.

2. If he be Foundred of both his Fe^t, take not out both his Soles together,
for then he will not be able to stand, nor Rise when he is down.

3. Some Smiths do take out the Frush and Sole, and some but only the Sole;
your often Practice in this Cure will be the best Directer.

4. The common way of taking out of Soles is known by every Country Smith.

5. The Poultess that I Ordered to be last applied to the Sole and Coffin of
the Foot, i^ very good applied to it when it has been bruised by stub, stone,
or any other Accident.


A other for the Foundring in the Chest.
About five or six penniworth of the Oil of Peter, with the like quantity of
Ale or B^er mixed with it, and well rubbed in with your Hand, holding a hot
Fire shovel at the same time before it, while you are doing it, is a very good
help in order to his Cure. If you intend to have the right Oil of Peter, do not
stint your self in the pric^ of it, for if you do they will mix Oil of
Turpentine with it.

Things good in general for the Mallender and Sellander.
You are always in these Diseases first to wash and shave away the Hair, and
rub the Sorrance with a Wisp till it be raw, and dry up the yellow Matter that
comes out of it, before you apply any thing to it.

What Cures the Scratches will Cure this Disease.
Gunpowder bruised in Hog's Grease, and anoint the Grief therewith, a soft
Rowed Herring out of the Pickle, beaten with Soap and Allom, and laid to it,
and renewing it for three days together, and pluck off the Scabs before you lay
it on again, Hens dung and Gilly*Flowers beaten together, or Soap and Lyme laid
to it, or the Dung of a Man, or Sulphur, Vitriol, Salt-n^tre, Sal* gam^e mixed
with Oil de bay, or green Copperas, Alum and Tobaccho boiled in Urine, or Oil
of Turpentine, Oil of Hemp Seed, Mustard, Verdegrease, etc.

Particular Receipts for the Cure of these Diseases.
Take Glovers shreds which he cutteth from his white Leather, and boil them in
white-VVine Vinegar till they be soft, and bind this to it hot, and if you find
that in once or twice dressing it take not away the Scurf or Scab, renew it
daily till it does, for by this means the Roots of the bristly Hairs which grow
in it, which feeds the Mallender will be taken away by this Receipt, which
will cause it soon to be Cured.


Another.
To anoint the Sorrance with the Oil of Turpentine, will both kill and heal it,
and make it mavelous sound. And this will likewise Cure the Scratches.

Another.
Take an Ounce of Gunpowder, bruise it to dust and mix it well with
Hog's Grease and Allom, and cha^e it in well, two or three dressings will Cure
it*

Another.
Take Verdegrease and soft grease and grind them well together to an Ointment,
put it in a Box by it self. Then take Wax, Hog's Grease and Turpentine, of each
alike, and being melted together, put that Salve into another Box; and when you
come to dress the Sore, after you have taken off the Scab, and made it raw,
anoint it with your green Salve of Verdegrease and fresh Grease, only for two
or three days. It is a sharp Salve, and will kill the Cankerous humor, then
when you see the Sore look fair, you shall take two parts of the yellow Salve,
and one part of the green Salve, and mix them together, anoint the Sore
therewith till it be whole, making it stronger or weaker, as you shall find
occasion.

Another.
Take of the strongest white-VVine Vinegar, and boil it, and so boiling hot,
rub the Mallender there with twice every day until it do bleed, that done, put
upon it the powder of Verdegrease good and thick, and so bind it on with a
Clout, and let it so remain till a Crust come thereon, and when you shall find
the Crust to be dry, and withal to Chop, anoint the grieved places with tried
Hog's Grease, and that will cause the Crust to fall off.


Another.
After you have rubbed off the Scabs, and washed it well with scalding
Chamberly and Salt, anoint it with this Salve made of green Copperas, Galls,
Verdegrease, Gunpowder and Allom, all made into fine powder, and made up in
Hogs grease and Tarr.

Things good in general to eat away proud Flesh.
Ink, quick Sulphur, Orpiment, Lethergy, unslackt Lyme, Roch Allom, Galls,
Soot, Verdegrease, green Copperas, white Copperas, Precipitate, the Juice of
Borage, Scabius, Fumitary, a little Oil and Vinegar boiled with a soft Fire,
and put to it Tarr, and it will eat away any dead Flesh, Oil of Vitriol, black
Hellebore, the Root of it beaten to powder, Arsnick, etc.

An Excellent Ointment to eat away all dead Flesh, and to heal the same.
Take of common Honey two Ounces, Roch-Allom, Verdegrease and Vinegar, of each
an Ounce; Sublimate two drams: let all be made into fine powder, and boil it a
few Warmths, keeping it still stirring, and then take it from the Fire* and
keep it in a Gally pot close stopped for your use. Apply it upon Lint or fine
Hurds to the Sorrance once a day, and it Cures speedily and soundly, but
before you dress the Sore, you cleanse, wash and inject the Wound with this
water.

A Water to wash and cleanse a Sore or VVound, before you use the Ointment
above.
Take red Sage, Plantain, Rib-wort, Yarrow, Bramble-leaves, Rosemary, Hysop,
and Honey-suckle leaves, of each half a handful, boil them in one Pint of
White Wind, and as much of Smiths or Cold Trough water, then add thereto the
boiling of common Honey one spoonful, and as much Allom as a Wall-nut, and a
bright black piece of a Sea*coal, the bigness of an Egg unbroken, then let it
boil till half be consumed, then strain it hard and wash the Sore therewith,
and if the Wound be deep, inject of this Water with a Syringe into it every day
when you dress him, and by this doing you shall cleanse the Wound, and take
away all bad and dead flesh, and heal it up soundly.


Another Water to cleanse and heal a S^re.
To a Gallon of Smiths Water and a quart of Ale, add two Handfuls of Sage, a
Pint of Honey, an Ounce of common Alum, and half an Ounce of white Copperas;
boil them very well together till they be all consumed, and put them into a
clean Vessel, and keep them for your use. Dr take Spring Water, and put to it
Roch-Allum and Madder, and boil them till they be both consumed, and put them
up for your use. Or take Sage, Cinquefoyl and Fennel, of each a good handful,
and boil them in a Gallon of Spring Water till they be tender, then strain the
Liquor from the Herbs, and put to it a quarter of a pound of Roch-Allum, and
let it boil again a little while, till the Alum be dissolved, then take it
from the Fire, and make use of it after this manner, viz. Dip Lint in it warm,
and lay it upon the Sore, and if it be hollow apply more Lint; Then make a
Bolster of Linen Cloth, and wet it well in the Water, then wring out the
Water, and bind on the Bolster close.

A Receipt for a Puncture or green Wound.
If it be in the Foot, or any other part of the Body, if you can come well unto
it, or if it be an Imposthumation unbroken, scald it first with this Medicine.
Then wash it with the Water above.

Medic^ne.
Take red Tarr a penniworth, of the reddest and best, of Hogs grease half a
pound, of green Copperas and Bay Salt of each a handful, both made into fine
Powder, boil all these very well, and with a Clout fastened upon a stick, apply
it scaulding hot four Mornings together, for this scaulding does so kill the
Malice of the Fistula, that it can never break to annoy the Horse any further.
It Cares the Imposthumes and ^oul Ulcers, being thus applied.


Things g^od to take a Wen, or any other Excression arising in the Flesh, or
hard Swellings.
Balm used with Salt, takes away the hard Swellings in the Throat, or W^ns or
Kernels therein. The Decoction of the lesser Sellendine wonderfully Cures all
hard Wens, or Tumors applied to them, The seed of Darnel, Pigeons dung,
Sallet-Oyl and the Powder of Linseed bo^led to the form of a Plaster,
consumes them, the Seed of Turn-Sole laid upon them* Archangel, or rather the
Hedge-Nettle stamped with Vinegar and applied as a Poultess, takes away any
hard Swelling, and also fiery hot Inflammations. To Tie a double Thread about
it to eat it off, then with your Incision-Knife cut it a cross in four equal
parts or quarters to the very bottom, but beware you touch not either Vein or
Sinew, then with Oil of Vitriol eat it away, or with Mercury; or else burn them
off with your hot Iron, then heal the place with your green Ointment. The
Leaves of Bucks-horn bruised and applied will consume them. The Milk that
issues out of the Fig Tree Branches when they are broken and applied, is also
very good; so is the Juice of Housleek or Mercury; the Juice of the Leaves and
Flowers of Mullein, with the Powder of the dried Root rubbed upon them takes
them away. The Water that droppeth from the hollow places of the Popla^-Tree
anointed with it does the like, Garden-Rue bruised with a few Myrtleleaves made
with Wax, and applied, takes away all sorts of them, so does an Ointment made
of the burnt Ashes of the Willow-Tree, mixed with Vinegar, and the place
anointed therewith, etc.

Things good to Cure an Anbury, which is a great spungy Wart full of Blood.
To Tie it about with a Thread or Hair so hard as you can pull it, and in few
days it will fall away of it self, then strew upon it the Powder of Verdegrease
to kill it at the Root, and heal it up again with your green Ointment. But if
it be so flat that you cannot bind any about it, then take it away with your
Incision-Knife close to the Skin, or else burn it off with a hot Iron, and then
first kill the Fire with Turpentine and Hogs*Grease molten together, and heal
it up as before prescribed, but if it grow in such a Sinewy place that it
cannot be conveniently cut away with a hot Iron* then eat it out with the Oil
of Vitriol, and heal it up as you do other Wounds.

Head Purged, Vide Perfumes in the First Part.


Things good for to put in Ointments and Salves for the Cure of all manner of
Wounds in General.
The Juice of ordinary Centaury is good to cleanse Old Sores, and to heal ^p
Wounds, the Juice of the leaves of Cleavers do close up the Lips of green
Wounds, or the powder of the Seed of the Herb does the same, Clowns Wound-wort,
Coral-wort, Cole-wort, the powder of the Root of Sow-Fennel, or Hogs-Fennel,
Fox-gloves, Golden-rod, Winter-green, True love or one Berry, Hounds tongue,
St. John's Wort, Kidney-wort, Knape-weed, Lady, Mantle is the best Wound-Herb
that is, and is good for inward and outward Wounds, Loosestrif^. The dried
leaves of Medlers strewed upon a Wound* healed it quickly, Money*wort or the
Herb two pence. The Juice of Nettles is good to wash a Wound with, and if it be
bound to it but three days you need no other Medicine, Pimpernel, Ground Pine,
Plantine, Rag-wort, w^ld Sage, Sarasens Consound, Solomon's Seal, Sanicle,
Burnet, Saxafrage, Scabius, Self*heal, Southern-wood, the Juice of wild Tansie,
Tutsan, Vervain, Blew-bottle, Elder, Couch-grass or Dogs-grass, Daffadil,
Cranes-bill, Comfrey, does so Conglutinate things together, that it is reported
that it will sodder Meal together, being cut into pieces and put into the Pot,
Celandine, Broom, Turpentine, Mastick, Frankincense, Balsom, the leaves of Elm,
Flix-weed is good for Ulcers and VVounds, Byfoyl, Costmary, Cowslips,
Cross-wort, Yarrow is good for Fistulaes and Ulcers, etc.

Particular Receipts for Salves or Ointments, for VVounds Old or New.
Take common Honey and Verdegrease finely pulverized, of each as much as will
suffice, boil them together till the Medicine wax red, and this will heal up
any Old or green Sore in short space.

Another.
Take Turpentine, black Soap, Hog's Grease, green Treat and Pitch a like
quantity, mix and boil them together, and apply it warm, either Plais^er-wise
or Tent-wise.

Another.
Take a quarter of a pound of Butter, of Tarr and black Soap of each half as
much, and a little Turpentine, boil all but the Soap together, and when you
take it off the Fire, put in the Soap, with this Ointment dress any Cut and it
will heal it, or Hog's Grease and Venice-Turpentine melted together.

Another.
Take eight drams of Venice-Turpentine, four drams of New Virgins w^x, melt
them in a Pewter Vessel, and stir them well together, and when they are well
melted and mixed, take them from the fire, and put into them half a Pint of
White Wind, and when it is cold, pick holes in it, and let the White Wind run
out, then anoint your Hands with Oil of Roses, and work the Wax and Turpentine
well together, then put them into the Pewter vessel again, and put to them half
an Ounce of the Gum of the Firr-tree, and three drams of the Juice of Bitony,
then Sees them well together till the Juice of Bitony be wasted* and put to it
three drams of Women's Milk, or the Milk of a red Cow, and Sees them once again
until the Milk be wasted, and so keep it for your use in a Gally-pot.

Another
Take Wormwood, Marjorum, Pimpernel, Calamint, Olibanum, beat them all into
powder, and boil them in Wax, and Barrows-grease till they be as thick as an
Ointment or Salve, with this dress any Wound, and it will heal it.

Others.
The powder of Honey and Lyme, or Turpentine simply of it self, will dry up and
Skin any Wound. If your Horse be goared upon a Stake, then pour into the Wound
Butter scalding hot, and let him lie after he is cast, so long as you think the
Ointment is gone down to the bottom, and do thus once a day till it be whole.
If you desire to keep a Wound open, put in the Powder of green Copperas, but if
to heal it up speedily, then Wheat Flour and Honey well beaten together will
do it.

Another for any new Wound or Hurt.
A quarter of a pound of the Powder of Bolearmoniack put into the best
white*Wine Vinegar as you can get, and boiled well upon the Fire,
and a piece of Butter put into it when it comes off the Fire, and the Wound
washed therewith warm once every day will be soon well. Or Linseed Oil is very
good put into a Wound to heal it up, and to kill a Gangreen if it be well
washed and cleansed with Batter aad Vinegar; Or Train-Oyl and the Powder of
Verdegrease melted together, will heal and skin any Wound well and quickly.

If you desire to see more variety of Ointments, Salves, Powders and Waters;
Look for them in the First Part.

Observations upon Dressing of Wounds.
If he has a Wound in his Head newly made, or in any other part that is full
of Sinews, Bones or Gristles* wash it well with White Wind warmed, and keep it
while you are in dressing covered warm with wet Clothes, then search the bottom
of the Wound with a Probe, and let it take as little Wind and Air as you can,
and having found the bottom of it, stop the Wound close with a Clout till your
Salve be ready. If the Wound be a Cut, make a handsome Roll of soft Tow, ^o ^ong
and so big as may fill the bottom of the Wound, which for the most part is not
so wide as the Mouth of the Wound, then make another Roll somewhat bigger, to
fil^ up the rest of the Wound, even the hard Mouth, and anoint them with such
Ointment as you shall think fit for the Cure, lukewarm, only observe this,
that if the Wound be large, stitch the Wound a little together with Crimson
Silk, it will heal the sooner and make the Scar less. But if the Hurt be like a
Hole made with some Prick, then make a stiff Taint either of Tow or Lint, so
long as will reach the bottom, and anoint it with your Ointments, and Bolster
the same with a little Tow, and clap a sticking Plaster over it made of Pitch,
Rosin, Mastick and Turpentine, melted together; if the Mouth of the Wound be
not wide enough to let out the matter, if it be in such a place as you may do
it without hurting the Sinews, give it a slit from the Mouth downwards, that so
the Matter may have the free passage out, and be sure to keep in the taint by
one means or other, and that it be not drowned within the Wound, and to tie
some thread at the upper end thereof, that it may be taken out at pleasure. Now
if the hole be deep and in such a place as you cannot cut it, then make your
tent full as big as the hole of a dry Sponge that was never wet, so long as it
may reach the bottom, and the tent being made somewhat full with continual
turning and wrying of it, you shall easily get it down, and dress the Wound
twice a day, and cleanse it every time with White Wind lukewarm, for the
Sponge anointed with the Ointment, will both draw and suck up all the evil
Matter, and make it very fair within, and as it begins to heal every day
tent it lesser and lesser, until it be ready to close up, and never leave
Tenting it so long as it will receive a Tent, be it never so short; for hasty
healing of Wounds breeds Fistulaes* which properly be old Sores; and
therefore must be healed like Fistulaes. Now if the wound proceed from some
Ancient Impostumation, then take to or three great Onions, and taking out the
Cores, put therein a little Bay Salt and a little whole Saffron, and roast them
in hot Embers then Plaisterwise lay them hot to the Wound, renewing it once a
day till it be whole. Now if the upper Skin of the Wound be putrified to take
it away, lay a Plaster of Cows dung to it ^od in Milk, and there let it remain
for twenty four hours, and it will leave nothing vile about the Wound.


An Excellent Receipt for any green*Wound.
Take Pen^y-royal, Camomil, Brook-lime, Rag-wort or Rag-weed, Sage,
Ground Pine, Ivy, Plantaine, Yarrow, Feather^ew, Maidenhair, of each a
handfdl, shred and bruise them very well in a Mortar together, then set them
over the Fire in a pound and a half or more of Hogs-Seam or Lard, with half a
pound of D^ers Suet, let them gently Simper for about an Hour; Then take it off
the Fire, and strain the Herbs from the Liquor, and set it over the Fire again,
and make it boil up; then take it off, and put into it a quarter of an Ounce of
Verdegrease finely powdered and searced, with a quarter of an Ounce of burnt
Allom, and an Ounce of common Bees Wax, and a good quantity of the Oil of Deers
Shank, stir them very well together, and put it into a Pot, and keep it for
your use. If you cannot get Maidenhair, use Chickweed and for want of Deers
Suet, or Oil of Deers Shank, put in a pound of Seam or Lard, half a pound of
May ^utter, and half a pound of Sheeps Tallow.


How to make Adders Tongue Ointment, which is a most Sovereign and Excellent
Ointment for any Beast that has been stung or bitten by any venomous Creature;
Or for any Wound by Stake, Bite or any other Accident; As also for any hard
Swelling in any Part of the Body, and is also very good for the Garget in a
Cows Bag, chafed in very well with your Hand twice a day.
Take as much of the Herb Adders Tongue as you have occasion to use* with a
third part of Male Plantine, and bruise them very well in a Mortar together,
then put to it fresh Butter new from the Churn, well beaten from the ^utter
Milk, and mix it very well with your Herbs, but put not in so much of it as to
make it lose its green Colors; After you have so done, put it into an earthen
Pan, and let it lie about three or four Weeks in some cool place till it grow
moldy, then melt it down upon a gentle Fire till the Herbs grow crisp; then
strain it out into some convenient thing fit for your purpose, and keep it for
your use. You may dissolve into it if you please (when it comes off the Fire)
some fine and clear Turpentine, which will make it much the better. You may
make an Excellent green Balsom for the said Distempers, if you boy* the Herbs
in Sallet Oil, and dissolve into it when it comes off the Fire, some fine clear
Turpentine. This Ointment is made only in the Month of April or May, the Herb
being then to be found, and in its prime, for it soon perishes with a little
heat.


Another f r a Sore or Swelling.
Black Soap, common Turpentine, Green Treat, (which is a green Ointment bought
at the Apothecaries,) Pitch and Hog's Grease, of each a small quantity boiled
well together, and applied is very good.


Another to dissolve any Sore or Swelling is very good without breaking.
Take half a pound of black Soap, (or for want of that common Soap) as much
Bolearmoniack powdered, with a little of the powder of unslackt Li^e, and put to
them a quarter of a Pint of Brandy, with a small G^ll of the Oil of Roses, and
Oil of Linseed, and anoint them with it, and it will help them.

Things good to Cure a Galled or Swelled Back in General.

Take the white of an Egg and beat it to an Oil, then take Flower, Honey and
^olearmoniack, finely beaten, and mix them well together, and spread it upon a
piece of thin Leather, and lay it over the place galled, and it will not come
off till it be well. Or take the Soot of the Chimney, and mix it with Cream
till it become a Salve, and make a Plaster thereof, and lay it to the Gall and
Swelling, and it will Cure him. Or take some two or three spoonfuls of
Aquavitae, and put to it some Soap and boil them well together, and anoint the
place well with it, as hot as it can be well applied to the Swelling, and it
will take it down, or Loam boiled in Vinegar to a Poultess, and apply to it
very hot takes it down.


Or take a Loaf of wheaten Bread and cut a slice of it, and toast it very well,
and when it is toasted, spread it all over with Honey on both sides, and prick
it full of holes, and toast it till the Honey is well soaked into it, and the
toast is become dry, then put it into a Mortar, and beat it to powder, and keep
it for your use, when you use it, strew it upon the Galled place, and it will
dry it up in a short space.

To take away any Swelling, and to heal any Galled back whatsoever.

Take only the Oil of Turpentine, and lay it upon the raw Back Morning and
Evening with a Feather, and it will heal it up, and so use it to a Swelled
Back, it will either sink it or break it.

Another for a Galled B^ck, Enter^ering or Shackle-Gaul.
Take three parts of Sheeps dung newly made, and one part of Rye, or Wheat
Flower, and dry the Flower and mix it well with the Sheeps dung, kneading it to
a Paste, and make it into a Cake and bake it, and apply the powder warm unto
the place, and it will heal it very well, or anoint it with Turpentine and
Verdegrease mixed together, finely powdered.

Another
Take Water and Salt and boil them well together, and wash the place therewith.
Then take Pepper made into fine powder, and strew it upon the place and it will
heal it in a very short time, or to bruise a new laid Egg between his Legs, and
rub the place with it, Cures the Gall there.

Another.
Take the leaves of Ars-smart, and wash them, and lay them all over the place,
and though you ride him every day, yet they will heal very fast, but if he
remain in the Stable, put the Water of the leaves upon it.

Another which Cures not only Galled Backs, but any other Wound whatsoever.
Take Rosin and common Pitch, of each six ounces, Mastick and Incense of each
one ounce, Turpentine, Galbanum, Bolearmoniack, of each three ounces, melt and
incorporate all these together upon a gentle fire, and as they begin to cool
make them up in Rowls, and when you use it, spread it upon a Cloth or Leather
somewhat thin, but if you use it without either Cloth or Leather, to any
outward part that is not yet broken, then lay it on much thicker then you use
to do Plaister-wise, and whilst it is warm clap Flox of the same Color upon
it. This is a most excellent defensative Plaster for the staying and drying up
of all evil humors, and also very Sovereign for asswaging of Swellings.

Another for a sore Back.
Take the Juice of Cellandine and Live Honey, of each two spoonfuls, beat them
with the Yolk of an Egg, and as much Allom and Wheatflower as will serve to
bring it to a Salve, dress the Sore with this once a day and it draws and
heals. Now though these Medicines are enough, yet because Farriers hold
diverse Opinions, and think what they know to be the best, I shall give you a
Catalogue of their Receipts in General.

The powder of Bryer-leaves, Rye-flower, the powder of burnt Oystershells, the
white of an Egg, Honey, Barley, Straw burnt and Soot will
dry up and heal a sore Back. The powder of Honey and unslackt Lime will skin
any Gall, provided the Sore be first washed with Vinegar and Onions boiled in
Water, and laid hot to a swollen Horses Back, will assuage the Swelling, and the
Yolk of an Egg, Salt and Vinegar will heal it up when it is broken, provided
you wash the Sore with Ale wherein Rosemary has been sod. The Soot or Grim of
a Pot will dry and skin a galled Back.


Things good for inward or outward Bruises, or Swellings in General.
Wood and Water-Bitony, Honey-suckle leaves, Knot Grass, Archangel, Plantine,
Rib-wort, Yarrow, Bursa-pastoris, Bugle, Chervil, Mallows, Solomon's Seal,
Sarasens Consound, Sarasens Wound-wort, Scabius, Self-heal, Sanicle, Sope-wort,
Thorough-wax, Rosin, Turpentine, Honey, Galbanum, St. John's Wort, Pitch, etc.

The Juice of Arsmart consumes all cold Swellings, and dissolveth all
congealed Blood, got by Bruises, Strokes or Falls; The Root of Cinquefoyl,
Cud-weed or Cotton-weed does the like, Osmond-royal or Water-Fern is also good;
Golden Rod outwardly applied is good for them: Nep or Catmint bruised, and the
Juice given inwardly is also very good. The Decoction of Wood Sage is a very
good Remedy for any inward Vein broken, to disperse and avoid the congealed
Blood, and to consolidate the Veins; Sanicle is also good. The powder of
Bolearmomack given in warm Ale stops any inward Bleeding; the powder of Irish
Slate given also in warm Ale is good for any inward Bruise whatsoever, etc.

Particular Receipts for the Cure of Bruises or Swellings.
First, Ripen it with Hay boiled in Chamberly, or with rotten Litter laid upon
it, then let out the Corruption, then fill the hollowness with the powder of
Rosin, and lay a Plaster of Shoomakers Wax over it, and thus do once a day
while it be whole, if it be slow of skinning or healing up, strew on the powder
of unslackt Lime, and Bolearmoniack mixed together, and if any proud Flesh
arise, take it down either with burnt Allom, or Verdegrease in powder.


Another.
Take Ale or Beer Yest, and Verjuice, and putting a little fine Hay thereunto,
boil them well together, then bind the Hay to the swelling, and pour on the
Liquor, and do thus three or four days together, and it will take away the
swelling, or rotten Litter and Hay boiled in Urine will take it away.


Another for any inward Bruise, by Fall or otherwise.
Take near a quart of strong Beer or Ale, and put to it one Ounce of the powder
of Bolearmoniack, and half an Ounce of the powder of Irish Sla^e, and boil it a
little and give it him fasting in the Morning, for three or four Mornings
together lukewarm, and he will do well.


Another for a Swelling upon the Head, occasioned by a Blow or o^herwise.
If the Swelling be on both sides, then Blood on both sides; but if it be but
on one side, then Blood but on that side the Swelling is of, and give him this
Drink, viz. One Ounce of Anniseeds, one Ounce of Turmerick, half an Ounce of
Bayberries all beaten to powder, with a Gill full of the Juice of Herb-grace,
red Sage and Wormwood; Put all this into a quart of strong Beer lukewarm, and
give it him fasting in the Morning, and Order him as you do a Horse that has
had Physic. It Is good also to apply this outward application to it, viz. a
little common Soap put to a quarter of a Pint of Brandy, and rub and chase it
in with your Hand very well, and heat it in with a hot Fire-shovel; Leave it as
thick upon the Swelling as you can. This will prevent a Farcy, which Blows and
Strokes do commonly breed, and is also very good for any old or new Swelling
whatsoever.


Another which will take away any Crusty Knobs, or hard Swellings in any part
of the Body of a Horse.
According to the Cure you are to undertake, whether great or small, proportion
Oil of Turpentine, and strong Beer or Ale, and let it be of equal parts alike,
well shaked together in a Glass, and then rub and chafe it very well in with
your Hand, and heat it also in with a hot Fire-shovel; and two or three days
after apply a Charge of common Soap and Brandy, well chafed in, as you did the
Turpentine before; You may if you please put in a little of the Oil of Worms,
which is a great Mollifier of any Crusty, hard or Bony part.

If you will see more of this kind, vide Observations upon Bruises and Strains
about three Leaves further.

Things good in General to Cure Swelled Legs.

Nerve Oil, black Soap and Boars Grease melted together, and anoint the place
with it, or to Bathe his Legs in Butter and Beer, or in Vinegar and Butter
melted together, or with Sheeps-foot Oil, or with Train Oil, or with Piss and
Salt Peter boiled together, and to roll his Legs with Hay-Ropes wet in the same
Liquor, from the Pastern to the Knee, but not bind them too hard, or to Bathe
him with the water wherein had been boiled Sage, Mallows and Rose Cakes, and
Butter and Sallet Oil put into it, or to take Frankincense, Rosin, fresh
Grease, of each alike, boiled and strained, and used once a day, as you see
occasion; Or to Wash his Legs with the coldest Fountain Water you can get; or
to let him stand every day till the Swelling be assuaged, in running Water up
to the Knees; Or else take Primrose-leaves, Violet leaves, Straw-berry Leaves,
of each a handful, boil them in new Milk till they be soft, then put into it of
Nervel, of Petroleum, and of Pumpilion, of each an Ounce, anoint him with it
for five or six days together; Or take Pitch, Virgins Wax, Rosin, the Juice of
Hysop, Galbanum, Myrrh, secondary Bdellium, Arabicum Populeon and Storax,
according to your Discretion, and boil them in Deers Sewet, and when it is cold
put into it Bolearmoniack and Costus beaten into fine powder, and incorporate
them well together into the other Ingredients and boil them all over again, and
when it is almost cold, work them up into Rowls, and when you use it, spread it
upon a Plaster, and wrap it about the Swelling, and let it stay there till it
drop off of it*self; this is good for a Surfeit.


To Assuage the Swelling of a Horses Legs, that is very much Swelled by reason
of the Scratches.
Take a quart of Chamberly or more, as you shall think fit, and put into it a
handful of Bay Salt, a quarter of a pound of Soap, a pretty quantity of Soot, a
good handful of Misle-toe chopped, boil them all very well together, and Bath his
Legs with it very warm two or three times a day, and wrap a Cloth wet in the
same, and lap about it, and this will assuage them. If you will have more
Receipts for swelled Legs; see the first Part for Plasters and Baths for
swelled Legs.


Things good to Cure a Horse that is Spu^-gall'd, or Shackle-Gall'd, or
Lock-Gall'd.
Salt and Urine mixed together, or Salt and Water, and the place bathed with it
takes out Venom; warm Vinegar is likewise good, or else bind unto the place,
the tender tops of Nettles stamped, Oil of Turpentine is good, or Allom and
green Copperas boiled in Water, and wash the place with it, the leaves of
Briony stamped and bruised with Vinegar, and applied to the Place, Honey and
Verdegrease boiled together till it look red, and anoint the place with it
twice a day, and strew upon it some chopped Flox to keep on the Salve, is very
good for Shackle-galls, and chiefly for the Scratches, etc.

Things good in General to Cure the Diseases of the Eyes, as Watery Eyes,
Blood-shotten Eyes, Dim Eyes, Moon-Eyes, Wart in the Eye, Inflammation in the
Eye, Pearl, Pin, Web or Haw, etc.
The Juice of Cabbages and Coleworts boiled with Honey and dropped into the
Eye, clears the Sight and consumes any Felm, as also the Canker that grows
therein, the Juice of Celandine put into the Eye, takes away the Pin and Web
in the Eye, and clears the Sight, the Juice of ordinary Centaury clears the
Sight, the Juice of Ground Ivy, alias Ale Hoof is good for Moon-Eyes, and to
clear the Sight, the Juice of Housleek is good to allay the fiery Heat of the
Eyes, and is good likewise for Rheumatick and watery Eyes, the Juice of
Germander put into the Eye, takes away the Pin and Web, and all dimness of
Sight, so does the Juice of Eyebright, so does the Juice of Horehound with
Honey. The seed of Clary powdered and finely s^arced, and mixed with Honey,
takes away dimn^ss of Sight, and is good for Watery Eyes likewise, so does the
Juice of Dragon, Ale-Hoof, Celander and Dasies stamped and strained, and white
Sugar, and white Rose Water put to it, takes away all manner of Inflammations,
Spots, Webs, Itch, smarting and any grief whatsoever in the eyes, nay, though
the Sight be in a manner gone. The leaves of common Ivy laid asteep in water
for twenty four hours helps sore and smarting waterish Eyes, the Juice of
Endive clears the Sight, the distilled water of Groundsel, the Juice of
Melilote clears the Sight, the distilled water of the Lilly of the Valley is
good for Inflammations of the Eyes, or for Pin and Web, the powder of Licoris
blown into the Eye, is good likewise for the same, with Rheumatick
Distillations in them, the distilled water of Loose-strife is good for hurts
and blows in the Eyes, and for blindness, the distilled water of Lovage takes
away the redness and dimness of them, sweet Marjorum stamped with fine Flower,
and laid to them, is good for Inflammations in them, the Juice of Mercury is
good for waterish Eyes, the Juice of Pimpernel with a little Honey cools the
Inflammations of them, and takes away the Pin and Web, the Juice of Purslain
is good to take away the redness of the Eye, the Juice of the Yellow
Rattle-grass with Honey put into the Eyes, or the whole seed put into them
draws forth any Skin, Dimness or Felm from the Sight, the distilled Water of
red Roses, is good for the heat and redness in the Eyes, and to stay and dry up
the Rheum and Wateriness in them, the Juice of Rue, Fennel, Honey, and the Gall
of a Cock put thereto is good, the Juice of Strawberry leaves ^ickt into the
Eye is good, or take Strawberries and put them into a Glass well stopped, and
set it in a Horse-dunghil for twelve or fourteen days, and then distill it, is
good for Inflamed eyes, or to take away any Felm or skin that grows over
them. The distilled water of the wild Tansie, or the Juice of it takes away
the heat and Inflammations in them, Meadow trefoil or Honey-suckle leaves is
good for a Pin and Web, the distilled water of Vervain is good to clear the
sight, and to take away the felm; the Juice of Violet-leaves is good to take
away the Inflammatio^ of them, either applied outwardly, or put into them,
Spring-wate^ is good to bath an inflamed eye with, water that is gathered from
the Willow-tree when it Flowreth, the Bark being slit and a fitting Vessel to
receive it, is very good for redness and dimness of Sight, and for Felms that
cover the Eye, and to stay the Rheum that falls into them, the Juice of
Mustard*seed is good for dimness of Sight, the Juice of an Onion with Honey
clears the Eye, and does remove the Pin and Web, and amendeth the
Blood-shotten Eye, the Juice of the Blessed Thistle is good for the same, the
Flowers or Roots of Valerian boiled in White Wind clears the Sight,
Egg-shells burned between two Tiles and beaten to powder, after the inward Felm
is taken away, is good for dimness of Sight, Lapis Calaminaris, Plantine-Water,
White Wind squirted into his Eyes, clears them, so does Alloes, Camphire
powder, white Vitriol, or white Copperas blown into his Eye after it is beaten
to powder, and searced very fine, takes away the Pin and Web, or any Felm
whatsoever, the Ashes of the Root of black Sallow Sugar Candy, and grated
Ginger and Salt made up in Butter and little Balls, and put one into his Eye
once a day takes away the Felm of it, Bine-Bole, or Bolearmoniack with white
Sugar Candy blown into the Eye, stops any Rheum that falls into the Eyes,
Alabaster beaten very fine and searced and blown into the Eye, takes away any
Felm whatsoever, so does the powder of a black Flint burnt, Sanguis Draconis
takes away a Felm, so does the Bone of the Cuttle-Fish beaten to powder and
blown into the Eye, and is likewise good for Blood-shotten Eyes, May-Butter,
Rosemary, Yellow Rosin and Cellandine stamped and Fried, and kept in a Box, is
a Jewel for the Eyes, burnt Allom blown into the Eyes is good for to take off a
Felm, an Egg-shell filled with Pepper, and burnt and beaten to powder, and
blown into the Eyes, takes away the Pin and Web, or any other dimness, the
powder of Sandevoir, and the powder of white Salt burnt, is good likewise for
the same, so is the powder of Pummistone blown into the Eye, the powder of the
inner Sole of a Shoo burnt to Ashes and beaten to Powder, is good to stop the
Rheumatick Eye, the powder of two Tiles rubbed together and blown into the Eye,
takes away a Felm, Wormwood with the Gall of a Bull beaten together, is good
for a dim Sight; or take the Roots or Leaves of Primrose clean washed and
boiled in runningwater the space of an hour, and put somewhite Copperas to it,
then strain it and let it stand, and there will appear an Oil upon the Water,
and anoint his Brows, Temples and Eyes with it, and it will take off a Felm;
Man's dung burnt in a Fire-shovel to a Cole, and beaten to powder and blown into
his Eyes, takes away a Felm; or take a handful of the angerest young Nettles,
and stamp them well, and put them in a Linen Rag, and dip it in Beer, then
squeeze out the Juice, and put a little Salt to it, and lick that into the Eye,
and that will take away the Felm; or the Lean of Beef, or a Gammon of Bacon
dried and beaten to Powder and blown into the Eye, takes it away also, (...)
or Lapis Tulia does the like prepared; The Gall of a Hare, and Live-Honey
alike, put into the Eye, does the same; the Haw every Smith can cut out.


Eyelids swelled outward.
If you Meet with a Horse (which is very rare to do) whose Eyelids are so
Swelled that the inside of them are turned outward, and look very red, and as
it were full of Bladders, and yet the Ball of the Eye very sound and good, then
you need do nothing to him but to keep him warm with a Hood made fit for his
Head, of some Linen Cloth, and to anoint them twice a day with white
Sugar Candy, Honey and white Rose Water, and in two or three days time they
will turn into their Places again, then take Blood from him, which is partly
the occasion (and cold Rheums together settling in the Head) of this Disease; do
not clip nor meddle with the Bladders, or any part of the Eye, lest you do not
only put out his Eyes, but endanger his Life, or at best make him but
Blear-eyed.


Particular Receipts for the Eyes.
Take Rose Leaves, Smallage, Maidenhair, Euface, Endive, Succory, Red-Fennel,
Hill-wort and Cellandine, of each half a quarter of a pound, being washed
clean, lay them in White Wind asteep a whole day, and then distill them. And the
first Water will be like Gold, the second like Silver, and the third like Balm,
this Water has recovered Sight for some years.


Another to take off a Felm, or Pin and Web.
Take white Copperas and beat it to powder, and sift it through a very fine
Sieve, with the same quantity of white Sugar-Candie beaten, and blow it into
his Eye once a day, and as you see it amend, once in two or three days is
enough.

Another to take off a Felm
Take Alabaster and beat and searce it very fine, and blow it into his Eye once
or twice a day, and it will take it off.


Another for the same.
Take Bay Salt, or for want of that Common-Salt, and bruise it very small and
mix it well with fresh Butter, then make it up into small Balls, as big as a
Hazel-nut, and open his Eyelid and put one of them in, holding your hand over
it till it be all melted, and thus doing once a day will take off any Felm, if
it be taken in time.


Another to take away the Rheum from his Eyes, and to clear it:
Take Butter and Salt, of each alike, and mix them well together with your
Knife, then take a piece as big as a small Wall-Nut, and put it into his Ear,
(on that side that is offended) and let it remain there for four or five
hours, and this will dry up the Rheum and clear his Eye. You must Tie or Sew
his Ear close, or else he will shake it out.

Another to stay the Rheum in a Horses Eye.

Take fine Bole, or Bole-armoniack, and blow it into his Eyes, and it will
drive back the Rheum; but if he will not suffer you to blow it into his Eye,
mix it with Butter and some white Sugar Candy beaten to powder, and make it up
into little Balls and put one of them into his Eye once or twice a day, as you
shall see occasion.

Another to take off a Felm.

Take the blackest Flint you can get, and Calcine it, then beat it to powder,
and Sift it through a fine Sieve, and put to it the powder of Ginger, and blow
it into his Eye as you see occasion.

Another for sore Eyes, dim Eyes or Moon-Eyes.
Take Lapis Calaminaris, half an Ounce, and heat it red hot, and quench it in a
quarter of a Pint of Plantain water, or white. Wine, do this eight or nine
times, then beat it to powder, and put it to the water, then add half a dram of
Aloes, and a spoonful of Camphire in powder, and let them dissolve, drop this
into the Eye*

Another for the same.
Take a Pint of Snow-water, and dissolve into it two or three drams of white
Vitriol, and with it wash his Eye three or four times a day, and it helps.

Another for a white Felm or Skin over the Eye.
Take the Root of the black Sallow, and burn it to Ashes, then put to it the
like quantity of white Sugar Candy, and grated Ginger finely searced, and blow
it into his Eye Morning and Evening.

Another for any Soreness in the Eye, at Pearl, Pin, Web or Bruise.
Take a new laid Egg, and roast it very hard, then cleave it in sunder
long-wise, and take out the Yolk, then fill the empty holes with white Vitriol
finely beaten, and close the Egg again, and roast it the second time, till the
Vitriol be molten; Lastly, beat the Egg, Shell and all, in a Mortar, and strain
it, and with that moisture dress the Eye. If instead of the Vitriol you fill
the Holes with Myrrh, finely searced, and hang the Egg up that it may drop, and
with that moisture dress the Eye, it is every way as good, only it is a little
stronger.

Another which is infallible for the Curing of a Pin, Pearl. VVib or Spot in a
Horses Eye.
Take an Egg and make a Hole in the top, put out half the White, then fill up
the empty place with Salt and Ginger finely mixed together, then roast it very
hard, so as you may beat it into fine powder, having formerly lapt it in a wet
Cloth, then Morning and Evening after you have washed his Eye with the Juice of
Ground Ivy, or Eyebright water, blow this Powder therein.

To Cure a VVart in a Horses Eye, which is upon the Edge or inside of the
Eyelids.
Take burnt Allom, and the same quantity of white Copperas unburnt, both being
beaten very small, and ^ay some of this powder on the Head of the Wart once a
day, and it will consume it.

Another for ^oul Eyes, sere Eyes, or Sight almost lost.
Take Thacchamahaca Mastick, Rosin and Pitch of each a like quantity, and being
molten with Flax of the Color of the Horse, lay it as defensive on each side
his Temples, as big as a twenty shilling Piece, then underneath his Eyes upon
the Cheek-Bone (with a round Iron) burn three or four holes, and anoint them
with sweet Butter, then take a handful of Cellandine, and wash it clean in
White Wind, but let it touch no water, then bruise it and strain it, and to the
quantity of Juice, put the third part of Woman's Milk, and a pretty quantity of
white Sugar Candy, searc'd through a Piece of Lawn, and lick it into his Eye
Morning and Evening. Thus do for the worst of sore Eyes, but if the offense be
not extreme, then you may forbear both the defensitive and the burning, and use
only the Medicine.


Another for a Bite, or Stroke upon the Eye.
Honey, powder of Ginger* and the Juice of Cellandine, mixed together, and
licked into his Eye with a Feather twice a day, is a very good Cure for it.


Another for a Felm.
The powder of Verdegrease finely beaten and searc'd, and burnt* Allom, of
equal parts alike, mixed with some of the Ointment of Marshmallows, and about
the bigness of a Pease put into his Eye once or twice a day will Cure him.


Another for Blood-shotten Eyes.
Roman Vitriol steeped in white Rose water, till it be Colored, (or for want
of that fair Spring water,) and the Eye washed therewith twice or thrice a day
Cures it.


Another to stop a Rheum flowing to the Eyes.
Take Flox or Hurds, and dip it in the best melted Rosin you can get, and apply
it to the hollow of the Eyes drives it back.


Some Observations to be observed upon Bruises and Strains.
1. In all Bruises by Falls or any other Accidents, it is good to Bleed first in
the common Bleeding Neck-Vein, before you give him any inward Medicines for it,
and be very careful that what you give him be not binding things, for they will
so coagulate and thicken the strained blood, that it cannot have its free
passage through the Uriter Vein as it should have, which will be very
prejudicial to his Health.

2. The best thing you can give him for any inward Bruise or Wrench in the Back
or Kidneys, is common Turpentine made into Balls, with the best English
Liquoris-powder you can get for Money, about an Ounce of it given him every
Morning for about a Week together, and a Plaster or Charge applied at the same
time to his Loins or Fillets, made up with Oxicrocium and Paracelsus melted
together, will perfectly Cure him in a Month at farthest, you may renew your
Charge, if there be occasion.

3. All things that provoke Urine are very good for him, for the congealed
Blood must have its Vent through the Uriter-Veins, or else it will do him but
little good.

4. If your Horse has a Strain upon the Back-Sinews; it is also very convenient
to let him Blood with your Fleam on the Shackle-Vein, on the Pastern-Joynt, the
Hair being first clipped away, to the end you may the better see how to strike
the Vein; When you have so done, apply your Piaister or Charge of Oxicrocium
and Paracelsus melted together, as before directed, and laid hot upon the
grieved part, and let it lie on till it come off of it self, and it will Cure
him in a very short time.

Things good in General for the Cure of any Halting coming by strain or strol^,
^ither before or behind, from the Shoulder or Hip down to the Hoof.
If it be in the Shoulder, to let Blood and apply things to it as you do other
strains. A Poultess made of Pellitory of the Wall, and Mallows boiled in strong
Beer Tilt, with Bran, Bean-flower and Sallet-Oyl put thereto, and applied warm,
is good to restore any Sinew-strength in a short time, the Decoction of the
Herb Scabius applied is good for any shrunk-Sinew or Vein, or Tansie boiled in
Oil is good for it, Oil of Turpentine, Brandy, Aquavitae, Oil of Spike, Nerve
Oil, Sallet-Oyl, Bears-Grease, Oil of Swallows, Bolcarmoniack is good for
Sinew-strains, so is Ar^mart and Brook-Lime steeped together, good for old
Strains, Glovers spe^ks boiled in Ale, and applied hot to the place is good,
Oil of Organum, Oil of Exceter, Oil of Peter, Oil of St. John's wort, Oil of
Roses, Mirtles, Sanguis draconis, Pickle or Brine from Olives, Train-Oyl,
Mallows, Oat-meal and Bran bruised together and boiled with Urine, and laid to
it Poultess-wise, Dialthea and Nerve-Oyl mingled together, Pumpilion, Nerve Oil
and black Soap minglod together upon the Fire, and anointed therewith, Brandy
and Soap boiled together is good, or White Wind Vinegar and fresh Butter boiled
together, with as much Bran as will bring it to a Poultess, and said to it
Morning and Evening is good, or Mallows and Chickweed boiled together in Ale,
etc.

Particular Receipts for the Cure of all Manner of Halt^ngs, coming by Strain
or Stroke, ^ither before or behind, from the Shoulder or Hip down to the Hoof.
Markhams Master-Medicine for a Back-Sinew Strain, or any Strain, Shrinking, or
Numbness of Sinews.
Take a ^at sucking Mastive Whelp, flay it and Bowel it, then stop the Body as
full as it can hold with gray Snails, and black Snails, then roast it at a
reasonable Fire* when it begins to warm, Bast it with six Ounces of Oil of
Spike made yellow with Saffron, and six Ounces of Oil of Wax; then save the
Droppings, and whatsoever moisture falls from it, while it any drop will fall,
keep it for your use. With this anoint the strain, and work it in very hot,
holding a hot Fire-shovel before i^, thus do both Morning and Evening till
amendment.

Another in Nature of a Charge for a Back-Sinew-Strain.
Take five quarts of Ale, and a quarter of a Peck of Glovers specks, and boil
them till it come to a quart, then apply it hot to the Grief, and remove it not
in five or six days.

Another for a Strain in any Part New or Old.
Take of Sheeps Sewet a pound, of Sheeps dung two handfuls, chopped Hay a
handful, Wheat Bran a pint, sweet ^oap a quarter of a pound, boil all these in
a quart of strong Ale till it come to a Poultess, then take it from the fire
and put in half a pint of White Wind Vinegar, and a quarter of a pint of
Brandy, and apply it hot to the grief, and give him Moderate Exercise.

Another for a Strain or Sinew-bruise.
Take Cumminseeds and bruise them gross, then boil it with the Oil of Camomile,
and put to it so much yellow Wax as will bring it to Cerots, and spread it upon
a Cloth or Leather, and apply it hot to the grief.

Another for old Strains, Griefs, or old Cramps.
Take Brandy, Oil de Bay, Oil of Swallows, Bolearmoniaek, Hogsgrease, black
Soap, of each half a pound, boil them till the Brandy be incorporate, then take
of Camomil, Rue, Red Sage and Misle-toe, of each a handful, dry them and bring
them to powder, and mix it with the Ointment, and bring all to a Salve. With
this anoint the Grief, and hold a hot Bar of Iron before it, Chasing it well
in, and do thus once a day, and in nine days the Cure has been effected.

A sudden Cure for a Kneck or Bruise on the Sinews, or Sinew-strain New or Old.
Take a live Cat, wild or tame, and cut off her Head and Tail, then cleave her
down the Chine, and clap her hot Bowels and all to the Bruise; let it lie on
twenty four hours, and serve another Cat or two so if there be occasion; when
it is dry, anoint it with Oil of Turpentine, Brandy and Soap, and heat it well
in with a hot Iron. The Cats Bones must be br^ken.

Another for a Strain newly done, to help it in twenty four hours.
Take the Grounds of Ale or Beer, a quart, as much Parsley chopped gross as you
can gripe, boil them till the Herb be soft, then put to it a quarter of a pound
of sweet Butter, and when it is molten, take it from the fire, and put it in a
pint of Wine Vinegar, and if it be thin, thicken it with Wheat-bran, and lay it
upon H^rds, and Poultess wise as hot as ^ie can endure it lay it to, and remove
it once in twelve hours, and give him moderate Exercise.

Another which is Markhams own Balm, which he says has never failed him in any
Strain in the Sh^ulder, or other Parts, ^id or apparent, or for any VVind-gall
or Swelling.
Take ten Ounces of Piece-Grease, and melt it on the Fire, then take it off,
and put into it four Ounces of the Oil of Spike, one Ounce of the Oil of
Origanum, an Ounce and a half of the Oil of E^^^ter, and three Ounces of the
Oil of St. John's wort, stir them well together, and put them up into a Gally
pot. With this Ointment (or indeed precious Balm) being hot, anoint the grieved
place, and Rub and Chafe it in very much, holding a hot Fire-shovel before it,
and anoint it once in two days, but rub and chafe it in twice or thrice a day,
and give him moderate Exercise For want of Piece-Grease take Goose-Grease.

[Look for Ointments in the Table of the Prices of Drugs, and you shall find
what it is, and where it is to be bought].

Another for Sinews that are extended, over-strained, and so weakened, tha^ the
Member is useless.
Take of Cantharides, Euphorbium and Mercury, of each a like quantity, and of
the Oyl-de bay double as much as of all ^he rest; bring the hard S^mples to
powder, and beat all to a Salve, apply this (...) the Grief (being desperate)
and though it make a sore, it will give strength and streightness to the
Sinews. For the Sore you may Cure it either with Pop^leon, fresh Butter or
Deers Grease warm.

Another of the same Nature, but more ge^^le.
Take Turpentine two Ounces, Verdegrease three Ounces, Hog's Grease six Ounces,
boil them till the Verdegrease be dissolved, then take Rosin, Bees Wax, of each
two Ounces, mix all these together, then apply it to the grieved pl^ce hot.

Another which is a Charge for a New Strain or Grief, proce^ding from Heat.
Take the Whites of six Eggs, and beat them with a Pint of White Wind Vinegar,
the Oil of Roses and Myrtles, of each an Ounce, Bolearmoniack four Ounces, as
much Sanguis Draconis, and with as much Bean-flower or Wheat Flour, (but Bean
is the best) as will thicken it, bring it to a Salve, and spreading it on
Hurds, lay it about the grieved place, and renew it not until it be dry.

^
Signs to know where the Grief lies.
You may know where the Grief lies, by pinching every several member, and where
he most complains, there is his most Grief.

For a New Strain.
Take White Wind Vinegar, Bolearmoniack, the Whites of Eggs, and Bean-flower,
and having beaten them to a perfect Salve, lay it very hot to the ^ore place,
and it will Cure it.

Another for an old Strain.
Take Vinegar and Butter, and melt them together with Wheat-Bran, make it into
a Poultess, and lay it as hot as may be to the place grieved, and it will take
away the Grief.

Another for a Back Sinew-strain.
Take Venice Turpentine and Brandy beaten together to a Salve, and anoint the
grieved place therewith, and heat it in with a Fire-shovel, and in two or three
times doing it will take it away.

Another for an old Strain or La^eness.
Take Boars-grease, Bolearmoniack, black Soap and Nerve-Oyl, of each a like
quantity* boil them well together, and apply it hot to the Grief, chasing it
very well, and heating it in with a hot Fire-shovel, and thus do it once a day
till the Pain go away.


An there for a Strain in the Pastern, or Foot-lock Joint.
A Poultess made of the Grounds of strong Beer, Hens-dung, Hog's Grease and
Nerve Oil boiled together, and applied to the grieved part, two or three times
bound on with a Linen Rag will help him.


Another very good for a New Sinew-strain.
Take common Soap a quarter of a pound, Bolearmoniack in powder an Ounce, the
Whites of three or four new laid Eggs, a Gill of White Wind Vinegar, half a
Gill of Brandy, and a quarter of a Pint of New Wort, either of Beer or Ale,
with half a Gill of the Oil of Turpentine, and incorporate and mix them very
well with your Hand; Then Rub and Cha^e the thinness of it in upon the grieved
place, holding a hot Fire-shovel before it to make it sink in the better, then
daub all over the thickest of it in the nature of a Charge, and stick Flox or
Hurds upon it, and bind it up with a Linen Cloth, and it will do well; If
there be occasion, you may apply a fresh Charge to it.

Another for an old Strain upon the Legs.

After you have Clipped away the Hair so close on the Pastern-Joynt, that you
can see the Pastern-Vein, strike it with your Fleam, and let it bleed well,
then take two Ounces of the Oil of Turpentine, with the like quantity of strong
Ale or Beer, and put them into a Glass, and shake them very well together, to
incorporate them the better, then pour it out into an Earthen or Pewter Dish,
and with your Hand anoint and cha^e it into the grieved part very well, holding
at the same instant of time a hot Fire-shovel before it, to make it sink in the
better. When you find that the Swelling is abated, lay the common Charge of
Soap and Brandy upon it, and bind a Linen Rag wet in the same about it; When
your Charge begins to pill off, anoint it with the Oil of Trotters once or
twice. This Way of Ordering him will perfect the Cure in a Week or Fortnight at
farthest.

Another for any Grief, Pain Numbness, Weakness, or Swelling in Joynt^ that
comes of a Cold Cause.
Take Brandy and Bath the place therewith very warm, heating it in with a hot
fire shovel, then wet a Linen Cloth in the said Brandy, and cover the wet
Cloth all over with Pepper finely beaten, very thick, and so Fold it about the
grieved place, then Roll it on fast with a dry Rowler, and let him Rest, and do
this once a day till you see amendment.


An Excellent Charge which never yet failed for any Sinew-strain from the I. W.
Shoulder, or the Hips down to the Foot, nay, though it be in the Coffin Joint,
which is the ^ardest of Strains to Cure.
Take of Burgundy Pitch, and of Frankincense, of each a quarter of a pound, as
much stone Pitch, or for want of that Common black Pitch, as containing the
quantity of a Wall*Nut, a quarter of a pound of Roses, and the like quantity of
Bolearmoniack finely beaten to powder, melt all these together till they be
thoroughly dissolved, incorporate them well together, if you add two or three
Pennyworth of Mallick to them, it will be the better, but if you have none of
it, it will do without it.


How to use it.
When it is almost cold that it will not scauld the Skin, lay it on the grieved
place with a Lath or any other such like thing, then lay all over the Charge
some Flox, Wool, Deers hair, or such like things, then heat the Charge again,
and daub it all over the Flox somewhat better then you did the former, then
cover it all over again with some Flox as you did before, and if he be a Stable
Horse, keep him out of the Water by watering him in the House* but if it be in
the Summer, you may Charge him abroad; If the strain be in the Coffin Joint,
you must let him blood in the Toe, which every common Smith can do, then stop
the bleeding of it by some Flax or Tow, dipped in the white of an Egg, beaten
with Bolearmoniack; use it as before showed, laying it all over the Hough
Heels, and Foot lock-Joynt, and especially at the setting on of the Hough.


How to know when it is well made.
If it be well made, you may know it by this Sign, viz. If you drop it upon a
Piece of white Paper and let it lie until it be cold, then take and break it
asunder, and if it Crumble in the breaking, it is too hard, but if it break
clear without Crumbling, it is well made, and if you find it too soft, and that
it will not keep on the Horses Foot, then put in a little more Rosin and
Bolcarmoniack into it, and if you find it too hard put in a little Tallow or
Sa^let-Oyl* but Tallow is the best. If it be in hot Weather you must make it
the harder, and especially if he run abroad; and if it be in cold Weather, you
must make it the softer. If you desire to see more Charges for these Uses, look
in my First Part.

For Swelledor Garded*L^gs, whether by Grease or other A cident.
If your Horses Legs be Swelled, only because the Grease is fallen into them
and there is no other outward Ulcer, neither will the Bathing with cold
Fountain water, and other ordinary helps assuage them, then take a Pottle of
Wine Lees, or else take the Grounds of strong Ale or Beer, and boil it with a
pound of Hog's Grease, then with as much Wheat-Bran as will thicken it* make
thereof a Poultess, and having made him a Hose of Woollen Cloth, fill it with
this Poultess as hot as he can suffer it, then close up the Hose and let it
abide two days; the third day open the Hose at the top, but stir not the
Poultess, but put in hot Moulten Grease to it whilst it will receive any, for
that will renew the strength thereof, then close it as you did before, and let
him stand two or three days longer, then open the Leg and rub it down; and if
you find occasion, you may apply another; if not, the Cure is wrought.

Now, if besides the Swelling, he has Ulcers, Chops and Sores, then apply the
Poultess, as before showed; And after a Week Application, take a quart of old
Urine, and put to it half a handful of Salt, as much Alum, and half an Ounce
of white Copperas, boil them together, and with it wash the Sore once or twice
a day, then after a little drying, anoint them with the Ointment called
Aegyptiacum, and is made of Vinegar eight Ounces, of Honey twelve Ounces of
Verdegrease two Ounces, of Alum one Ounce and a half, and boiled to the
height, till it come to a red Salve, and it will both kill the Malignant
Humors, and heal and dry up the Sores.

Another for swelled Legs, wheather by Grease, ^o^tiness, Wind or Travel.
First, Bathe them well with the Pickle or Brine which comes from Olives, being
made hot; Then take a Pint of Train Oil, as much Nerve Oil, and as much Oil de
bay, a quarter of a pound of Alum, half a Pint of Sallet-Oyl, half a pound of
Hog's Grease, put all these to a Pottle of Urine, and with a handful or two of
Mallows, Oat-meal bruised, and Bran, boil them to a Poultess, and very hot
apply it to the Grief; Do this once in two days.


Things good in General for a Horse that has a Wren^h in his Back.
To shave away the Hair, but then you must not lay his Charge on too hot; You
may find many sorts of them in my First Part. But more particularly take this,
Take of Bolearmoniack, Com^rey, alias, Consolida Major, Galbanum,
Sal-Armoniack, Sanguis draconis, his own Blood, Burgundy-pitch, Mastick,
Olibanum, of each alike, stamp them well together with Wheat-Meal, Vinegar and
the white of an Egg, and lay it upon the place grieved, then clap upon the top
of it all along the Chine and Back, a Sheeps Skin newly taken off from his
Back, and change it every day, and in three or four days it will be well, but
let the Charge lie on till it fall away of it self. Or to Bath his Back with
Brandy well warmed, and the powder of Bolearmoniack mixed together is very good.
But if your Horse be Naturally weak in the Back, or swayed in the Back, these
two Diseases are not absolutely Cured; but Coleworts boiled in Sallet-Oyl, and
put Bean-Meal into it, and Charge the Back with it, will strengthen it.

Or you may give him these things inwardly which is good for a Back
swanckt in the Fillets or Loyn; Or for a Wrench in the Backbone, viz. Take one
Ounce of Solomon's Seal, one Ounce of Comfrey, one of Clary, a quarter of a
pound of Pollipody of the Oak, Wood-bitony If your Roots be green, slice them,
if dry beat them to powder.
two handfuls; Boil them in a Gallon of strong Beer or more, till half the
quantity be consumed, then take it off the Fire, and put into it a quarter of a
pound of Butter, and a quarter of a pound of Honey, and give him a quart of it
lukewarm in a Drenching-Horn fasting, at the end of every third day, for about
three or four times, and Order him as in Observations how to Order sick Horses;
I^^ing-Glass boiled in Milk with a little Bole armoniack is a great Strengthner
of the Back, given him for several Mornings together; But the more easy and
familiar way to Cure these Distempers, and is as good a thing as I think you
can possibly give him, is to make him some Balls of common Turpentine, and the
powder of English Liquoris, and give him about two Ounces of them, for about a
Fortnight together, and apply at the same time to the Reins of his Back this
excellent Plaster, viz. Oxicrocium and Paracelsus, of each a like quantity
(but rather more of the Oxicrocium) melted together, and spread upon Sheeps
Leather, and apply it to grieved part, and let it lie on till it fall off of it
self; You may renew his Charge if you think it convenient, after the other has
been about a Fortnight on. This is also a very excellent Plaster for a Back
Sinew-strain in the Foot-lock Joint, and indeed for all manner of Strains
whatsoever.

To Cure the Lampas.
Take a roasted Onion very hot, and put it upon a Clout, or upon Hurds, and
with it rub the Lampas very much, and do this two or three times a day till it
be whole, but the best Cure is to burn it away, which every common Smith can do.

Things good to Cure the Camery or Frounc^.
To let him Blood in the two greatest Veins under his Tongue, and to wash the
Sore with Vinegar and Salt, or to burn the Pimples on the Head, and to wash
them with Ale and Salt till they Bleed.

To Cure the Barbes.
Clip them away with a Pair of Scissers, and let them Bleed, then prick them in
the Palate of the Mouth with your Fleam, and wash the place with Wine Vinegar,
Bolearmoniack and Salt, and see that no Hay dust stick upon the Place Clipped,
and he will be well again.

Several Receipts for the Canker in the Mouth, Nose, or in any other Part of
the Body.
For the Canker in the Mouth or Nose, take White Wind half a pint, Roch-Allom,
the quantity of a Wall-nut, Bay Salt half a spoonful, English-Honey one
spoonful, Red-Sage, Rue, Rib-wort, Brambleleaves, of each alike much, boil
these in the White Wind so much as will suffice, till a quarter be consumed,
and inject this water into the sorrance, or if it be in the Mouth* wash the
place with a Clout fastened to a stick, and dress him therewith twice a day, or
oftener as you shall see ^it, till it be whole.

Another for the Nose or Mouth, or any other place.
Take the Juice of Plantine, as much Vinegar, and the same weight of the powder
of Alum, and with it anoint the sore twice or thrice a day, and it will kill
it and Cure it.

Another.
Take of Ginger and Alum, of each alike, made into fine powder, mixing them
well together till they be very thick like a Salve, and after you have washed
it very well with Allum-water or Vinegar, anoint it with this Salve, and in
twice or thrice dressing it will be killed.


Things good in General for the Canker.
The Herb Fluellen stamped, and the Juice given inwardly, or applied outwardly,
heals the most spreading and eating Cankers and Ulcers, and fretting Sores,
Sage, Plantine, Rosemary, Honey, Alum, Verdegrease, green and white Copperas,
Brimstone, Tansie, Bay Salt, Bramble-leaves, Elder, Ginger, the Roots of
Asphodil, quick Silver, Arsnick, Agrimony made up with Hog's Grease Cures old
Cankers and inveterate Ulcers, Alum, Honey and Verdegrease mixed together is
good; the Decoction of white Beets in Water is good for Running Sores, Ulcers
and Cankers in the Head, Legs, or other Parts of the Body, the Decoction of the
leaves of the Burr-dock, etc.


Another Excellent Cure for the Cure of the Canker in the Head, Face or Ey^s,
etc.
Take three Ounces of Burgundy Pitch, and half a pint of Sallet Oil, and put
them into a large Earthen new Pipkin, and set them over a soft Fire, and let
them Simper gently, keeping them stirring while they are on the Fire, to
incorporate them the better. Your Pipkin must be the larger, by reason that you
are to put in Verdegrease* which is of that fie^y Nature, that it will make it
quickly rise and boil over, if you have not a special care thereof; After you
have boiled it near a quarter of an hour, put to it one Ounce of the Oil of
Turpentine, and as much of the Powder of Verdegrease as will lie upon a
sixpence, finely powdered and searc'd through a Lawn Sieve, boil them also a
little while together, then take it off the Fire, and put it into a Gally-pot,
and keep it till you have occasion to use it.

Directions to know whether it be well or ill made.
If it be vell boiled it will be neither too thick nor too thin, but in the
condition of an Ointment, and of a very good green Color; But if it be too
much boiled, your Verdegrease will turn it of a red Color, which will be so
prejudicial to your Salve, that it will lose the healing quality thereof.

Directions how to use it.
If you use it for a Canker in his Nose, you are to Tie a Linen Rag upon the
end of a stick, and dip it in Wine Vinegar and Salt, or Verjuice and Salt mixed
together, and put it ^p into his Nostrils, and rub and scrub off the scabs and
filth that you find therein; When you have thus washed and cleansed it, take
the longest Goose-feather you can get, and if it be not long enough to reach to
the top of his Nostrils, Tie it to the end of a small stick, and dip it into
the Salve, and use it as before once a day, and he will do well. If you find it
on his Head, Face or Eyes, you must do the like, viz. to rub and scrub off the
scabs till they Bleed, and lay on some of your Salve with a Feather, and strew
some Wheat-Bran upon it to make it keep on the better. You are to dress it once
a day till you find it heal, and then once in two or three days is enough.

Observa^ion.
The quickest and speediest Way for to effect all outward Cures, is to let him
stand in the House during his Cure.


Things good to Kill Worms in General.
Alheal, Alkanet, Water Agrimony, the leaves of Bistort, or Snake-weed, the
powder of the Root of Butter-Bur, the Seed of Sea Co^ewort, bruised and given
in Beer, the powder of ordinary small Centaury, the powder of the Root called
Devils Bit, Elecampane, the powder of Fern-Roots, the Juice of Flix-weed,
Gentian, Feltwort or Baldmony, Germander, Hops beaten to Powder and given him,
the powder of Horehound, Knotgrass, Groundsel, Savin, Brimstone, Allom, Salt,
Mother-wort, the Bark of the Root of the Mulberry-Tree, Nettleseeds, the powder
of the leaves of the Peach*tree, the powder of Plantine, Horseradish;
Wild-Rotchet, Rupture-wort, Southern-wood, Vervain, the Bark of the
Wallnut-tree, or the powder of the green shells, Wormwood dried and beaten and
given, Tansie seed* the white Beete sodden with Garlic, Mercury Calcined,
Alloes, blak Soap, Ta^ners Ouze, his own* Hair chopped small and given him in
his Provender, Rue, Soot, the warm Guts o^ a new slain Hen or Chicken rolled up
in Salt and Brimstone, and given him, Elder-berries sodden in* Milk, Chalk,
Fennegreek, Bay Berries, Turmerick, Worm-seed, Garlic, Hens dung, Saffron,
Mint, Sage, Rozin, Juniper berries, the green Branches of Sallow or Willow
given him, Reeds, so much of Sublima^um as will lie upon two pence, workt up in
Butter and given him, Stone-crop, Quicksilver crude or mortified, with the
Juice of Lemons, etc.

Particular Receipts for the ^ots or Worms.
Take a quart of new Milk, and as much Honey as will extraordinarily sweet,
then give it him in the Morning lukewarm, having fasted all the night before,
and let him ^ast after it two hours; then take a Pint of Beer, and dissolve
into it a good spoonful or more of black Soap, and being well mixed together
give it him, then ride and chase him a little, and let, him fast another hour,
and the Worms will avoid.


Another more Easy.
Take Savin chopped and stamped small, a good handful warmed in a quart of
Beer, and given him lukewarm, or a quart of Brine given him is very good.

Another.
Take as much Precipitate, alias, red Mercury Calcined as will lie upon a
Silver twopence, and work it into a piece of sweet Butter, the bigness of a
small Wall-Nut in the manner of a Pill, then lape it all over again with
Butter, and make it as big as a small Egg, and give it him Fasting in a
Morning, taking forth his Tongue, and putting it upon the end of a stick, put
it down his Throat, and Ride him a little after it, and give him no Water that
Night, and let him fast two hours, and then let him feed as at other times.
With this Medicine you may kill all manner of Bots, Trunchions and Worms of
what kind soever, but you must be very careful you exceed not the quantity
prescribed, for it is a very strong poison.

Another.
Take the ^ender tops of Broom and of Savin, of each half a hand^ul, chop them
very small, and work them up into Pills with fresh or sweet Butter, and having
kept him over Night fasting, give him three of these Pills the next Morning
early, and let him fast two hours after it, and give Him no Water that Night;
Or take Rosin and Brimstone beaten not very fine, and strowed amongst his
Provender, and given him fasting, long before he drinks is good.

To a Mare with Foal, be Cautious what you Give her.
You shall need therefore but only to Rake her, and to let her Blood in the
Roo^ or Palate of her Mouth, and make her eat her own Blood, for that will not
only Kill, but help all inward Maladies.

Another.
Take a quart of Milk warm from the Cow, and put half a pint of Honey to it,
and give it him the first day; The next day take Rue and Rosemary, of each half
a handful, stamp them well together, then let it in^use together with the
powder of Brimstone and Soot, (so much as will suffice) four Hours in a quart
of Beer or Ale-wort, then strain it, and give it him Blood-warm, then Ride him
gently an hour or two, and set him up warm, and give him Hay an Hour before you
give him Drink, and let it be white Water, and give him no Hay before you give
him his said Drink, and let his Drink be either a Mash or white Water.

Another.
Take two or three Heads of Garlic well peeled and bruised, with the quantity
of a small Nutmeg of black Soap, and put them into a quart of strong Beer, and
warm it a little over the Fire, and give it him lukewarm in the Morning
fasting, with about an Ounce of the Flower of Brimstone at the Mouth of the
first Horn; And Order him as you do Horses that you give Drenches to.

Another.

Three or four penniworth of the powder of Carolin^, (which you may buy at the
Apothecaries) given him in a quart of sweet Wort in the Morning fasting, is a
very good Cure for them.


Another.
Take of Turmerick and Anniseeds a good spoonful, of each beaten to powder, put
them in a quarter of a Pint of Brandy, and a pint and a hal^ of strong Beer,
and gi^e it him fasting in the Morning lukewarm, with some Flower of Brimstone
put at the Mouth of each Horn, not exceeding an Ounce of it in all, and let him
Fast three or four hours after it. You may Repeat this Drink two or three
times, as you see occasion.


Another for the Bots in a Horse.
Take the Guts of a Chicken newly Killed and wrap them up warm in Honey, and
put it down his Throat over Night; the next Morning give him a Pint of New
Milk, with about three Ounces of the Flower of Brimstone, and exercise him
after it.


Things good i^ General to stench Bleeding, either inward or outward, or of any
Sinew, Cut or Wound, or of B^e^ding at the Nose.
The leaves of Snakeweed or Bistort strowed upon the Wound after it is beaten
to Powder, the Juice of Cleavers applied to a bleeding Wound will stop it; the
green leaves of Cud-w^ed or Cotton-weed bruised and laid to the Wound, the
decoction of the Herb called Golden Rod outwardly applied the smoother
Horse-tail is good, either inwardly taken or outwardly applied, Ladies Mantle,
the dried leaves of Medlars strowed upon the Wound being beaten to powder,
stops the Bleeding of it; the Juice of Mint given in Vinegar stays
Bleeding inwardly, Moneywort or the Herb two pence stays Bleeding inwardly,
so does Moonwort, or the Oaken Moss of a Pale or Spear; Mouse-ear stays the
Flux of Blood inward or outward; the Powder of the leaves of the Peach Tree
strowed upon the Wound, Plantain, Queen of the Medows, Medlars dried before
they be ripe and beaten to powder, and strewed upon the Wound, the Juice of
Sorrel, stone-crop, a piece of a Fuze-ball or a Mullipuss laid to any Bleeding
Wound stops it presently; An Ointment made of white Lilly-Roots with
Hogs-Greas is very good for them. The Broth wherein Coleworts has been sodden,
is good for cut Sinews and Joints. The Root of Garden-Lilly stamped with Honey,
gleweth and soddereth them together, the Herb Tutsan or Park-Leaves, the Leaves
or Bark of the Willow-Tree is good for the Bleeding of Wounds, or at the Nose,
or Fluxes of Blood, the powder of the blew Bottle taken inwardly, the Juice of
Clowns Wound-wort taken inwardly with Comfrey, or applied outwardly, the Down
of a Hares or Cony Skins, or Woolen Cloth burnt to Ashes and strewed upon the
Wound, Primrose leaves or Wild Tansie bruised, and old Felt burnt and beaten to
Powder. Bolearmoniack beaten to powder, and given inwardly or applied
outwardly, stancheth Bleeding. To stop Bleeding at the Nole, Tie him hard upon
his Forelegs, about twelve inches above his Knees, and just beneath his Elbow,
and keep the Nape of his Neck as cold as may be, with wet Hay or Clothes, and
it will stanch him presently. The leaves of Rosemary made into Oils, Ointments
or Bathings, help all cold and benumbed Joints, Sinews or Members, etc.


The best Receipt to stop Bleeding at the Nostrils.
The Juice of the Roots or Leaves of Nettles squirted up his Nostrils stays
the bleeding at the Nose. But the best thing of all to stop bleeding at the
Nose, is to take a Hank of Coventry-blew thread, and hang it cross a stick, and
set one end of it on fire, and strew a little White Wind Vinegar on it, to keep
it from burning too fast, and let him receive the smoke up his Nostrils, and it
will stop it in a very short time, when Nothing else will do. New Horse Dung
tempered with Chalk and strong Vinegar laid to a Bleeding Wound will stop it,
burnt Silk is good likewise for it, so is the Juice of Coriander, or bruised
Sage, or Hogs dung, or a Clod of Earth, or bruised Hysop, or the soft crops of
Haw-thorn bruised, or to boil two ounces of the Horses blood, and beat it to
powder, and strew upon the Wound; and to stop Bleeding at the Nose, the Juice
of Coriander squirted up it stays it, or the Juice of Periwincle, the Coam of
a Smiths Forge laid to the Wound stays bleeding, or Shepherds Pouch distilled
and an ounce given fasting, stays any inward bleeding, whether natural or
unnatural, or Bursa-Pastoris bruised and applied to the place.

Particular Receipts to stop Bleeding.
Take the powder of the Stone Emachile, and blow it up into his Nose, and lay
it to the Vein or Wound that Bleeds, and it stancheth them.

Another.
Take the Root of Rubarb and bruise it in a Mortar, and stop it into the
Nostrils that bleeds, and it stays it.

Another for the Bleeding at the Nose.
Take Bitony and stamp it in a Mortar with Bay Salt, or other white Salt with
Wine-Vineger, and put it into his Nostril that bleeds, and it stays it.

Loosening Things in General, Vide the first Part.


Binding Things in General which is good to stop a Looseness, Lask or Flux of
Blood.
Sloes, or the inner Rind of the black Bush, wild Bryar-ball, or the inner
Rind of it, Dock-Roots, or the seeds of Docks boiled in Beer* the inner Skin
that covers the Chest-Nut, Cud-weed or Cotten-weed, the Root of the
Water-flag, or Flower-de-luce, the seed of Flea-wort fried and given, the seed
of Flix-weed given in Water where Steel has been quenched, the powder of
stinking Gladwin is good for the Flux, Winter green, the dried shells of
Hazel-Nuts, or the red Skin that is over the Kernel, the berries of Holly-holm,
or Halver-bush beaten to powder and given, Knape-weed, Knot-grass, Ladies
Mantle, the seeds or Roots of Water-Lilly, Loose-strife or Willow Herb,
Honey-wort, or the Herb Twopence, Moon-wort, the Oaken-Moss of a Pale or
Spear, Mulberries, the Roots of Mullen, the Leaves and Bark of the Oak and
Acorn Cups, the leaves of the Pear Tree, or sour Pears, Periwincle, Queen of
the Medows, red Roses, Sanicle, the powder of Services when they are mellow,
Shepherds Purse, wild Tansie, the Bark of the Wall-Nut Tree, or the Kernels of
the Wall-Nuts when they are old, Yarrow, Wormwood, the Juice of Rue mixed with
clarified Honey with red Wine, or Bean flower and Bole-armoniack boiled in
Milk* or red Wine and Bay Salt bruised together, Cinnamon and Nutmegs boiled in
red Wine, Tanners Bark, Dragon-water, a pint of it sweetened with Treacle,
Myrrh, Mastick, Storax, the Rind of Pomegranate, Alum, for a Foal give him a
Pint of Ver-Juice to drink. The inward and outward Barks of the Willow-Tree
burnt to Ashes is a great binder and dryer up of Sores, etc.

Particular Receipts to stay a Lask or Looseness.
Take Bean-flower and Bolearmoniack, of each three Ounces, mix them with red
Wine, or stale Beer, and give it him blood-warm.


Another.
Take half a Pint of Plantine water, and half a pint of red Wine, (or for want
of that, Claret,) and put into it an Ounce of Cassia powder finely beaten, with
as much of the powder of Pomgranate Rinds, and boil them well together, then
take the Yolks of two Eggs, and some Loaf Sugar, and make a Caudle of it, and
give it him luke warm, and it will help him.


Another.
The powder of a Stags Pizel dried and grated, and given him in Claret or stale
Beer, is a very Sovereign Remedy for it, so is the powder of the Jaw Bone of a
Pike, Teeth and all, given after the same manner.


Another very Excellent.
Take three pints of stale Beer, and put to it the powder of Cummin-seeds three
spoonfuls, and boil them together till half be consumed, then take Knot grass,
Shepherds Purse and Plantine, and stamp them severally and put four or five
spoonfuls of the Juice of each of them, and put to the Beer, and boil them
again a little, and give him it half overnight, and half the next Morning; But
if it fall out in the Winter that you cannot get the Herbs, then take the Water
of the distilled Herbs, and use it as before.


Another.
Take as much Bole-armoniack as contains the bigness of a Wall-Nut, beat it
into fine powder, and put it into a pint of Claret, (or for want of that,
Verjuice) and give it him when you find occasion. Or take a pint of Claret,
Verjuice or Beer, and put into them an Ounce of the powder of Cinnamon, with
some of the powder of the wild Briar-balls, and two or three ^olks of new laid
Eggs warmed over the Fire. This Given twice or thrice at most will perfectly
Cure him.


Another very good.
Take a quart of Claret, and put to it four Yolks of new laid Eggs, half an
Ounce of long pepper, with as much of the Grains of Paradise, boil them
together and give it him lukewarm. Or take an Ounce of the inward Bark of an
Oak, and half an Ounce of the powder of long pepper boiled in a quart of new
Milk, and give it half overnight, and the other half of it the next Morning
fasting is very good.


Another.
Take two or three wild Briar-balls, if they be not very large, and beat them
to powder, and boil them in a quart of Beer with a little of the powder of
Bolearmoniack, and give it him Blood warm, and it is a certain Cure.

Another for a violent Scouring.
Take the Intrails of a Pullet, or great Chickin, all but the Gizard, and mix
with them of Spikenard one Ounce, and make him swallow it, and this will
infallibly stay his Scouring, yea, though it be a bloody Flux.

Another which will stay a Lask, be it never so violent.
Take a penny worth of Alum powdered, Bolearmoniack powdered an Ounce, put
them in a quart of Milk, keeping them stirring till the Milk become all of a
Curd, and give it him lukewarm.

Another.
Take a quart of Red Wine, and put into it an Ounce and a half of Bolearmoniack
in fine powder, and two Ounces and a half of the Conserve of Sloes, mix them
together and boil them pretty well, then take it off and put into it a spoonful
of the powder of Cinnamon, brewed altogether, and give it him, and let him fast
two hours after it, and le^ him eat no washed Meat. Hay is wholesome, so is
Bread and Oats, if they be well mixed with Beans or Wheat, but not otherwise.

Another.
Take a handful of the Herb Shepherds Purse, and boil in a quart of strong Ale,
and when it is lukewarm take the leaves of Woodrose stamped and put therein,
and give it him.


Things good in General for a Bloody Flux.
Cummin-seeds, Knot-grass, Plantine, the leaves or seeds of Agrimony, the inner
Rind of the Barberry-tree, or Ber^ies, or red Beets, Bistort or Snakeweed, and
Turmentil is very excellent, Brank u^sine, Bears-breech, Bucks-horn, Plantine*
Burnet, the Roots of Cinquefoyl or Five Leaved Grass, the Juice of Clowns
Wound-wort, red Darnel, the powder of the yellow Water-Flag or Flower de luce,
the Flower of ^vy, Kidney-wort, Sage, Wormwood, Shepherds pouch, Red Robin, the
seeds of Sorrel or Roots, wild Tansie, ^ole-armoniack, Myrrh, Southernwood,
Parsley, Rue, Spittlewort, Cassia, Cinnamon, Chalk, Vinegar, Bursa Pastoris,
Tanners Bark, Red Wine, Sloes, Arsmart, Self-heal, Paul's bittony, Milfoyl, the
blood of a Hare made into Powder, the Powder of Men's bon^s, the powder of white
Dogs Turd, the Pizzle of a Heart, or of Hearts or Goats Horns burned, the Jaw
bone of a Pike beaten to powder, red Saunders, etc.

Particular Receipts for the Bloody Flux.
Take an Ounce of Saffron, two Ounces of Myrrh, three Ounces of Southernwood,
of Parsley an Ounce, of Rue three Ounces, of Spittle-wort and Hysop, of each
two Ounces, of Cassia which is like Cinnamon, one Ounce, beat all these into
fine powder, and with Chalk and strong Vinegar work them to a paste, of which
paste make little Cakes, and dry them in the shadow, and dissolve some of them
in a pint and a half of Barley Milk, or for want of that, that Juic^ which is
called Crimor or P^isane, and give it him to drink, and it does not only Cure
the bloody Flux, but being given with a quart of warm Water, heals all grief
and pai^ either in the Belly or Bladder, which comes for want of staling.

Another.
Take Red Wine three pints, half a handful of the Herb called Bursa Pastoris,
or Shepherds purse, and as much Tanners bark taken out of the Fat and dried,
boil them in the Wine till somewhat more then a Pint be consumed, then strain it
hard and give it him lukewarm to drink, if you add to it a little Cinnamon it
will be the better, or to dissolve into a pint of Red Wine, four Ounces of the
Conserve of Sloes, and give it him to drink, either of the Medicines are
sufficient.

Another most Excellent Receipt, which is infallible for the Cure of the Bloody
Flux, or any other Scouring whatsoever.

Take three pints of new Milk, and dissolve in it over a gentle Fire four or
five Ounces of Issing-Glass, which, when it is thoroughly dissolved, it will so
thicken the Milk that it will look like unto Cream. After you have so done,
pour or strain it forth through a very course Sieve, to take out the dross and
dregs of the Issing glass that will remain behind undissolved, and give it him
lukewarm in the Morning fasting, and at twice or thrice giving it will Cure
him at farthest. It Is also a very great Strengthner of Nature.

When the Issing-glass is dissolved, and the dregs strained and poured from the
Milk, there will not be above a quart of it, which is quantity enough to give
him at a time.

To make your Issing-glass dissolve the freer and better, bruise it first in a
Mortar, and then take it in pieces, which if it be right and good, it will
Flake off like unto a Wafer, and be Transparent.

Issing-glass is not much unlike in form and shape unto a white Pudding; The
Price of it you may find in the Table of the Prices of Drugs.

It Is very good also to be given to a weak Horse, to strengthen and make him
lusty.


Things good in General for the Falling of the Fundament*
To anoint it with Oil of Roses or warm Red-Wine, if it be not inflamed, and
put it up again; but if it be, bath it with a Sponge dipped in the Decoction of
Mallows, Chamomel, and Dill, mingled together, to assuage the Swelling, and
put it up again with your warm hand, and bath the Tuel about with Red-Wine,
wherein has been sodden Acatium, Galls, Acornecups and the paring of Quinces,
then throw upon it the powder of Bolearmoniack, Frankincense, etc.

Particular Receipts for the Falling of the Fundament.
Take Garden Cresses, and having dried them to powder, with your Hand put up
the Fundament, and then strew the powder thereon, after it lay a little Honey
thereon, and then strew more of the powder, mix with it the powder of Cummin,
and it helps.

Another.
Take white Salt made into very fine powder, strew a little upon the Gut, then
take a piece of Lard, and first having boiled Mallow-leaves till they be soft,
and beat the leaves well with the Lard, and when it is well beaten make it up
like to a Suppository, and apply it to the place every day once till it be
whole.


Another.
Take a small Faggot made of the green Boughs of the Willow-tree, and burn them
to Ashes in some clean place* When you have done wash his Fundament with warm
Water, and strew some of the finest of them upon it, and put it up into its
place again with your warm Hand, and Tie down h^s Tuel between his hinder Legs
to his Surcingle, pretty straight, and it will Knit very strong again. Or white
Pepper strowed upon it, after it has been beaten and s^arced to a very fine
powder, and used as you did the other, is very good also.


Things good in General for the Biting of a mad Dog.
To let blood first, Angelica, Balm, Wood-bittony, Cardus Benedictus, the Juice
of Elder, all taken inwardly* An Ointment made of the Juice of the Figtree
leaves and Hogs grease is good to anoint the sore, Gentian, Felt-wort or
Baldmony, Hounds tongue, Mint bruised and laid to the ^ore is good, Pimpernel
given inwardly, or applied outwardly, Plantine, the Bark of the Wall-Nut tree
taken with Onions, Salt and Honey is good, the tops of Rue, Box leaves,
Primrose*roots, of each alike, powdered together, and boiled in new Milk with
London-Treacle is good, Hob goblin, Dan-wort. Sallet-Oyl, the powder of
Diapente given inwardly, or lay a live Pidgeon cleaved in the midst hot to the
Wound, and it will draw out the venom, and heal the sore with Turpentine and
Hog's Grease melted together, the leaves of Aristolochia bruised will take away
the poison, Yarrow, Calamint and Southernwood made into a Salve. The Ash Keys,
the Roots of the sweet Bryar dried and beaten to powder, and given inwardly,
and applied outwardly, is good, etc.

Particular Receipts for the Biting of a mad Dog.
Take Hob-goblin, Periwincle and Box-leaves, of each half a handful, first
mince them small, and stamp them very small in a Stone Mortar, and with Milk or
Beer administer it both at the Change and Full of the Moon.

The best of Cures for the Biting of a mad Dog.
Take the Herb which grows in dry and barren Hills, called, The S^ar of the
Earth; you must give it three days together; the first time you must gather
three of these Herbs with all the whole Roots, and wash and wipe them clean,
then pound them well, losing no part of them, and give it him in Beer, an ^ be
careful that he has all the Herbs and Roots, you may make them up in sweet
Butter, which will do as well; The second day give him five of these Herbs and
Roots, and the third day seven, and he will be assuredly Cured, for it Cures
all manner of Cattle of all sorts whatsoever; It Cured a whole Kennel of Hounds
of a Gentleman's, one Beagle excepted, which they did not suspect to be bitten
It Cured a Gentleman's Son, who was so far gone with it that his Head began to
be Addle, and to talk idly, yet it Cured him perfectly, and though he was
then but a Child, yet he lived to be a proper man. Look for another afterward.

Another.
Take Goats dung, and of Flesh that has layn long in the Salt, with the Herb
Danewort, of each half a pound, and forty Wall Nuts stamped altogether, and lay
part thereof to the Sore, and it will suck out the venom, and heal up the
Wound; but upon the first Dressing give him Wine and Treacle together to drink.

Another.
Give him two or three spoonfuls of the powder of Diapente, in a quart of good
Ale or Beer, and to cauterize and burn the Sore, and to heal it up with a
healing Salve.


Another.
Presently after the Biting let him Blood, then take Sage and Rue, of each a
large handful, one Ounce of common Treacle, three or four Heads of Garlic
peeled and bruised, of scraped Tinn or Tinnfoyl the bigness of a Nutmeg; Put
all these into a Gallon of strong Ale, and put them up into an Earthen Pot
close stopped with Paste, then boil it in a Kettle of Water till half of it be
consumed. Give him five or six spoonfuls of it before the Full of the Moon, and
three days after; but if necessity requires, give it presently.


Another not so difficult to make.
First, let Blood, (as you must always do in this Distemper) then take Henbane
and burn it to Ashes, and mingle it with Hog's Grease, and apply it to the place
bitten* and give him some of the Juice of the green Herb inwardly to drink in a
quarter of a Pint of Angelica water, and he will do well.

Things good in General to expel all manner of Poison, either by Serpent,
Spider, or any venomous Be^st.
Bay Berries, Burrage, the powder of the bl^w Bottle, the powder of the Root of
the Butter-burr, water Caltrops, Dragons, the seed of Fennel, Garlic, English
or foreign Gentian, Felt-wort or Baldmony, Clove-Gilliflowers, Angelica,
Germander, Hawk-weed, the leaves or the berries of the Herb called True-love,
or one Berry, Hops, Horehound, Juniper Berries, Lavender-Cotton, the white
Lilly, Lovage, wild Marjorem, Mustard Seed, Ground pine or Champepitis, the
Seeds of Garden Rue, Sorrel, Southern-wood, Stone-crop, the Juice of Turmentil
or Set-foyle, Heart-trefoyl, Vipers Bugloss, the Root of Valerian, Holythistle,
Birth-wort, the Root of Spider*wort, the seed of Turnips, the Juice of
Bastard-wild poppy, Moon-wort, Calamus, white Hellebore, or Neesing-root,
Bittony, Elecampane, Mallows, Cinque-foyl, Master-wort or Herb Gerard, the
seed of Hercules, All heal, Parsley-seed, Ameos, or Bishops weed, Wormwood,
Pom^itron, the seed of Oringes, Pepper, the Ashes of Reeds given him to drink,
Mug-wort, or great Tansie, and Wine and Camomel stamped together.


Particular Receipts to expel Poison.
Take a pint of Sallet Oil, and mix with it some Dragon and Angelica water, and
give it him lukewarm.


Another.
Take Calamus, ^ittony, Angelica, Dragons, and Elecampane and Bay Berries,
about two ounces of all of them together very finely beaten, and boil them in a
quart of Ale, and give it him, is very Excellent.


Another.
Take Rue, Mug-wort, Germander and Wormwood, chopped small and boiled in a quart
of Beer and give it him.

If You desire to know the best Cure for this Distemper, Look for the Ointment
of Dialthaea or Marshmallows, in the Table of the Prices if D^ugs, and you may
find the Receipt ^f it.


Things good in General for the Plague or Pestilence
^^oo^ not your Horse in this Dis^^se, for if you do it w^ll certainly K^ll him.
Red-Lead, Bezor, the seed of the Thorny-Apple, Gunpowder, Bistort or Snake
weed, one Blade, Burrage, the powder of the blew bottle, the Roots of the
Butter-Burr beaten to powder, the Juice of Cellendine, Cuckoe-pint dried and
beaten to powder, the Leaves or Root of Devils bit boiled in Wine, Elecampane,
Garlic, True-love or one Berry, the Berries of Ivy, Juniper berries,
pimpernel, the seeds of Garden Rue, Saffron, Sage, the Roots of the Star
thistle, Stone-crop, Angelica, the Roots of Valerian, Diapente mixed with Sack
and sweetened with Treacle, Urine mixed with Hens dung, Gentian, Aristolochia,
Myrrh, Scrapings of Ivory, Bay Berries, Pepper, Germander, Turmentil, The Scull
of a dead man, dried and beaten to powder, and given in Sack i^ most excellent.
the Seeds or Leaves of Southernwood stamped and given in White Wind, or Ale
with Bolearmoniack or Balm, Bittony or Naphe, the Juice of Marigolds, Scabius,
Dragons*water, Mug-wort, Featherfew, Yarrow, Tansie, Briar-leaves or
Elder-leaves, the Root of the white Lilly given three Mornings together boiled
in Beer, causes the poison of the Pestilence to break forth into Blisters in
the outward part of the Skin, the Root of Winter-Green is good, Calathian
Violet, Vipers-grass, Rue, Ameos or Bishops-weed. To preserve a Horse from the
Infection of the Plague is to anoint his Nose with Vinegar, wherein has been
steeped Affasetida during the Infection.


Particular Receipts for the Cure of the Plague or Pestilence.
Take Devil-bit, Gunpowder, Bistort or Snakeweed, Angelica, Bayberries, the
Root Meum, Elecampane, all beaten to powder, and give it him two Mornings
together, and Order him as you do other sick Horses. About three Ounces of all
of them is enough.

Another.
Give him two spoonfuls of Diapente with a pint of White Wind, or a quart of
strong Beer sweetened with Treacle, and give it him. If you desire more
Receipts, you may Compound them as your discretion will think ^it, out of my
General Things for the Plague.


Things good in General for Pissing and Staling of Blood.
Agrimony, Wood-bittony, Bucks-horn, Plantine, wild Bryar Palls, the whole
Chest-Nut dried and beaten to powder, the powder of the Root of the Earth
Chest-Nut, the Root of Cinquefoyl or Five-Leav'd Grass, Clowns Wound-wort,
Comfrey, the powder of an Herb called Crabs-claws, the Herb or Seed of
Flix-weed given wherein Steel has been quenched, Fluellen or Lluellen, Golden
Rod, the smoother Tail of the rougher Horse tail, the Juice of Housleek,
Spear-Mint, Money wort, Mouse-Ear dried, green Mulberries, red Robin, Shepherds
Purse, Bolearmoniack, [Hob-goblin is a Stone much like an Oyster-shell, which
you may find upon course stony Lands. It is good also beaten to powder to take
off a Felm from the Eyes.].
Hob-Goblin, Blood-wort, Plantine, the Juice of Purslain; the powder of Gum*
Tragacanth and Arabeck, the red Rattle grass boiled in red Wine, red Roses, the
seeds of Rushes, the Juice of the powder of Sanicle.

The Seeds of Sorrel or Roots, wild Tansie, wild Time or Mother of Time,
Turmentil or Set-foyl, the Kernels of old Wall-Nuts, the powder of the Rind o^
dried Pomgranates, Pollipodi^m of the Wall, Knot-grass, Comfery, Storax,
Pineapple, Kernels, Daffodil and Wheat Flour, or Licoris and Anniseeds rolled
in Honey and given him. Barley boiled in the Juice of Gumsolly, the Barley to
eat and the Liquor to drink, the yellow Willow herb, Bugle, herb Two pence,
water-Sengreen, Marsh mallows, the Root or Queen of the Meadow, Knipper-wort,
the
tender tops of the Bramble-bush or Flowers, the berries of the Hawthorn tree,
Acatia, Moss of an Oaken pale or stick boiled in Beer, Coral is a most
excellent thing to stop all issues of blood, a live Frog given him, or
Aristolochia longa boiled in Ale or Beer is very good.

Particular Receipts for the Care of a Horse that Pisses or stales Blood.
Take Knot-grass, Shepherds purse, Blood-wort of the Hedge, Pollipodium of the
Wall, Comfery, Garden Blood-wort of each a handful, shred them small, and put
them into a quart of Beer and boil them, then put to them a little Salt, Leaven
and Soot, mix altogether and give it him.

Another for the same.
Take three or four red Sprats, or one red Herring, with a hard Row, chop them
very small, and let them lie asteep a^out half an hour, in a quart of strong
Beer, and give it him lukewarm, fasting in the Morning, or at any time of the
day when you have occasion, with about a spoonful of the powder of
Bolearmoniack amongst it, and it will Cure him at twice giving at farthest.


Another which never yet failed, whether it be a Strair, or some other inward
Distemper, and will stop any violent Scouring, being boiled in Beer, and given.
Take two or three wild Briar Apples, if they be small, and beat them to very
fine powder, taking out the sticks that are in them, and boil them in a quart
of Beer, and give it him fasting, so long as you find him stale Blood. If you
put to it the powder of Hob-goblin, it will be the better, and it will
certainly Cure him. Take heed you blood him not, for if you do you endanger his
Life. It will Cure him at twice or thrice giving at furthest.

These Balls are to be Given when they be Ripe, which is about the latter end
of November.

Another.
Take a good handful of Arsmart, and chop it very small, and boil it well in a
quart of good Beer, and when it is cool enough give it him so long as you find
him to stale Blood, with the powder of Bolearmoniack, and you shall find it
work a Cure in two or three times giving at farthest.

Things good in General for the Cure of the Poll-Evil.
To sink it at the first Rising, anoint it very well with red Lead and Sallet
Oil, and cha^e it in very well twice a day with your hand, and keep him warm,
and it will sink it, and if you find it will not sink, ripen it with Wine
Vinegar, and the Loam of a Wall, straws and all, boiled together, and let out
the Corruption with a hot Iron, and Tent it with Flax dipped in Hog's Grease, and
after four days tent it with a dry Sponge dipped in Turpentine, Saffron and the
Yolks of Eggs. But if it be turned to a Fistula, then take of unslackt Lyme and
Arsnick, the Juice of Garlic and Onions, Wall-wort and Holly, and boil them
till they become an Ointment, then wash the Sore with the Water wherein green
Copperas and Allom has been bo^led, and fill the whole full of the Ointment,
by dipping a tent therein twice a day, or to take of Orpiment, unslackt Lyme,
Verdegrease, the Juice of Pellitory, Cellendine, black Ink, Honey, and strong
Vinegar boiled together thick, and made into Rowls, and put it into the Sore,
and if the Fistula be killed the Matter will be white and thick, then dry it up
with the powder of Savin, Honey and Lym^ baked together, or anoint it with
Tarr, fresh Hog's Grease and Sallet-Oyl melted together, or tent it with red
Lead and black Soap mingled together, and to sink it before it breaks, lay a
Charge to it of Shoomakers Wax spread upon Allom'd Leather, or what other
Charge you think most convenient. You may find Var^ety of them in my First
Part, if you look for Charges.

Particular Receipts for the Cure of the Poll*Evil.
After you have shaved away the Hair from the Swelling, then lay on a Plaster
of black ^hoomakers Wax* with some Mastick melted in it, and spread it upon
Allomed Leather and let it lie till it has ripened or broke the Impostume,
then take a Pint of Wine-Vineger, and when it is boiling hot, mix with it as
much Loam with the Straws in it, and apply it as hot as the Horse will suffer
it, and renew it once a day till it be whole.

Another.
Take an Ounce of Quick Silver, and kill it in fasting spittle, and mix it with
the quantity of a Hens Egg, with Hog's Grease and Brimstone finely beaten to
powder, incorporate these very well together, and anoint the Swelling very well
with it, then take red Tarr one penniworth, of Hog's Grease half a pound, and of
green Copperas and Bay Salt, of each a handful, both made into fine powder,
boil them very well, and boiling hot apply it to the place with a Clout T^ed on
the end of a stick, being lately anointed with the Quicksilver, Hog's Grease
and Brimstone, and by so scaulding it three or four Mornings together, you may
after that but only warm the Tarr, and apply it, and it will be Cured, for this
Scaulding does so Kill the Malice of the Fistula, that it will never break
forth any more, and this will Cure any other Fistulaes or foul Ulcers
whatsoever.


Another.
After you have so slit the Sore that the Corruption may Run forth, and you
have eaten or cut away the proud and dead Flesh, and washed it and made it very
sweet and clean with Allomed water, pour into it some Oil of Turpentine, and
thus dressing it every day, you shall soon find it grow well, for this Oil will
no^ only search it at the bottom, but it will also cleanse and heal it. It will
likewise heal any raw Back pinched by the Saddle, or any Swelling it will
likewise sink.

Another.
Take Euphorbium and Mastick* mix them well together, and Sees them well with
French Soap, and make a Tent and put it into it, and it will consume the evil
moisture.

Things good for the Pains, vide Scratches, for what Cures the Scra^ches Cures
these.

Things good in General to Kill the Canker in any Part of the Body.
Green Copperas, white Copperas, Bay Salt, unslackt Lyme, Soap and quick Silver
well mixed together, Turpentine Hog's Grease, Arsnick, Verdegrease, Allom,
Garlic, Rue, Savin* Tar, Ginger, Pepper, Orpiment, Oil of Vitriol, Elecampane,
Fluellen, Tansie, Cuckoe-point, Snap-dragon, Burr-dock Roots, etc.

Particular Receipts to Cure the Canker of the Body.
Take Savin, Bay Salt and Rue stamped with Barrows-grease, and anoint the Sore
therewith, and when the ill Humors are killed, (which you shall know by the
whiteness) then heal it with Tar, Oil and Honey mixed together.

Another.
Take Vinegar, Ginger and Allom, and mix them well together, and anoint it
therewith, and it will kill the Poison and heal the Ulcer.

Another for a Canker, foul Ulcer, L^prosie, and to make Hair grow.
Take a quart of Tar, and put to it half a pound of Boars grease, an Ounce of
green Copperas, a quarter of a pound of Salt Peter, two Ounces of Wax, a quart
of Honey, a quarter of a pound of Rozin, two Ounces of Verdegrease, a quart of
Lynseed Oil, Sees them till half b^ consumed; then strain it and keep it ciose
in a Pot, then when you have occasion to use it, take of it warm, and apply it
to the Sore, it does both heal, draw and make Hair to grow.


Things good in general to Cure a Fistula or Canker, or any other Running Sore
whatsoever.
Wild Champions, Doves Foot or Cranes Bill, the powder of the Root of Sow
Fennel put upon them, the Juice or Water of Flix-weed or Toad Flax put into
them, the Juice of Coleworts, the Juice of Flea-wort mixed with Hog's Grease
cleanses them, the Juice of the Flower-de luce, Fluellen or Lluellen, Golden
Rod, the Juice or the distilled Water of Winter green, the Root of the black
Hellebore b^aten to powder and strowed upon them, consumes the dead Flesh
instantly, the leaves of True-Love or one Berry, Knape-weed, Knot-Grass, Ladies
Mantle, Money-wort or the Herb Twopence, the Juice of the Leaves or Roots of
Nettles is good to wash all rotten and stinking Sores, Fistulaes and Gangrenes,
and such as are fretting, eating or corroding scabs or manginess, in any part
of the Body, the Root of Cow Parsneps scraped upon the hard skin of a Fistula
will take it away, the Juice of Pellitory of the Wall, Pimpernel Ground Pine or
Champepitis, the Juice of Plantine, Queen of the Medows, the Juice of Rag-wort
or Rag-weed, the red Rattle-grass, Winter Rochet or Winter-Cresses, the Juice
of wild Sage, the Juice of S^razens Wound-wort. It is good for Ulcers in the
Mouth and Throat, be it never so foul and stinking, and so is Sanicle, the
powder of Savin is good to cleanse them, but it keeps them from healing, the
Juice of Scabius, the Juice of Garden Succory, Self-heal is good to cleanse
Sores, and is good for Ulcers in the Mouth and Throat, so is the Juice of
Smallage put to Honey of Roses, the Juice of Sorrel or Wood sorrel is good for
Ulcers and Cankers, the Juice of the Tamarisk Tree, Vervain, the Juice of the
Leaves of the Wall-Nut Tree, or the Water of them distilled in Ale is good to
cleanse and Cure ^oul Running Sores, Wheat Flour mixed with the Yolk of an
Egg, Honey and Turpentine does draw and heal any Bile, Plague Sore, or any
running ^oul Ulcer, Roch Allom and Bay Salt burned to powder and beaten
together, and mixed with Cummin and Honey, keep it for your use, and apply it
either Tent-wise or Plaister-wise, which will heal any old Sore, the Oil of
Turpentine is good likewise for the same purpose, the Juice of Beets, Calafoma
or Calofonia, the Ashes of Garlic strowed upon them, the powder of Cellendine
or Verdegrease, Vinegar and Honey mingled together upon the Fire; but if you
intend to make it stronger, put to it some Mercury, Sublimate and Arsnick
beaten to powder, but the other may be applied to the Mouth, and he receive no
danger, or White Wind Vinegar, Mercury, Precipitate, Camphire, green Treacle,
Sage, Yarrow and Ribwort, with Honey and Hog's Grease boiled together, This
water will Cure any Fistula whatsoever if it come to the bottom, and heal is up
with your green Ointment.

A Cank^r Cured.


till half be consumed, and strain it and wash the Wound with the Liquor, or
take four quarts of Cole-trough water, boil it and skin it, then boil it over
again after you have strained it, with white Copperas, Allom and Verdegrease,
of each a pound, beaten to powder, and when it is clear, put it into a Glass
for your use. The powder which remains at the bottom, keep by it self, for it
will heal up any Old Sore, or take Roman Vitriol, Roch Allom and Rose Water
boiled till they become as hard as a stone, and strew this powder upon it is
excellent good; but to break a Fistula, take Brook*lyme, Mallows, Arsmart, of
each alike, boiled in Chamber-Lye till they be soft, and apply it to the
Swelling, and renew it not in two or three days But to Cure a Canker take red
Grape leaves, Bramble-leaves, Honey-suckle leaves, Allom, Columbine ^eaves,
Sage leaves, boiled in Water, and wash the sore till it bleed, or Verdegrease,
Butter and Salt melted scald^ng hot, and pour it into the Fistula, and use it
till all the Flesh look red, then tent it with Verdegrease, Allom,
Wheat Flour, and the Yolks of Eggs beaten and mingled together, and skin it
with Barm and Soot mixed together, or Loam-Wall and Wine Vineg^r put hot upon
the sore, is good to ripen and heal it, or Butter, Rozin and Frankincense, made
boiling hot and poured into the Wound, and for a Fistula in the Head, dip a
Lock of Wool in the Juice of the Hous^eek, and put it into his Ear, and put
Hurds upon it and Tie it clo^e, and this will break it, or ^alt mixed with
Butter or Water, and salt put into his Ear will do the like.

Particular Receipts for the Cure of a Fistula.
After you have searched it to the bottom with a Probe of Lead, or some other
thing which will bend wheresoever the Concavity of the Sorrance leads it, and
when you have found the bottom let it be opened downwards, if it may be
possibly done to the end the Corruption may the better issue out, then tent it
two or three days with tried Hog's Grease to cause the hole to be the wider,
then inject this Water following.

Take of Sublimate, and of Precipitate of each as much as will lie upon a
three-p^nce, of Allom and of white Copperas, of each three Ounces, burn all
these in an Earthen Pot, but first rub the bottom with a little Oil to keep it
from burning, this done burn them together, then take two quarts of fair clear
Water, boil it first by it self, and scum it in the boiling, then take it from
the Fire, and put in as much of this powder as will lie upon a shilling at
twice, and thus it is made; b^t if you would have it stronger, then take fair
water and Smiths water, of each alike, and of white*Wine vinegar a third part,
and with the Ashes of Ashen-wood make Lie of them with the Water and Vinegar,
and so make your Water with this Powder and Lie in the former Ingredients,
according as before is taught you, inject this water with a Syringe into the
Sorrance, and in a short time it will both kill the Fistula and heal it up, and
is an approved and infallible Cure.

Another.
Take a Pint of the best Honey, an Ounce of Verdegrease beaten to powder, and
boil them together three quarters of an hour, then strain it into a Gally-Pot,
and keep it for your use. This is a very precious Ointment to tent a Fistula or
Poll-evil, for it searches it to the bottom, and eats away all dead and evil
Flesh, which causes it to heal the better.


A Water for a Fistula.
Take a Pint of the best White Wind you can get, or for want of that White Wind
Vinegar or Verjuice, and put a good handful of Sage-leaves bruised into it.
After you have boiled it pretty well, strain out the Sage from the Wine, and
dissolve into it about an Ounce and a half of Roman Vitriol, half an Ounce of
burnt Allom, and half an Ounce of the fine powder of Verdegrease; When it is
cool, put it in a Glass, and keep it close stopped for your use. When you dress
the Sore, let it be very warm, and Syringe it very well to the bottom once or
twice a day, and in five or six Weeks it will be Cured.


Another Receipt for a Fistula,
Take of Roch Allom and bay Salt burnt, of each half an Ounce, the leaves of
Rag-weed and Elder-tops, what you think fitting, according to the Concavity of
the Sore, bruise and mix them very well together, with a handful or two of Gray
Snails, shells and all, and stop the Hole full of it to the bottom, having
first washed and cleansed it very well with a Syringe, with the water
abovesaid, do this once or twice a day, and it will do well.


Things good for Fevers in General, which you are to use according to your
Discretion.
Some hold it death to let Blood, but this you may use as Discretion serv^th.
To let Blood, the distilled water of the Branches, Leaves, Flowers, or Fruit
of the Bramble is very good, the Leaves or Roots of Burrage or Bugloss is very
good for Pestilential Fevers, to defend the Heart, and to Mitigate heat in
them, the seeds or leaves of the blew-Bottle is likewise good for the same, so
is the Root of the Butter-bur, the Juice of Cinque^oyl is good for all
inflammations and Fevers, the distilled water of Dandelion; the inner Juice of
the Pomcitron or Lemmons are good, Cochenele is good in Pestilential Fevers, a
Manchet steeped in Muscadine and given him, or in Sallet Oil, Mashes of Malt
and warm Water, three or four Yolks of Eggs, given him in eight spoonfuls of
Aquavitae, and stir him till his shaking Fit be over is good, so is Muscadine
and Sugarcandy brewed together, Wormwood, Pepper, Grains, powder of dried Rue
boiled in Ale, and sweetened with Treacle and Sugar Candy is good, so is
Ston^-crop bruised and infused in Ale and given him, Germander, Gumgragant and
dried Roses put into a quart of Ale, with Sallet Oil and Honey given him
lukewarm is good, Alloes, Garlic, Licoras and Anniseeds mixed in White Wind
and given him, Rue, Long Pepper, Bay Berries, Smallage boiled in Beer, Saffron
and Treacle mingled together, If you desire to know the several sorts of
Fevers, look in the First Part for Fevers, and there you shall find them.
or a handful of Thyme boiled in Beer till it be tender, then ^train it and put
to it Sugar Candy, Anniseeds and Treacle, and give it him blood-warm; but for a
Hectic Fever boil Sage, Yarrow, Ribwort, Plantine, Bramble-leaves,
Honey-suckle-leaves, of each a handful, with common Honey a spoonful in two
quarts of running Water till half be consumed, then put to it a good Piece of
Allom, and two spoonfuls of Vinegar, and when it is dissolved drain the Water
from the Herbs, and keep it for your use, and wash his Mouth therewith often,
for his Tongue will be raw; Then give him this Drink, take of Alloes an Ounce,
powdered Garlic half an Ounce, of Anniseeds and Licoras an Ounce made into
powder, bruise your Garlic and put to it three Ounces of brown Sugar Candy,
and add to it a Pint of White Wind, and give it him Blood-warm, and Ride him
afterward; Give him this Drink every other day for three Mornings together.

Particular Receipts for them.

Take Oil of Vitriol, Oil of Sulphur and the Spirit of Salt, and put to it a
quart of strong Beer, ninety or one hundred drops of either of them, and give
it him every Morning till you find his Fever abate; These three Oils or
Spirits are much of a Nature, for they all comfort and strengthen the Stomach
very much, and abate all Inflammations, quenching Draught, and abating the Heat
of Fevers, and create a good Stomach; They purify the whole Mass of Blood,
and resist all Poison, Plague and Putrefaction, and are so excellent Medicines,
that they are to be accounted truly Cordial and Comfortable to the whole Body;
powerful, yet safe in Operation; If you give them alone, they are present
death. They are good also applied outwardly, to takeaway hard Knobs or Warts,
and to kill Ulcers or Fistulaes in the Flesh. The Dose given him is from Fifty
to one hundred Drops. When you take them mix them not together, but use them
singly by themselves. Have a care you touch not your Linen or Woollen with
them, for if you do, they will soon eat them full of holes. The salt Spirit I
advise you rather to make use of, of the three.


Another Receipt good for a Fever.
Take of Diapente one Ounce, Bay Berries and long Pepper, of each half an
Ounce, of the flat shell of an Oyster burnt and beaten to powder half an Ounce,
of Diascordium half an Ounce, put all these into a quart of strong Beer, and
give it him ^uke-warm when you find him want it, and Order him with White Wind
and Honey to preserve his Stomach, and a Cordial of brown Houshold-bread boiled
in Beer, and sweetened also with Honey, as you have Directions more fully how to
make, and use them in Directions for sick Horses, after the Table of Simples;
This Drink will cause him to sweat and sleep, which will bring him to his
Senses, which is the proper effect of the Diascordium; but if you find that
this does not make him sleep, then give him as much powder of Poppyseeds as
will lie upon a six pence in two Hornfuls of small Beer, at each Nostril one,
or for want of that a spoonful of white Poppy water, which cause him to sleep
soundly.


Things good in General to be Given inwardly for the Cure of the Farcy.
Hounds tongue, Knot-grass, Horse-Mint and Spare-Mint, Rag-wort, feed of
Bastard Rhubarb, Savin, Scabius, Stone-crop, Tamarisk, Oil of Vitriol, ten or
fifteen drops of it in his Drink is good for it, stinking Gladwin, Dodder,
Callamint, Water-Hemp or Water-Agrimony, Hearts-ease, Hops, black Hellebore or
Bears foot, Fumitory, the dried Bark of the black Aller-tree, the Root of
Asarabica is not only good for it, but likewise for all Cankers or Old putrid
Ulcers and Fistulaes upon the Body, the inner Rind of the Barberry-Tree, the
inner Rind of the Elder-Tree, or Berries, Burrage, Briony a great Purger, which
must be Corrected, Gentian, Feltwort or Baldmony, the Juice of Housleek or
Stone-crop, Liver-wort, the seed of Male and Female, Mercury, Chick-weed,
Turmerick, Bay Berries, Fennegreek, Nut-galls, the inner Rind of the Wall-Nut
Tree, the Juice of Cinquefoyl put into his Ears, or the Juice of Rue and
Aqua-vitae, or Assafetida and Brandy put into them, the Juice of Ground Ivy
given inwardly, the Juice of Cellandine, the Juice of Sow-thistle,
Southernwood, etc.


Things good in general to be applied Outwardly to Kill the Knots of the Farcy.
After you have Blooded him well, take Oil of Bay and Euforbium mixed together,
and anoint the Knots with it, or to Bath the place with the Stale of a Cow or
Ox, and with the Herb called Lions Foot, boiled together, or Tallow and
Horse-dung melted together, or to burn the Knots with a hot Iron, or to wash
the Sore with Salt, Vinegar, Allom, Verdegrease, green Copperas and Gunpowder
boiled together in Chamber-Lye, or take a pennyworth of Tar, two Handfuls of
Pigeons dung, white Mercury two penniworth, and make it into Salve, and anoint
him with it. Soot, Bay Salt and black Soap is likewise good, so is Rue,
Brimstone, Arsmart, Hemlock, Nettles, Housleek, Brandy, Oil of Turpentine,
Aqua-vitae, Pepper, Ginger, Misle-toe, the powder of unslackt Lime, used at
your pleasure, etc.

Observation upon this Disease.
If his Breath smell strong and stink, his Lights are rotten, and there is no
Cure for him.

Particular Receipts both Inwardly given and Outwardly applied for the Cure of
the Farcin.
Take nine Leaves of the Pot-Herb called Beetes, of the smallest but soundest
Leaves, and nine grains of Bay Salt, beat these very well together to a salve,
and put this Medicine into his Ears by equal portions in the Morning before
Sunrise, and stitch them up, and let him stand with Meat before him, and let
his Drink be white water. Unstitch them not in twenty four hours, then take
forth the wool and stuff and he is Cured.

Another.
If the Farcin be in the fore-parts of the Horse, take two ounces of Arsnick,
and put it into a piece of new Cloth, and bind it up with a piece of new
pack-thread, and fasten it unto his Mayn* and if it be in his hinder-parts, as
well as his fore-parts, then hang it upon his Tail, and the more you ride and
exercise him the better, and though the common way is to keep him with a spare
diet, I like not of it, for you cannot keep him too well, for the lower you
keep him, the more does the disease get the upper hand of him.

Another to anoint the Farcy Knots with.
Take black Hellebore, and add to the Herb some of its Juice, then put to it
old Boars or Barrows Grease, and boil it till the Juice be quite boiled away in
it, whereby to bring it to an Ointment, with which anoint the Knots or Buttons
of the Farcin with, but shave or clip away the hair before you do anoint it.


Another for it when it first appears, before it begins to be raw.
Take of Chamberly, Soot and Bay Salt, and boil them very well together, then
at night wash the Places infected with a rag, upon the end of a stick very hot,
but not so hot as to scauld away the hair; then in the morning anoint it with
Tarr and black Soap, boiled together pretty hot. This done four or five times
together will Cure it.

Another which De-Grey says he has Cured 100 Horses with.
Take of Rue the leaves and tender tops only, without any the least stalk, a
good handful, first chop them small, then stamp them in a Mortar to an
Ointment, then put to it one spoonful of the purest tried Hog's Grease you can
get, and work them together to a Salve, then stop into either Ear the whole
quantity by equal proportions, and put a little wool upon the Medicine to
cause him to keep it in the better, and so stitch up his ears, and let it be
in about twenty 24 hours, and then unstitch them, and take forth the Wool and
he is Cured. ^. W.


Another, which if he has it given him twice it will Cure him.
Take the inner Rind of Elder, the inner Rind of the Wall-nut-tree, the inner
Rind of the Barberry-tree, of all of them an equal quantity, and not exceeding
above a handful of all of them together; Boil them in a quart of strong Beer a
little while, then take out the Barks, and add to it the powder of Turmerick,
Fennegreek, and two Nut-galls beaten to powder, with the powder of Grains of
Paradise, about an ounce of all of them, boil them in the same Beer about as
long as you did before, then sweeten it with Treacle, and give it him lukewarm
in the Morning fasting, and let him fast two or three hours after it, and
order him as you do a sick horse,; if you put into it a little handful of
stone-crop it will be the bettet; You must wash the buds of the Farcy night and
morning with this water. Take half a pound of green Copperas, and boil it a
little while in a quart of Chamberly; before you boil it you must put in a good
quantity of Salt or Brine.


Another.
After you have kept him slenderly fed all Night, give him the next Morning
fasting, half a pint of the Juice of Housleek, and half a Pint of Sallet Oil
mingled together, and let him Fast till Night, and then give him Hay and no
Water till the next Morning, and that warm too. This Drink used twice will
almost Cure any Farcy.


Another for the Farcy*
Take a handful of each of these Herbs here underwritten, chopped very small,
and boiled in three Pints of strong Ale or Beer to about a Pint and an half,
and after you have strained the Liquor very well from the Herbs, give it him
lukewarm fasting in the Morning, but before you give it him, stir into it an
Ounce of crude Antimony, finely powdered and searc'd; About three or four days
after give him the like Drink again, and repeat it the third time if there be
occasion, and it will certainly Cure him. The Herbs are these, Chickweed,
Woodbittony, Groundsel and Mullen.


The Buds must be anointed also with this outward Application.
Take the bigness of a Hazel-Nut* of yellow Arsnick beaten to powder, and put
to it about a spoonful of black Soap, (or for want of that, common Soap) and
lay a little of it upon the Head of every one of them, which will so corrode
and eat into them, that they will become so loose, that they will drop out by
the Roots, then heal up the wounded places by anointing them with your green
Ointment, which you may find in the first Part, or with Sallet-Oyl or Hogs
grease; take care you let him not come to gnaw it with his Teeth for fear of
poisoning him, or that you lay it not upon any sound place, for it will make a
Wound wheresoever it comes. You may anoint them with the Oil of Vitriol, if yo^
please, which has the same Operation with the other.


Another outward Application for this Disease, which will not only Cure the
Buds of it, but any foul Scab, Leprosy or Mange.
After you have let Blood, which is always convenient in this Disease; Take
three Pints of old Urine, and a Pint of Vinegar or Verjuice, and put to it half
a Pound of the Stalks of the strongest Tobaccho you can get, but let them be
first bruised and laid asteep in the Urine all Night before you boil them;
After you have ^o done, set it over the Fire, and put to it an Ounce of the
Flower of Brimstone, and boil them altogether till it come to a quart, then
strain forth the Liquor from the stalks, and anoint the infected places with it
till they be well.

Another inward and outward Application for the Farcy.

After you have Blooded those Buds with your Incision-Knife, which are fresh
and green wash them once or twice a day with your Fistula-water, which will
Kill them, conditionally you give him this inward Drink with it, viz. Take two
quarts of Running Water and put to it, two Handfuls of Herb-grace, chopped
indifferent small, with two or three spoonfuls of bruised Hemp Seed, and set it
over the Fire, and let it boil away till it come to three Pints, then give it
him three times in nine days, and Order him as you do sick Horses, and he will
do well.


Another to Cure it by p^tting something into his Ears.
After you have bruised about nine or ten Cloves of Garlic, (being first
peeled) wiuh a Handful of Rue, and about half a quarter of a Pint of Brandy
strain the Juice through a Cloth into some convenient thing, and put to it so
much of black or white Wool as it will well drink up, and fill each Ear full
of it, putting a piece of dty Wool upon it to keep it in the better. Then sow
them up as you have Directions before, and do not unstitch them in twenty four
hours; If you open his Head in the usual place under his fore-top, and put
into it about the length of an Inch of the inner Rind of Elder, and let it
remain there about the same time, the Cure will be the sooner Expedited.


Another Medicine to put into his Ears to Cure it when it is in his Head.
After you have let Blood bruise so much of Housleek and Hemlock as will
contain two spoonfuls of the Juice of each of them, and add to them two
spoonfuls of Sallet-Oyl, and fill each Ear full of it, leaving so much room as
you may put Flox or Wool upon it to keep it in the better. When you have so
done stitch up his Ears as in the former Receipt, and at twenty four hours
end take out the stuff. If you like best the former way of soaking up the Juice
with the Wool better then this, you may use that.


A Drink to Cure the most malignant Farcy that is.
Before you Give him this Drink here underwritten, let him be kept very
sparing of Meat all night, and the next Morning Blooded on both sides the Neck
very well. It Is this, Take the inner Rind of the Barberry Tree, Herb-grace,
Sage, Wormwood, Fennel, Lungwort, of each half a Handful chopped small,
Anniseeds, Turbich, Turmerick, and of Aristolochia rotunda, about two Ounces of
all of them beaten to powder; boil the Herbs pretty well in two quarts of small
Beer to one quart, then strain it forth and put in your Powders to it, and when
it is cold enough to take, give it him.


How to Order him before and after you have Given it him*
1. Before you give it him, let him fast four hours, and after it as much,
when you have given it him, Air him well by Riding him after it.

2. Let him drink but once a day, and let it be white Water, which is a handful
or two of Wheat-Bran stirred in amongst his water, made first lukewarm.

3. Let him be kept in the House with very dry Meat during his Cure.

4. Exercise is very good in this Distemper, and the more you use him to it the
better you will find him,

5. It Is good also in order to his Cure, once or twice a day to Flounce him
backward and forward in some clear River or Pond, up to the Midsides, which
will cleanse his Body, and take away the Filth and Venom of the Disease.

6. This often washing him in cold water will wash off the poisoned Medicines,
if he has been poisoned with any, and also abate very much the Malignancy of
the Disease.

7. Let him rest three or four days after his first Drink, and then give him
another, and Order him in every thing as you did before.

8. If you find him after this second Drink that he is not perfectly Cured, you
may give him the third, and this will certainly Cure him.

9. When you give him his first Drink, if you please you may Blood him with the
end of your Cornet in the Furrow on the top of his Mouth.

The Virtues of this Malignant Drink for the Farcy are these.
It will cause him to vomit up much Filth, and run at the Nose very nauseous
and stinking stuff, and yellowish Water; It is a great Sweetner and Purifyer of
the Blood, as also a great Drier up of all evil and malignant Humors that are
seated and rooted in the Body; If the Heads of the Buds appear red and loose,
lay upon them a little burnt Allom, mixed with a little Butter or Hog's Grease,
and you shall quickly find them to fall off.


A Receipt for the C^re of the Water- Farcy.
This is the usual and common Way for the Cure of it, viz. To take a long and
small Iron Rod, and bend it backward at one end about the length of a Fleam,
then heat it red hot in the Fire, and strike the swelled places under his
Belly, and chaps full of Holes, and let and squeeze out the gray and Oily
water, that you find pent up in the Skin, and wash the places, (to keep them
from wrankling, and to take out the Fire) with Chamberly and Salt, and some
powder of Bolearmoniack mixed amongst it as hot as he can we^l endure it for
three or four times, and he is Cured.

Things good in general to Cure the Running or rotten Frush.
To take off the Shoo and pare away all the corrupt places, and make them raw,
then put it on again being widened; then take Soot and Salt, bruise them well
together in a Dish, and mix therewith the Whites of three Eggs, and dip Tow
therein, and stop all the Foot with it, renewing it seven days together, or to
wash it with Urine three or four times a day; or take a quart of urine, and
boil in it a quarter of a pound of Allom, with some green Copperas, and strain
it out, and keep it for your use; and after you have washed the Sore with it,
strew on it the powder of green Nettles Fried and Pepper, and it will dry it
up. When you dip Tow in any thing, you must splint it in that it may not fall
off, and during the Cure to let him come into no wet, and at the seven days end
leave stopping him, and ride him abroad, and bring him in very clean into the
Stable, for dirty setting up breeds this infirmity, etc.

Things good in general for the Overflowing of the Gall, which is a yellowness
of the Skin, and a Costiveness of the Body.
Saffron boiled in Milk is good, or Ale, Saffron and Anniseeds mixed together,
or Cellandine Roots chopped, bruised and boiled in Beer, or for want of
Cellandine, Rue, and give it him lukewarm, etc.


Things good for Gangrenes inward or outward.
The Leaves, Fruit or Roots of Briony; but it is a great Purger which must be
Corrected* the Leaves of Bugle bruised and applied, or the Juice of it to wash
the place; the Meal of Darnel is good to stay them, Cankers, or any other
eating and fretting Sores, Watercresses, Mallows, Elder-leaves, Brook-lime,
moldy Hay and Bran boiled in the dregs of strong Beer, and laid to very hot,
is good to stay its spreading, if any thing will do it; Nettles bruised and
laid to them is good, so is the decoction of the Leaves or Bark of the
Tamarisk-Tree, and the place Bathed therewith.

What the Spleen i^.
It is a long, flat, narrow and spungy substance, of a pale fleshy color,
joining with the Liver and Gall; it is the Receptacle of Melancholy, and the
dregs of the Blood, and it is as subject to Infirmity as any inward part
whatsoever, as to Inflammations, Obstructions, Knobs and Swellings; it is
through the spunginess apt to suck in all manner of Filth, and to dilate and
spread the same all over the Body, the appearance thereof is on the left side
under the short Ribs, where you shall perceive some small Swelling, which
Swelling gives great Grief to the Midriff, and takes away more of his
Digestion then his Appetite, and being suffered to continue, it makes faint
the Heart, and grows in the end to a hard Knob and stony substance. Now if I
mistake not, this Spleen is no other then the Milt, and I have known four or
five Horses die of it out of one Stable, and it has been looked upon no other
then the Plague, which if they had had things proper for the Distemper they
might have lived.

Things good in General for the Spleen, either inwardly taken or outwardly
applied.
A Decoction of the Herb Archangel in wine applied to the place grieved hot,
Barley-Meal-boyled with Melilot and Chamomel flowers, with some Lynseed,
Fennegreek, and Rue applied warm, the Juice of Chamomel given inwardly, or to
make him Sweat, and then give him a quart of white wind, wherein has been
boiled the Leaves of Tamarisk, and a good quantity of Cummin seeds beaten to
powder, and give it warm, or to pour into his left Nostril every day after he
has Sweat the Juice of Myrobalans mixed with Wine and Water to the quantity of
a pint, or take Cummin-seed and Honey, of each six ounces, of Lacerpitium as
much as a Bean, of Vinegar a pint, and put all these into three quarts of
water, and let it stand so all night, and give him a quart thereof next Morning
fasting, or Garlic, Nitrum, Hore-hound and Wormwood sodden in sharp wine, and
given, and to bathe his left side with warm water and to rub it hard.

A Particular Receipt for the Spleen.

Take a Handful of Agrimony chopped very small, and work it up with sweet
Butter into two or three Balls, with half an Ounce of the powder of Turmerick,
and as much of Cummin-seeds powdered, and give him them fasting in the Morning
for several Mornings together, and it will Cure him; It Is good also to give him
some of the Herb boiled in his Drink, or Oxicrocium applied Plaister-wise to
the grieved part is very good.

Things good in General to Cure the Colt-Evil.
The Juice of Rue mixed with Honey, and boiled in Hog's Grease, Bayleaves, with
the powder of Fennegreek added thereto, and anoint the sh^ath with it. The
powder of the Herb Avit, and the leaves of Bittony stamped with White Wind to a
moist Salve, and anoint the Sore therewith; to wash the Sheath clean with
lukewarm Vinegar, and to draw out the Yard and wash that also, and to Ride him
twice every day into some deep Running Water, tossing him to and fro to allay
the heat of the Members till the Swelling be vanished; and if you swim him now
and then it will not be amiss; but the best way to Cure a Horse is to Give him
a Mare, and to swim him after it; To bathe his Cods with the Juice of Housleek,
or with the water wherein Knee-holm has been sod; if it stops the Urine, then
give him new Ale and a little black Soap in it to drink, or to wash his Cods
with Butter and Vinegar made warm, or with the Juice of H^mlock, or else take
Bean-flower, Vinegar and Bolearmoniack, and mix them together; Lay it
Plaister-wise to his Sheath and Cods, or to make him a Plaster of Wine-Lees,
Housleek and Bran mixed together, and laid to his Sheath and Cods, etc.

Things good to Cure the Mattering of the Yard.
Take Roch Allom one Ounce, and White Wind one Pint, boil them till the Allom
be dissolved, then Blood-warm inject this Portion with a Syringe, putting it up
into his Yard so far as it may be four or five times a day, till it be well.
This is so perfect, that you need not any other.

Things good in General for Shedding of Seed, which is no other then the
Running of the Reins in Men.
Amaranthus that bears a white Flower, the Juice of Bistort added to the Juice
of Plantine outwardly applied, Comfrey, to Ride him into some cold water up to
the Belly, then cover him warm and give him Red Wine and Hogs-dung, or Red-Wine
and Acatium, Venice-Turpentine, etc.


Two Receipts (which may serve in stead of many more) for the Shedding of the
Seed, or Running of the Reins, which is an infallible, safe and sure Way of
stopping it; And is also good for all manner of Bruises by Falls, or any other
Accident, etc.
If you give it for Bruises or Falls, leave out the Bolearmoniack.
Take a pound of common Turpentine, (if you will not go to the Charge of the
Venice) and put to it so much of the fine powders of Bolearmoniack and English
Liquoris, with a little Wheat Flour, as will make it up into a stiff Paste;
When you have occasion to use it, Roll it out between your Hands, and break so
much of it off as contains the bigness of a small Wash-ball, and give him three
of them Morning and Evening upon the end of a stick, or in a Horn full of
strong Beer, till you find the Flux of Seed stayed, which will be in a Week or
Fortnights time at farthest. It Is convenient to purge and cleanse his Reins
very well first before you give him his Balls, which will not only Expedite,
but perfect the Cure so much the sooner and better.

Another for the same.

Take brown Sugar Candy, Tanners Bark finely powdered and Sifted, with the
powder of the dried leaves of Clary, and incorporate them very well with some
common Turpentine, and make them up into Balls with a little Wheat Flour, and
give him two or three of them at a time, Morning and Evening, about the bigness
of a Pigeons Egg, till the Flux of the Seed stays, which will be in a very
short time.

Things good in General for the Cure of the Falling of the Yard.
To Wash his Yard with Seawater, or Water and Salt, and if that will not
prevail, prick all the outmost skin of his Yard with a sharp Needle very
slightly, and wash all the Pricks with strong Vinegar, and this will not only
make him draw up his Yard again, but also if at any time his Fundament chance
to Fall, this Cure will put it up again, or to put Honey and Salt into his Yard
made liquid, or else a quick Fly or a Grain of Frankincense, or a Clove of
Garlic clean pilled and bruised, and Bath his Back with Oil, Wine and Nitre
made warm and mingled together; But the best Cure is first to wash all his Yard
with White Wind warmed, and anoint it with Oil of Roses and Honey mixed
together, and so put it up into his Sheath, and with a l^ttle Bolster of
Canvass keep it from falling down, and dress him thus in twenty four hours
until he be recovered, and let his Back be kept very warm as is possible, both
with Cloth and a Charge of Plaster made of Bolearmoniack, Eggs, Wheat Flour,
Sanguis Draconis, Turpentine and Vinegar, or else lay next his Back a wet Sack
or wet Hay, and a dry Cloth over it, and that will keep his Back exceeding warm.

What is good for the Cure of the Particular Diseases in Mares, Barrenness,
Consumption, Rage of Love, Casting Foals, hardness to Foal, and how to make a
Mare cast her Foal.
If you have your Mare barren, boy^ good store of the Herb Agnus in the Water
that she drinks, or to stamp a good Handful of Leeks, with four or five
spoonfuls of Wine, then put twelve Flies called Cantharides, and strain them
altogether with a sufficient quantity of Water to serve the Mare two days
together, by pouring the same into her Nature with a Glister*Pipe made for that
purpose, and at the end of three days offer the Horse to her, and if he covers
her, wash her Nature twice together with cold water; Or to take of Nitrum,
Sparrows dung and Turpentine, of each a like quantity, wrought together and
made like a Suppository, and put that into her Nature, and it will cause her to
desire the Horse, and also to conceive. If you will have her fruitful, boil
good store of Mother-wort in the Water which she drinks; If she lose her
Belly, which shows a Consumption of the Womb, give her a quart of Brine to
drink, Mug-wort being boiled therein. If your Mare, through good keeping,
forsake her food, give her for two or three days together, a Ball of Butter and
Agnus Castus chopped together* If you will have her cast her Foal, take a handful
of Bittony, and boil it in a quart of Ale, and it will deliver her presently.
If she cannot Foal, take the Herb Horse-Mint, either dry it or stamp it, and
take the powder or the Juice, and mix it with strong Ale, and Give it her, and
it will help her. And if your Mare is subject to cast her Foals, as many are,
keep her at Grass very warm, and once in a Week give her a good warm Mash of
Drink, this secretly Knitteth beyond expectation.


Things good in General for the Cure of a Consumption.
Wood-bitony, Hore-hound, Juniper Berries, Leeks mixed with Sallet Oil and
Sack, with some Frankincense, Agarick, Bay Berries, Brank-Ursine, China,
Dandelion; but the best is to scour him well, and put him to Grass; Or take a
Sheeps Head with the Wool on, wash it clean, and boil it in a Gallon of fair
water, until the flesh come from the Bones, then strain it, and put into the
Broth half a pound of Re^ined Loaf Sugar, of Cynnamon, Conserve of Roses,
Conserve of Barberries, Conserve of Cherries, of each three Ounces, and give
him a quart every Morning fasting; use this till four or more Sheeps-Heads be
spent, and let his Drink be either sweet Mashes or white Water. Take no Blood
from him in this Disease, but rather labor to Cherish the Blood h^ has,
neither be too busy in Administering unto him Purges, but Cordials, as
Diapente, Diatessaron, Duke Powder, Cordial Powder, and such like Restoratives,
and to give him good Meat and good Mashes, and to change his Meat sometimes to
make him eat his Meat the better.

Things good in General for the Lungs.

Physick-Nuts is good for Rotten Lungs, Lung-wort, or Wood Liver-wort beaten to
powder and Given in Beer, is good for Inflammations and Ulcers of the Lungs,
the powder of stinking Gladdon, given him in Beer, with a little Mastick, is
good for them. The Decoction of Hysop made with Figs, Water, Honey and Rue
helps the Inflammations of the Lungs, the old Cough or shortness of Breath,
Featherfew, Pennyroyal given with Honey clears the Breast from all gross and
thick Humors, and cleanses the Lungs; Calamint is good for the Wheesing of
them; Common Horehound cleanses them, and is good for the Ulceration of them,
so does Bittony; Scabius scoureth the Chest and Lungs, Mullen or Lungwort is
good, Comfrey, Cowslips of Jerusalem, Cinquefoyl is good for the Liver and
Lungs, Chervel boiled is good for the Consumption of the Lungs, Cummin-seeds,
Brank-Ursine, Rue, Licoris, Bay Berries, Cassia, Water-Agrimony, Alehoof, the
Leaves of the Fig Tree, Lung-wort which grows upon Oaks or Beeches, which is a
kind of Moss with broad grayish tough Leaves, Maidenhair, wild Marjorem,
Hedge Mustard Seed, Rosa Solis or Sun-dew; the Juice of Sanicle, Vervain,
Wood-bind or Honey-suckles, Cresses, Almonds, Bugloss, Garlic boiled in Milk,
Tartar, which is the thickest of White Wind Lees, dried and made into powder,
Elecampane, Sugar Candy, Diapente, or take a Pint of sweet Sack, Honey, Myrrh,
Saffron, Cassia and Cinnamon, of each alike, made into fine Powder, and mix two
spoonfuls of it with your Sack, and give it him warm fifteen days together, and
feed him with Mashes and white Water. But if his Lungs be rotten, then take the
Juice of Purslain half a Pint, and mix with it Oil of Roses, and put to it
Tragantium steeped in Cows Milk, and give it him seven Mornings together, and
this will Ripen the Impostume, which you may know by his stinking Breath, then
give him this Powder; Take of Cassia made into fine powder, seven Raisi^s of
the Sun stoned, boiled in a Pint of Muskadine, and give it him Bloodwarm; or
the Water of Angelica give him with some of the Root.

Particular Receipts for the Lungs.
Take of Horse Lungwort, alias Mullet, it grows in every place with broad
hoary soft leaves, which do feel like Velvet. shred it, stamp it and strain it;
Then take of Fennegreek a good spoonful, and of Madder as much, made into ^ine
powder, and give this to him in a quart of good Ale or Beer, and give it him
every other day, for twelve or fourteen days, and sprinkle his Hay with Water,
and let his Oats be washed in good Ale, and let his Drink be white Water, and
sometimes sweet Mashes.

Another,
Take a Snake, and cut off the Head and Tail, and Flea it, and after cut the
same into Pieces the length of your Finger, and roast it as you would an Eel
upon a Spit, and let it Baste it self, and keep the Oil of it in a Glass for
your use; when you use it anoint the Breast, and his four short Ribs which be
against the Lungs; but first clip away the Hair, for that will take too much of
the Oil up, and thus do often for some time, and it will recover his Lungs
again, and make him perfectly ^o^nd.

Things good in General for the Consumption of the Liver.
There is no absolute Cure for it, but to preserve it give him half a Pint of
Sack, with the same quantity of the Blood of a young Pig lukewarm to drink, or
to give him three days together no other food then warm Wort and baked Oats,
and let him be kept Fasting the Night before he receives his Medicine, or to
put into his Wort which he drinks, two or three spoonfuls of the powder of
Agrimony, red Rose-leavs, Saccarum, Rosaceum, Diarcadon, Abbat is, Disantelon,
Lico^as, and of the Liver of a Wolf, or to give him Sulphur and Myrrh beaten
into fine powder, mixed with a new laid Egg, and given him in half a Pint of
Malmsey, and separate him from other Horses, for this Disease is infectious.

Things good in General to Preserve the Liver, and to open the Obstructions of
the Liver and Spleen.
Amara dulcis, Alheal, Agrimony opens and cleanses the Liver, water-Agrimony
opens the Obstructions of the Liver, and mollifieth hardness of the Spleen,
Alexander or wild Parsley, Angelica, Asarabica, the decoction of Avens, the
Bark or the Root of the Bay Tree, opens the Obstructions of the Liver and
Spleen, and other inward Diseases, the Juice of the white Beet opens them,
Wood-bittony, Butchers broom or Knee-holly, the leaves of Calamint, Centaury,
Columbines, Dandelion, Liver-wort, the leaves or Bark of the Maple-Tree,
Pimpernel, Groundpine or Chamepitys, Agaricum, Almonds, Fumitory, Chamomel,
Wormwood, Licoras, Anniseeds, Smallage, Parsley, Spikenard, Gentian, Succory,
Endive and Lupine, all these are very comfortable for the Liver, and are to be
Seethed in Water that he drinks, Alloes dissolved, Ireos stamped, ^avoury
Lungwort, or Oil and Wine mixed together; but the best of all is a Wolfes Liver
dried and beaten to powder, and given him in Beer, or strowed amongst his
Provender, or Parsley and Hartshorn, or Fennel and Parsley-roots scraped or
boiled in Water, and given him with Licoras and Sorrel, or ^ollipodium of the
Oak beaten to powder and strowed amongst his Provender, or take Hysop,
Cowslip-leaves, Silver-wort or Lung-wort, alias Mullen, Hartshorn, of each a
handful; then take Gentian, Aristolochia rotunda, Fennegreek, Enula compana
dried and long Pepper, of each alike, and when they are all powdered and
searced, take a spoonful of all of them; chop the Herbs and mingle them with
this powder, and put a spoonful of live Honey to it, and boil all of them in
strong Ale till half of them be consumed, and give it him Blood-warm; Groundsel
preserves it greatly.

Of the Infirmities in General of the Hoofs, as false Quarters, loose Hoofs,
casting of the Hoofs, Hoof-bound, Hoof-running, Hoof-brittle, Hoof-hurt,
Hoof-soft, Hoof-hard, and generally to Preserve Hoofs.
False Quarters.
To take off the Shoe, and to take away so much of the Hoof on that side the
Sorrance is, that when the Shoe is set on again, the Chink may be wholly
uncovered, then open the Chink to the Quick with your Drawing-Iron, and fill up
your Rift with a Roll of Hurds dipped in this Ointment; Take Turpentine, Wax and
Sheeps Sewet, of each alike melted together, and dip your Hurds therein, and
stop the Rift therewith, renewing it once a day till it be whole; and thus the
Rift being closed on the top with this Ointment, draws the place betwixt the
Hoof and the Hair with a hot Iron overthwart that place, which will make it
grow and shoot downwards, and Ride him with no other Shoo till his Foot be
hardened and become ^ound.

What is good to Cure a loose Hoof.
If the Hoof be loose, let it be of what cause soever, you are first to open it
in the sole of the Foot, so as the Humor may have free passage downwards, and
put a restrictive Charge about it, as you have some in my First Part, then to
heal it up with Turpentine and Hog's Grease melted together; Or take three
spoonfuls of Tarr, and a quarter of a pound of Rosin, and half a Handful of
Tansie, and half a Handful of Rue, and half a Handful of red Mints, and half
Handful of Southernwood brayed altogether in a Mortar, and add to it half a
pound of Butter, and a Penniworth of Virgins Wax, and melt them on the Fire
till it come to be a thick Salve, then spread it upon a Cloth, and lay it to it
seven days together till it be whole; Or to anoint it with Burgundy-pitch, and
it will fasten it; Or take Bittony, Rosemary, Rue, Bolearmoniack and
Frankincense boiled together and laid over it; o^ to take Tar, Brimstone in
fine powder, Wheat-Bran, and the Urine of a Man-Child, boiled all to a
Poultess, and apply it hot to the Hoof, and it will fasten it, or to stop it
with the Brains of a Pig, or to stop it with Flax dipped in the Whites of Eggs,
or wash it with Vinegar, and ^ill it with Tartar and Salt, and then anoint it
with Olibanum, Mastick and Pitch of Greece, of each alike, and a little Sanguis
Draconis, new Wax and Sheeps Suet, and melt it together, and anoint it with it,
and if the new Hoof come, cut away the old.

Of Casting the Hoof.
Take Aqua fortis the strongest you can get, and first with a Rape or
Drawing-Iron File or draw away the old Hoof somewhat near, then touch the Hoof
so prepared with your Aqua fortis three or four several dressings and no more,
then anoint the Foot with the Unguent for Horses Feet, viz. take Hog's Grease
three pounds, Patch Grease two pounds, Venice-Turpentine one pound, new Wax
half a pound, Sallet Oil one pound, melt and mix all these upon the Fire, and
anoint the Coffin of the Hoof up to the top, and this will bring a new Hoof.

Another.
Take Turpentine half a pound, Tar half a Pint, new Wax half a pound, Sallet
Oil one Pint, melt all these except the Turpentine together, till they be well
mixed; and a little before you take it from the Fire put in your Turpentine,
and stir it till it be cold, but before hand make him a Buskin of Leather, with
a thick Sole made fit for his Hoof, but wide enough, that it may be Tied about
his Pastern, and dress his Hoof with this Medicine, laying Tow or Hurds upon
it, and so put on the said Buskin, and fasten it to the Pastern Joint, or a
little above, but so as the Buskin do not trouble the Foot, renewing the
Medicine every day till it be whole, and is good likewise for a Hoof-bound
Horse; and as the Hoof begins to come, and if you find it grow harder and
thicker in one place then another; or crumbleth, or grows out of fashion,
take your Rape and File it into good fashion again; and when you find it so
well that you may turn him out, put him into some moist Pasture or Meadow, which
will cause the Hoof to become tough.

Of the Hoof-bound.
First, pluck off the Shoes, and shoo him up again with Half Moon and
Lunet-shooes; then ease with your drawing Iron or Rape, the quarters of the
Hoofs on both sides of the Feet, from the Cronet down to the end or bottom of
the Hoofs, so deep till you perceive as it were a dew to come forth, and if you
make two Rases it will be the better, and enlarge the Hoofs the more, that
done, anoint the Hoofs next to the hair about the Cronet with this Ointment.

Take of Turpentine one pound, of Wax and of Sheep or Deers Sewet, of each half
a pound, of Tarr and of Sallet Oil, of each half a Pint; melt all but the
Turpentine together, and when you are ready to take it up put in your
Turpentine, and stir it well together till it be cold, anoint his Hoofs once a
day till you find amendment, and ride him once a day upon soft ground for the
space of a Month; then take off his Half Moon Shoes, and pare his Soles,
Frushes and Heels, so thin, till you may see a dew come forth, and the Blood
ready to start, then tack on his Shoes, and stop his Feet as well within as
without with this Charge.

Take of Cow or Ox-dung, and of Wheat-Bran, of each so much as will suffice, of
tried Hog's Grease, and of the Kidney of a Loyn of Mutton, of each one pound, of
Turpentine and Tar of each half a pound, melt all these together, (the
Turpentine excepted) which must be put in when it is almost ready to take from
the Fire, keeping it shirring to mix the Ingredients. Let this Charge be laid
on hot, and renew it nine days together, to the end the Sole may arise, but if
this will not do take out the Sole clean, and after you have stanched the
Bleeding with the tender tops of Hysop stamped in a Mortar, apply then the Oil
of Snails to it and red Nettles; the Oil is thus made, take forty, fifty or
more Snails, and put them into a Bag with Bay salt, and when they are hung some
time nigh the Fire, there will drop an Oil from them, and use that with red
Nettles once a day for three days, and heal up the Feet with your green
Ointment, which you may find in my First Part, which will bring a New Hoof
again, which then Shoo him with Lavels again, and turn him forth to Grass.

If you fear that your Horse is subject to be Hoof-bound, anoint his Coffin all
over with Neats-foot Oil, especially at the setting on of the Hoof, or with
Turpentine, and to stop his Feet underneath with Cows dung. Or take the Fat of
Bacon half a pound, of white Soap three Ounces, Balm a handful, and five or six
Sprigs of the tender tops of Rue, chop and stamp all these together very well,
then fry them and lay them to reasonable hot, and let him come in no wet till
he be well, and being thus dressed every day once, his Hoof will in a short
time be sound and easy to him again.

Things good in general to Preserve Hoofs, and to make them grow.
To pare him well when you Shoe him, which ought to be when the Moon is three
days in the increase, Turpentine, Hog's Grease and Bees Wax melted together, and
anoint the Coffin with it, or Myrrh, Allom, the Juice of Garlic, Rue, Asses
dung or Cows dung, Pitch, Rozin, Sallet Oil, Dogs-Grease, Olibanum, Dialthea,
Sheeps Sewet boiled together, and anoint his Hoofs with it, or Chalk and white
Lead mingled together* or Bark dust and Honey mingled together, or Yarrow,
Allom and Wormwood boiled in Oil, or to boil Beans till they burst, temper them
with Honey, and anoint his Feet with them, or to wash them with warm. Vinegar,
and anoint them with Hore-hound, Wormwood and Grease melted together, standing
upon his own wet Litter, is good to keep them moist, and make them to grow.

Particular Receipts to make a Horses Hoof grow, and to Toughen it.
Take the Juice of Garlic seven Ounces, of old Hog's Grease two pounds, and a
Handful of Asses or Cows dung, boil and mix them well together, and stop his
Feet with it, and anoint the Cronets of his Hoofs, the Medicine being pretty
hot.

Another for brittle Hoofs.
Take Turpentine, Sheeps Sewet, unwrought Wax and Hog's Grease, of each half a
Pound, Sallet Oil half a Pint and of Dogs Grease a pound, boil them altogether,
and keep them in a Gally-Pot for your use, and when you use it, anoint his
Hoofs very well two or three times a day with it, especially at the setting on
of the Hair, and to stop them with Cowsdung and Dogs grease melted together.

Another most Excellent.
Take one pound of Dogs and Hog's Grease, and Clarify it with Rosemary, then
mix it with half so much Cows dung, and boil it up and anoint his Feet with it
either hot or cold, is very good.

A most Excellent Receipt for brittle Hoof'd Horses, to make their Hoofs grow
so in a Fortnights time, that they will carry a Shoo^ that would
not carry it before.
Take a Gallon of fresh Hog's Grease, half a Bushel of Damask Roses clean picked,
and when you have melted your Hog's Grease, and that it is boiling hot, put in
your Damask Roses into it, and stir them well about till they be all wet, then
take them off the Fire and put them into an Earthen Pot close covered, and put
it into the Oven after you have drawn your Bread, and there set it stand till
it be cold, then take it out and put it into a new Horse-dunghill that is very
hot, and there let it be for three Weeks, then take it out and melt it again
and strain the Roses from the Liquor, and keep it in an Earthen Pot close
covered for your use.

How to use it.
When you dress your Horse, take a spoonful of Tar, and three Balls of
Horse-dung warmed in a Pint of that Oil, then take off his Shoes* and bind up
his Feet with a pair of Buskins of Leather with a thick Sole, and pour in the
Liquor and let him stand a Week so, but apply fresh shift to him every day
poured into the Buskins, but take away none of the old Medicine, then tack on
his Shoes again, and stop his Feet, and anointing them with the former
Medicine, after his Bags are off you may water him twice a day as at other
times, and when his Feet be clean picked and dry, you may use the Medicine as
you did before. In my First part you may have a better Direction to make the
Buskin*

Things good to soften a Hoof that is too hard.
Take an Ounce of Soap, two Ounces of unslackt Lyme, with as much strong Lie as
will make it soft, and stop his Feet daily with it till they come to a
convenient softness. Or hot glowing Embers put upon the Hoof will soften it.

Things good to harden Hoofs if they be too soft.
To burn an old Shoe Sole and seethe it in Vinegar, and Bath his Feet with it
twice a day will harden them, or take of the powder of Galls, Bran and Salt of
each a handful, boiled in a Pottle of strong Vinegar, and therewith Bath the
Hoofs and it will harden them, the powder of Honey and Lyme, the powder of
burnt Oyster-shells, the powder of a burnt Felt or Boot mixed together with
Cream is good.

Things good for the Malt-long.
Things good for the Malt-long of the Hoofs, which will run in Waterish humors
about the Cronet, which are certain Knobs there. If it be in the Summer take
black Snails and Burr-dock-roots, and beat them well together, and lay them
unto the sore, and renew them once in twenty four hours; but if it be in the
Winter, take the scrapings of a Pan or Cauldron, and put to it a handful of the
inner Rind of the Elder Tree, and having beaten them well together in a Mortar,
lay them to the Sore, and renew it once a day, and it will heal it, or take
Garlic, Pepper and Honey, of each alike stamped together, and laid to it.

For any Hurt upon the Hoof, or for all manner of Hurts in General.
To stop the Hoof with Honey and Vinegar mingled together for the space of
three or four days at least, and then lay on the leaves of Tamarisk bruised
with them till it be whole, or to stop the Hoof with Sheeps-Grease and
Horse-dung mixed together, and renew it once a day till it be well, or take
Pitch and Rozin of each two Ounces, Brimstone in fine Powder an Ounce, melt
them together on the Fire, and add to them an Ounce of Turpentine, and as it
cools make it up into Rowls, and when you use it put it into the Wound pretty
hot, and all about the Sorrance, and clap Hurds upon it, and over that a piece
of Leather, and so splint it on, and in twice or thrice dressing he will be
Cured, two Ounces of Turpentine melted down with some Wax heals any Wound or
Gall, House-Snails seethed in Butter will draw out any Thorn or Nail being
often renewed, or take Soap and Salt of each alike, and work them into an
Ointment, and after you have washed the Wound with Beer and Salt, or Urine and
Salt, and dried it again with a Linen Rag, bind on the Medicine, and let it
remain on for twenty four hours, which will take out the venom; then take Train
Oil one spoonful or two, and as much white Lead into fine Powder, and work them
to a thick Salve, and apply it to the Sorrance Plaister-wise till it be whole,
which will not be long, for nothing does dry up sooner, or is more kindly or
natural for the breeding of a new Hoof then this.

Things good in General to draw out either Stub, Thorn or Iron, either out of
the Foot or any other Part of the Body.
Black soap laid to the sore all night will make it appear, the roots of Reeds
stamped and mixed with Honey, and laid to it, draws out any Stub or Nail, so
will also black Snails stamped and wrought with Butter,
the root of stinking Gladwin roasted and laid to it, the root of the Sword-Flag
stamped with the powder of Frankincense and Wine is good, Daffadil stamped with
Meal of Darnel and Honey, Clary stamped and laid asteep in warm water, and the
slimy substance taken and applied Plaister-wise does the like. Dittony bruised
and applied, Primroseleaves, Galbanum, Agrimony stamped with Hog's Grease; if a
Cloth be wetted in the distilled water of Haw-thorn, and applied, will draw
forth any Thorn and Splint, the seeds and leaves of Mullen boiled in Wine, the
Juice of Scabius and Southernwood bruised and laid to it, Soap and Chalk mixed
together, and when it is out pour into it scalding hot Turpentine, and when
that is cold pour in the powder of Sulphur, or black Snails and Soap bruised
together and apply it to the Grief; and bolster up his Foot or the Sore with
Hurds, and keep it from all wet and filthiness.

What is good for the Cords in general.
To Bathe his Legs with the Grounds of Ale, and to Rope them up with Hay wet in
the same for a Fortnight or more together, or take Mustard, Aquavitae and
Sallet Oil, and boil them together, and make a Plaster of it, and apply it to
the place grieved. But the best and sure Cure of all is to make a Slit upon the
very top of his Nose, and with your Cornet take up his two great Sinews which
you shall there find, and cut them in sunder, and so heal it up again with some
healing Salve, and this will do him no harm but good, for it will give him the
use of his Legs so perfectly, as that he will seldom or never after trip any
more, and this can any ordinary Smith do.

To Cure the String-halt.
Take up the middle Vein upon the Thigh, and underneath the same, then under
the said Vein there lies a string, which string must be cut away, and then
anoint him with Butter and Salt, and he will both do well and go well. You may
find it more at large afterward.


Great Driers in General of old Sores, and of all manner of moist Humors
whatsoever.
Allom burnt, unslackt Lyme, the Ashes of an old Shoe burnt, Oyster-shells
burnt will dry up any sore, be they never so moist, the Juice of Elder, the
powder of the Leaves of Brambles, or the inner Rind, the powder of the Root of
the Butter-bur, the powder of Fern Roots, the powder of sow-Fennel, the
distilled water of Throatwort, the whole Plant, Root and all, w^ll dry up the
hollow moisture of corroding Ulcers, the Ashes of Southernwood, the Ashes of
Nutshells burnt, Chamberly, green Copperas, Brimstone, Mastick, Frankincense,
Cloves, Myrrh beaten to powder, and laid upon a Chafing Dish of Coals, then
take some Lint, and receive the Smoke of it into it, and lay it upon the Sore,
but wash it first with Chamberly, Soot and Cream tempered together, Aquavitae
and Soap boiled together, Rye flower, the White of an Egg beaten to an Oil with
Honey, Bole-Armoniack and Meal m^xt amongst it, and make a Plaster of it, is
good to heal up any New Galled Back, Barley-straw burnt and Soot, the powder of
Honey and unslackt Lyme will heal any Gall, being first washed with Vinegar,
the Soot or Grim of a brass Pot, the powder of the Bone of a Crab-Fish, the
Powder of Galls, the Grease of Snakes roasted with Heads and Tails off is a
great Drier, the Bark of a Willow-Tree burnt to Ashes, is a great Drier and
Binder, dry Figs beaten to powder with Allom, Mustard and Vinegar, or Oyland
soft Grease beaten to a Salve, with Vitriol,
Galls and Allom; the powder of Pomegranates, Salt and Vinegar does dry very
much, or take a Toast of Wheaten-bread, spread all over with Honey, and Toasted
dry, and beaten in a Mortar to powder, and strowed upon any Gall, and it will
dry it up soon, or take Egg-shells burned black and beaten to powder, with old
Shoes burned to a Coal and Charcoal, quick Lime and green Copperas burned in
an Earthen Pot until it be red hot, then take of each of these alike, and knead
them well together till they come to a Paste, and bake it well, and beat it
into fine Powder, and strew it upon the sore, and before you dress it, wash it
with strong Vinegar or Chamberly, and it will be well; or bathe the sore with
hot melted Butter, and strew upon it the powder of Rozin for a day or two, then
take of thick Cream and Soot, and work it to a Paste, and apply it to the place
Plaister-wise.

A Plaster to dry up superfluous moisture, and to bind Parts loosened.
Take Bitumen one pound, of the purest part of Frankincense three Ounces, of
Bdelium Arabicum one Ounce, of Deers Sewet one pound, of Populeum one Ounce, of
Galbanum one Ounce, of the drops of Storax one Ounce, of common Wax one pound,
of Rozin Cabial half a pound, of Viscus Italicus one Ounce and a half, of
Apoxima one Ounce, of the Juice of Hysop one Ounce, of the drops of Armoniack
one Ounce, of Pitch half a Pound, let them be well molten together and
incorporated, and make a Plaster thereof.

Another Plaster to dry up any Swelling, VVind-gall, Splint or Bladder, in or
about the Joints.
Take of Virgin-Wax half a pound, of Rozin one pound and a quarter, of Galbanum
one Ounce and a half, of Bitumen half a pound, of Myrrh secundary one pound, of
Armoniack three Ounces, of Costus three Ounces, boil all these together in an
Earthen Pot, saving the Armoniack and Costus, which being first Ground like
fine Flower, must be added unto the other things, after that they have been
boiled and cooled, and then boiled together again and well stirred, so as they
may be incorporated together, and made all one substance, and then applying as
occasion shall be administered.

Things good to dissolve Humors.
To bath the Sorrance well with hot melted Butter, and to strew upon it the
powder of Rozin for a day or two, then take Cream and Soot, and work them to a
thick Paste, and apply it to the Sorrance, and it will dry* up the humor and
skin, and heal the sore. Wormwood, Sage, Rosemary, and the Bark of an Elm, or
of a Pine, and Linseed boiled in Oil, and make a Bath thereof, and lay it to
the grieved place, and it will dissolve any humor* that are bound and gathered
together.

A pound of Figs stamped with Salt till they come to a Salve, dissolveth all
manner of Humors, by opening the Pores, and giving a large Passage* Look for
more Receipts in my first Part, of this Nature.

Things good to stop Humors.
The Flower of Wheat mixed with the Juice of Henbane stays the Flux of
Humors* The Flowers of the VVillow-Tree boiled in White Wind and given
inwardly, dries up evil humors; Wormwood, Sage, Bolearmoniack, Camphopia, a
kind of Gum, Cardimonium is good.

Things good to drive back Humors.
Vinegar, Salt and bold-Armoniack beaten together, and spread about the Sore
drives it back, or White-Lead and Sallet Oil beaten together, or Red Lead and
Sallet Oil, or else V^gue^um Album Camphoratum, and such like, but to take away
the evil Humors of the Legs, take of common Honey, Turpentine, Mastick,
Frankincense, Bolearmoniack made into powder, Sanguis Draconis, New laid Eggs,
White Wind Vinegar, the Flower of Rice mixed altogether, and make a Plaster of
it, and Lap it round about the Legs from the Feet to the upper Houghs, do this
four or five times

Hmours made thin.
Garlic makes thin, thick and gross Humors, and cutteth such as are tough
and clammy, French Mercury a Decoction made of it and Cumminseeds.

Humors Purged.
A Conserve made of Musk, Roses are a great Purger of waterish Humors, Seen
purges choleric and phlegmatic Humors, also gross and Melancholic.


Simples that are good to cleanse the Body from all manner of evil Humors.
Agrimony, Anniseeds, the inner Rind of the Barberry-tree boiled in Ale and
given him for three or four Mornings together clears the Body from Itching,
Mange, Tettars, Ring-wormes, Yellows and Boyls. The Flowers of Broom or Fuz
cleanses it of Choler; The Decoction of the root of Butchers Broom or
Knee-holly made in Wine and Treacle p^c thereto, cleanses the Breast from
Phlegm, and the Chest from much clammy Humors gathered therein; wild Marjorem
cleanses it from Choler; the seed of Cow Parsnips cleanses it from tough
phlegmatic matter therein; the powder of English Rubarb steeped all night in
Ale and given him fasting, cleanses the Stomach, Liver and Blood, by purging
away those evil Humors that offend the Body; the distilled Water of Dragons
given him, is a great Clenser of the internal Parts, Mallows or Macsh-mallows
does the like; Mercury cleanses the Breast and Lungs from Phlegm; the distilled
Water of the Star-thistle or Root beaten to powder is very good; Common
Wormwood cleanses the Body from Choler; Ground Pine is good for all Diseases of
the Brain, procured from cold and phlegmatic Humors, etc.

Simples that are good to dry up all manner of evil Humors in Sores or Wounds

The powder of the root of the Butter-bur does wonderfully help them, wild
Bryar-balls dried and beaten to powder, and strewed upon them, does the like;
the root of Sow Fennel beaten to powder and used as before does the like; so
does Fig wort, Mother-wort and Lung-wort; Nettles bruised and applied to them
is very good; Pollipody, Rupture-wort bruised and applied to the place grieved
dries up all manner of filthy Ulcers and Humors; Green Copperas boiled in
water, and the place bathed therewith dries them up; About two Ounces of burnt
Allom, put into a quart of Spring Water after it comes off the Fire, and the
place grieved Bathed therewith warm Morning and Evening, and a wet Cloth dipped
in the water, and bound about it three or four times double wet, is excellent
good to dry them up; the powder of the root of Turmentil is good; The Flower of
Wheat mixed with the Juice of Henbane laid to them, stays the Flux of them to
the Joints; the Leaves, Bark or Seed of the Willow-Tree does the like; the
Flowers also has the same Faculty in drying up of evil humors; Wood-Sage
digesteth Humors, etc.

Things good in General for the Shedding of the Hair from the Main or Tail.
To anoint the Main and Crest with black Soap, and then to make a strong Lie of
Ash Ashes, or else of Urine and Ashes, and wash it all over with it, but if
there should grow on the Horses Tail a Canker, which will consume away ^oth the
flesh and bone, then lay some Oil of Vitriol upon it and it w ll kill it; if
you find it eat too much, it is but wetting it with cold water, and it will stop
it; Or take of green Copperas, Allom and white Copperas boiled in Running water
till half be consumed, and wash it with it till it be whole; but if the Hair
fall away, then take Southernwood and burn it to Ashes, and mix it with common
Oil, and anoint it with it, and it will presently bring Hair again; If it be in
the Main, let him Blood; but if it be both in the Main and Tail, then take
Quicksilver and tried Hog's Grease, the Quicksilver being first mortified with
fasting Spittle, incorporate them very well together till the Hog's Grease be of
a perfect Ash Color, and anoint the Sorrance with it every day once, heating
it in with a hot Fire-shovel, and three or four days thus dressing him he will
be well.

Things good in General to take away Hair in any part of the Body.

The Gum that grows on the Body of Ivy rubbed therewith, for it is of so hot a
quality that it does obscurely burn; the Juice of Fumitory of that which
grows amongst Barley with Gum Arabic, etc.

Particular Receipts to take off Hair in any Part of the Body.
Dissolve in Water eight Ounces of Lyme, and then boil it till a quarter be
consumed, then add to it an Ounce of Orpiment, and lay a Plaster of it to any
part of the Horse, and it will in few Hours bring away the Hair.

Another.
Take Rust and Orpiment boiled in Running Water, and wash the place with it
very hot, and it will soon bring the Hair away.

To make Hair black.

The Leaves of the Bramble boiled in Lie, and anoint any place with it makes
it black, or the Leaves and Berries of the Wayfring Tree boiled in Lie, or the
Juice of common Elder, or the Decoction of Sage washed therewith.

To make Hair Yellow.

To wash the Hair with the Lie of the Ashes of the Barberry-Tree.

Things good in General to make Hair grow very soon, very thick, and very long.
The Roots of the Elm boiled very well in water, and wash the place therewith,
the Juice of Thistles put on the place, the Juice of Red Beets, the Juice of
Onions; Tar, Hogs grease, Dogs-grease, the Ashes of green Willow, Nut-shells,
Soap, Bears-grease, Aquavitae* Oil of Turpentine, an Oil made of the white
Lilly-roots with Hog's Grease is very good, the Ashes of Southern-wood mingled
with old Sallet-Oyl, etc.

Particular Receipts to bring Hair, and to cause it to grow long.
Take the dung of a Goat newly made, ordinary Honey, Allom, and the blood of a
Hog, the Allom being first made into fine powder, boil them together and anoint
the place with it every day, and it will make the Hair come again apace.

Another.
To wash the place with the water wherein the Roots of Althaea has been
boiled, and after dry it gently with your hand increases Hair much.

Others.
To wash the place with the Urine of a young Boy, then take Lie made of
unslackt Lyme, Ceruse and Lytergy, and with it wash the Hair off, and it will
make it come soon, long and thick, or to wash the place with Oil mingled with
the Ashes of Nut-shells burnt, or else Snails shells burnt, or Nettleseeds
bruised with Honey, Water and Salt, or the Root of the white Lilly beaten and
sod in Oil, and anoint the place therewith, or the Juice of Radishes or Tar,
Sallet-Oyl and Honey boiled together, or the Soot of a Caldron mixed with Honey
and Oil* etc.

Another.
Take a quarter of a pound of Soap, and as much Piece-Grease, and a quarter of
a pint of Aquavitae, boil these together, and apply it to the bald places, and
in a Fortnight it will bring Hair again.

Another which is the best of all.
Take green Wall-nut shells and burn them to powder, and mix it with Honey,
Sallet-Oyl and Wine, and anoint the place therewith, and it will increase Hair
wonderfully and very soon.

Things good in General for to Ripen all Imposthumes, Inflammations hot or
cold, or for any Swelling in any part of the Body and Legs, and to take away
hard Knobs or Kernels, etc.
Wheaten-Bran boiled in Vinegar, Leaven made of Wheat, Daffodill stamped with
Bores-grease and Leaven of Rye-bread, is good to ripen hard Impostumes,
Brank-cresses, Sow-thistles, Hawk-weed, the Juice of Thorn-Apples boiled in
Hog's Grease to an Ointment, the leaves of Arsmart bruised and laid to any
Impostumes in the Joints, for the space of an hour or two takes away the pain;
the Juice of Housleek is good against the burning Inflammations, the Juice of
Wall-penney-wort is likewise good for any hot Inflamm^tions or Tumors, all the
sorts of Pimpernel is good to Cure Inflammations and Swellings, the Leaves of
Flowers of Fether-few is good for all hot Inflammations and Swellings, the
Leaves of Mullen boiled in Water and laid to the Eyes Cures and eases the
pains of them, Walter-Caltrops used in the Nature of a Poultess is good, Water
Sengreen, or fresh-water-souldier, Duckmeat, is good for all hot Inflammations
and Swellings, the fruit of the Pompion boiled in Milk is good for the
Inflammations of the inward parts, the green leaves of Elder pounded with Deers
Suet allayeth all hot Inflammations, Straw-berrie-leaves, Bay Leaves, Apples
are good for all Inflammations and hot Swellings, Figs stamped and made into
the form of a Plaster with white Meal and the powder of Fennegreek and
Lynseed, and the Roots of Marsh Mallows applied warm does soften and ripen
Impostumes, and all hot and angry Swellings and Tumors, and if you add thereto
the Roots of Lillies, it ripeneth and breaks venomous Imposthumes.

Observation.
To all cold Swellings or Imposthumes you may apply hot Simples to them, and to
all hot Swellings and Inflammations you must put cold; If the Swelling does
Imposthumate, you may know it by the heat, and when you have made it fit to be
opened, open it with a red hot Iron.

Particular Receipts to Ripen Imposthumes or Swellings.
Take Mallow-roots, and white Lilly-roots, of each alike, bruise them and put
to them Hog's Grease and Linseed-Meal, and boil them till they be soft, and
Plaister-wise apply it to the Grief, and it will Ripen it, break it and heal it
presently. Or Oil of Populeon is very good, anointed twice a day with it.

Another:
Take Southern-wood and dry it to powder, and with Barley-Meal and the Yolk of
an Egg make it into a Salve, and lay it to the Impostume, and it will ripen it,
break it and heal it.

Another.
Take of Sanguis Draconis, Gum Arabic, New Wax, Mastick, Pitch of Greece,
Incense and Turpentine, of each a like quantity, and melt them together, then
strain them and make a Plaster thereof, and lay it to the Imposthume without
removing, and it will both ripen, break and heal it.

Another.
Take Wheat-bran two Handfuls, and so much Wine, Ale or Beer, as one quart, and
to thicken it put to it of Hog's Grease half a pound, boil them together till
the Liquor be quite consumed, and apply it hot to the place, renewing it every
day once till it break of it self, or be so soft to be opened, then let forth
the Corruption with a hot Iron, and Taint it with Flax dipped in this Salve, take
of Turpentine and of Hog's Grease, of each alike; and of Rozin and Wax a much
greater quantity, melt them together and dip the Taint in it, and put it into
the Wound, renewing it every day once till it be whole. This is to Ripen
Inflammations, Pustules and Kernels, which do grow under the Chaul of a Horse;
but if it be an Inflammation in any other part of the Body, then take four
quarts of the Grounds of a Beer-Barrel, of Smallage, Pennyroyal,
Winter-Savoury, Comfrey, Rue, and of the Leaves and Berries of Misletoe, of
each two Handfuls, chop them small and put them to the Grounds, and put to it a
pound of Sheeps Sewet or Deers Sewet tried, and three or four Handfuls of Rye
or Wheat-bran, so much as will serve to boil it to a Poultess, and when it is
boiled apply it to the place, it will break it or at least soften it that it
may be opened, if it be hard when you put your Poultess thereunto, it will send
it back.

Things good in General for Imposthumated Ears.
If it be not broke, Water and Salt put into the Ear, or Butter and Salt will
break it, or to apply to this swelling Linseed beaten, and put to it Honey and
Hog's Grease melted together, and when it breaks Taint it with Flax dipped in
Salve made of Turpentine. Metrosatum and Sallet Oil; but if he has pain in his
Ear, dip some black Wool in the Oil of Chamomil, and put into it; but if it be
broken, dip it in the Oil of Roses, Honey and Venice Turpentine, the Juice of
Ivy growing on a Pale or Wall, put into the Ears stays the running of them,
though it be of long continuance, and helps old Ulcers and Impostumes bred
there, but if you think it too sharp, you may mix it with the Oil of Roses.

Particular Receipts for Imposthumated Ears.
Take of Pepper beaten and searced, and tried Hog's Grease one spoonful, the
Juice of Rue one handful, White Wind Vinegar two spoonfuls, and if the
Swelling, Imposthumation or Inflammation be in the Ears, Face, Head or Throat
of the Horse, if you take either black Wool, fine Lint, Flax or Hurds, and dip
it into this Medicine, and so stop both his Ears therewith, and then stitch
them up that it get not forth, renewing it once in two days, till the Swelling
be clean gone, he will be certainly Cured. But if the Grief be in any other
part of the Body, then with this Ointment you shall anoint the grieved or swollen
place once or twice a day, till it depart; but if the Swelling be near about
the Cods or Privy Parts, then bath the place well with cold Water, and after it
is made dry again, with a Cloth anoint it with the said Ointment every day once
or twice, and it is a present Cure; It Cures also the Ulcer and Canker in the
Nose, and is a sure Cure for the Vives.

Things good in General for the Strangles.
To anoint and chafe the Swelling well with Bacon-grease or Hog's Grease, and
that will ripen and break it. Or so soon as you find the Swelling begin to
arise between his Chaps, take a wax Candle and burn it therewith, till the Skin
arise from the Flesh, then lay unto it wet Hay or wet Litter, and that will
ripen it and make it break; then lay a Plaster unto it only of Shoomakers Wax,
and that will both draw and heal it. Now if it break inward you may know it by
voiding the corruption at his Nose; then twice or thrice every day Perfume his
Head by burning under his Nostrils Frankincense or Mastick, or else by putting
a hot Coal into wet Hay, and let him receive the smoke thereof up his Nostrils,
or else to blow the powder of Euphorbium with a Quill into his Nose; and so
Note, that whatsoever Cures the Vives Cures the Strangles; or with a small
round hot Iron thrust a Hole through the Skin, on both sides the Weesand, and
then after it begins to matter, to mix Butter, Tanners water and Salt
together, and every day anoint the sore therewith till it be whole, to anoint
the Swelling with Oil of Turpentine is good. Blooding him in the Mouth is very
good for this Distemper.

A Particular Receipt for the Strangles.
Take Basilicon, old Bores Grease and Dialthaea, of each four Ounces, of Oil de
Bay one Ounce, incorporate all these very well together, then anoint the place
well after you have clipped away the Hair, and bind it up with a piece of
Sheeps skin with the Wool next to the Inflammation, that the warmth thereof
may the better help to ripen the Pustules, which being ripened, let forth the
Corruption with a small hot Iron, and taint it for three or four days together
with Basilicon only, and afterward heal it up with your black Aegyptiacum,
taught you in my First Part, and let him eat good sweet Hay and Bran in stead
of Oats, and let his Drink be white Water.


An Excellent Receipt for the Strangl^, Squinzey, Strangling or Cold, that has
Run for above half a year or more at his Nose.
Give him this Drink in the Morning fasting, in a pint and a half of strong
Beer, (not boiled, but heated) lukewarm, and blood him in the third ^urrow of
his Mouth after it, viz. the powder of Turmerick and Anniseeds, of each an
Ounce, half a quarter of a Pint of Brandy, with five or six spoonfuls of
White Wind, White Wind Vinegar, or for want of that, Verjuice; Then Air him
after it. When you have brought him home, Cloth and Litter him up warm, and
Tie him to the empty Rack for three or four hours or more; But if you see him
sweat very much, which this Drink does usually cause him to do, and that you
find him desirous to lie down, you may untie him and give him that liberty; let
him have no Mash, but only warm water, and a handful or two of Wheat-Bran put
into it, and the next Morning give him the like, and presently after it (to
bring him to a Stomach) give him about two Ounces of Honey in half a Pint of
White Wind, or White Wind Vinegar, or for want of either, Verjuice, and Air him
after it. The third day you may give him the common Cordial for Horses, viz.
three Pints of stale strong Beer, boiled with a good big Toast of
Houshold-Wheaten Bread, crummed into it, and when you are ready to give it him,
put into it before it be quite cold, Honey and fresh Butter a quarter of a
pound of each, and give it him luke warm fasting, and exercise him after it,
and set him up warm three or four hours, after give him as you did before,
warm Water and Bran in it. Thus Order him till you find Amendment.

The Vertu^s of the Cordials of White Wind and Honey, and of the To^st of
Houshold-bread boiled in strong Beer, and sweetened with Honey, etc.
These do not only help to bring him to a Stomach, and kill the Canker in his
Mouth and Throat, (which this Disease does commonly bring a^ong with it) but
also clears his Guts, and clen^eth and heals his Lights, if there be any
Imperfection in them.

Observations upon this Disease.
1. If you find that he Runs at the Nose any ^oul, filthy and yellowish Matter,
and it afterward turn white, you need not much Question the Cure.

2. If he has any Knots or Kernels under his Jaws, your common Charge of Soap
and Brandy, heated and rubbed in well, will either break or sink them.

3. If you find the Hair in the middle of the swelling begin to scale off, and
that it be soft all over, you may let out the corruption with your Incision
Knife, and let it heal up of it self.

4. Though your Dri^^ does cause him to be very sick, and make him swell much
in his Body, fear him not for he will do well.

5. Two or three Miles Riding every day will do him much good in order to his
Cure.

A Receipt for a Sprain Shoulder; And if you desire to see more Variety of
Receipts, look for Sinew-strains.
Take Oil de Bay, Dialthaea, fresh Butter, Oil of Turpentine, of each two
Ounces, boil and mix them well together, and when they be well incorporated
anoint the grieved place therewith, so hot as he can well suffer it without
Scaulding, and anoint him thus twice or thrice a day, and give him moderate
Exercise by walking him a Foot pace gently up and down, and this is a certain
and approved Remedy.

Another for a Sprain in the Shoulder.

Take one Ounce of the Oil of Spike, half an Ounce of the Oil of Lin^eed, half
an Ounce of the Oil of St. John's wort, with half an Ounce of the Oil of
Pompilion, and put them all together into a Glass Viol, and shake them very
well together to mingle them, then put them forth into some earthen Vessel, to
prevent penetrating and loss of the Medicine; And when you have occasion to use
it, chafe and rub it all over the grieved place with your hand, one holding at
the same time at a little distance a hot Fire-shovel, or Brick-bat before it,
to make the Oils sink in the better. This is very good for a slight Strain;
Then Blood him in the Shoulder, and Tie his fore-Feet together.


Another for a very great and violent Shoulder-strain, which is the best
R^ceipt I know for the Cure of it.
If by any Accident he get a Strain in his Shoulder, take this common and usual
way which our Smiths do now generally use, viz. To take up his sound Leg
before, and double it backwards in the Joint, and Tie it so doubled with some
List or Garter, so fast that it Untie not; then force him to go upon his three
Legs, till he sweat at the Roots of his Ears, Flanks and between his Legs;
then let down his Leg again (by untying it) which will cause the Blood to
descend so into the Plate-Vein, that it will be more visible to be seen then
when it was Tied up; but in case it does not appear so plain as you would have
it, dabb a little warm Water upon it with your Hand, and stroke it downwards
toward the place you are to let Blood, and this will make it appear more
visible to be seen then it was before. Then Tie up his Leg again, and let him
Blood in the common bleeding place, viz. between his Chest and lame Leg, about
two quarts or more, according to the greatness or smalness of his Strain. Let
the blood that you save for this purpose (to anoint him with) be about a quart,
add let it be the last blood, for that is the best, and therefore most proper
and fit for your use; put a handful of Salt into the Bowl you receive it into,
and keep it stirring all the while it is running to keep it from clotting. When
he has bled so much as you think Fitting, pin up the Mouth of the Vein with a
Pin or Needle to prevent Bleeding, winding some Hairs of the Mane or Tail about
the Pin, to keep the Pin fast and steady, and a day or two after take it out;
but before you pin him up, anoint him all over the Shoulder and bottom of his
Breast, between his Legs and down to his Knee, with Oil of Turpentine and
strong Beer or Ale, of equal parts alike, shaked and mingled very well together
first, in a Glass Vial, clapping and dabbing it well in with your hand; And
after you have anointed him as much as you think good, smear all the said
places anointed before with the Blood and Salt, chafing and dabbing this also
very well in with your hand, as you did the other; Then bring him home softly
into the Stable, and give him some Meat, and Tie his Forelegs together with
his Surcingle, or any other String that is broad and easy; The next day you
may untie his Legs, and walk him abroad in your Hand at the Halters end, which
if you find that he goes pretty well, you may Mount his Back, and Ride him a
Mile or more gently; Then set him up again, and Tie up his Legs as you did
before; The third day after his Dressing, make him a thin flat Wedge of Wood
about the breadth of a Sixpence, and drive it between the Shoe and ^oe so fast
that it stir not, not forgetting still to Tie his Legs together; Thus Order him
for three or four days together, which is the usual time limited to make him
sound again, conditionally it be but a new Strain; When you take him out of the
Stable, or Ride him at any time, you must untie his Legs* and take forth the
Wedge. This Receipt is good also for a Shoulder that is pulled out of its
place, about the breadth of a Man's Hand or more, or a Wrench Shoulder, or a
splayed Shoulder, etc.

Things good in General to Cure the Sit-fast, or hard Knobs growing under the
Saddle.
Take a long Nail with the Point turned inwards, and catch hold of the edge of
the dead Skin or Horn which will rise from the sound Skin, and with a sharp
Knife cut away all the dead and hard skin from the sound Flesh, and heal it up
by pouring hot Butter into it Morning and Evening, and when the Flesh is made
even, dry and skin it either with the powder of Honey and Lyme, or with Soot
and Cream mixed together; or to wash the Wound either with Urine or White Wind,
and dry it up with the powder of Oyster-shells burnt, or of Bole-Armoniack; or
take the green Leaves of Cabbage and stamp them with Hog's Grease, and work them
to an Ointment, and lay it to his Back, then put on the Saddle and Mount his
Back, to the end that the Ointment may the better enter, or sink into his Back,
and in few days it will Cure him, etc.

Things good in General for a Navel-Gall.
To anoint it with the Oil of Turpentine, will not only cleanse it but heal it
also; but if you find any dead or proud Flesh arise in it, either cut or eat it
away before you use any Medicine, with either burnt Allom or the powder of
Verdegrease; or after you have washed and cleansed the Sore with your Copperas
water, or with warm Vinegar, strew this powder on it; Take of Honey a Quartern,
and as much unslackt Lyme as will thicken the Honey, and make it into a Paste,
and bake it so hard as that you can beat it to powder, and strew it on the
Sorrance, etc.

Particular Receipts for the Navel-Gall.
Take Oil de Bay, Oil of Costus, Fox Grease, Oil of Savin, of each an Ounce;
then take one hundred of great Garden Worms, and scour them with Salt and
White Wind, and put all the Ingredients together into an earthen Pot very well
stopped, and boil it well, then add thereto of Sallet Oil one Ounce and a half,
and boil it over again till it come to a perfect Ointment, then strain it into
a Gally-pot, and keep it for your use, only warm it, and so dress the Sorrance
therewith with Lint or Hurds, and it will soon be whole.

Another.
After you have washed the Sore with old Urine and Salt, then anoint it with an
Ointment made of Bitony, powder of Brimstone, Hellebore, Pitch and old
Hog's Grease stamped together and melted, or with your green Ointment in the
First Part.

Another for the Navel-Gall.

If the place be only swelled, and the skin not broken, then dabb the grieved
Part all over with your Hand, or with a Rag wet in Brandy, and it will take it
down; Or the Oil of Turpentine used after the same mann^r will do the like: but
if it be raw and sore, then these Medicines are very proper for it, viz. Take a
quarter of a Pint of Whale Oil, by some called Train Oil, and boil in it as
much of the powder of Verdegrease finely powdered and ^earced as will lie upon a
small shilling, and the grieved part anointed with it will Cure it very
speedily. Or the same quantity of Verdegrease, Train-Oyl, and two or three
spoonfuls of the Ointment of Marshmallows boiled a little together, is a
certain Cure for it.

How you are to Order them.
If the Skin hang loose about them you are to cut it off. But if it be an Old
Navel-Gall, which feels hard, then cut out the bruise with your Incision Knife,
and ^ear the wound up again with a hot Iron, and heal it up with your green
Ointment in the First Part.

These Medicines are not only good for a Navel Gall, but for any manner of
Sores and raw Backs whatsoever, and also for a Sit-fast. Vnguentum Bubrum
desicativum is also good for them, so is Palm-Oyl.

What is good for the Cure of the Pal^ey.
To let him Blood on his Neck-Vein and Temple-Veins, on the contrary side to
that way he wryeth his Neck, then anoint his Back all over with Oil of
Petrolium, and with a wet Hay Rope swaddle his Neck all over even from his
Breast to his Ears; Then for three Mornings together give him a Pint of old
Muscadine, with a spoonful of these powders in it, viz. Opoponax, Storax,
Gentian, Manna, Succory, Myrrh and long Pepper beaten all into fine powder, but
put not in so much of the Myrrh and long Pepper as of any of the rest.

Things good in general to Cure the Lethargy or sleeping Evil.
To keep him waking with great Noise, and let him Blood in the Neck and Palate
of the Mouth, and to give him water wherein has been boiled Chamomel,
Mother-wort, Wheat, Bran, Salt and Vinegar to perfume his Head, and to anoint
the Palate of his Mouth with Honey and Mustard mixed together, or to put
Parsley-seed or Fennel-seed into his Water to provoke him to Urine*

Another for the same.
After you have Blooded, as you must always do in this Disease, then take some
of the green Boughs of the Ash-Tree, and set them on Fire in some clean place,
and quench the Coals made thereof in some Ale, and when you have strained it
out, give him a Hornful of it at each Nostril, the Cold being first taken off.
It Is good also to open his Forehead underneath his Fore-top, and put into it a
Slice or two of an old Onion, and let them lie there till they Rot.

Things good in General for the Phrenzie and Madness in a Horse.
To let him Blood in all the lower parts of his Body, to draw the Blood front
his Head; As namely, in his Shackle, Veins, the Spur-Veins, the Plat-Veins and
the Thigh. Veins, and let him Blood very much, then give him this Drink, Take
the Root of wild Cucumber, and where that cannot be gotten, take a Handful of
Rue or Mints, and a Handful of black Hellebore, and boil them in Beer, and give
it him luke warm; or to give him the Root of Virga Pastoris stamped in water,
or to give him Man's Dung in Wine three Mornings together, or to make him
swallow down Hens Dung.

Things good in General for the Quitter-bone.
To open it, and put some Oil of Vitriol into it, and that will so eat about
the Bone, so that you may thrust it out; this is a very safe, and as good a
Medicine as any you have. If you find it eat too much, you may stop the eating
of it with cold water, or with your Copperas water in my First Part, which will
not only keep it sweet and clean, but also keep proud Flesh from growing in it,
or you may heal it up with a Salve made of Turpentine and Hog's Grease, and
always before you dress it to wash it with the said water, or Auripigmentum
made into fine powder, and steeped in White Wind twenty eight hours, and apply
it to it, and it will eat so about it that you may pull it away with your
Fingers, and do likewise after the bone or gristle is taken out, heal it up
with your Copperas water and your green Ointment, and let him not come into the
water during the time of Cure.

Particular Receipts for the Cure of a Quitter-bone.

Tent it a day or two with Hog's Grease and Verdegrease ground together, then
take scalding hot Grease poured into the Hole, and lay a Plaster of Pitch and
Tarr mixed over it for twenty four hours, and if the Bone rise not, do the same
again and it will rise, then take it out with your Nippers, and heal it up with
some of your Salve, which you best like on, which you may find in my First Part.

Another.
Take of common Honey and Verdegrease in fine powder, as much of each as will
suffice, boil it till it be red* and tent the Wound till it be whole, keeping
evermore the Wound open, lest it heal up above before it be well healed up at
bottom.

Another.
Take of Arsnick the quantity of a small Bean made into ^ine powder, and put it
to the botttom of the Sorrance, and stop the Mouth of it with hurds, and bind a
clout over it very fast that he bite it not off, for it will poison him, and
after it has remained on for twenty four hours, open it and it will look
black therein, it is a sign that it has done his work, then to allay the fire
and to restore the flesh, is to taint it with Turpentine and Hogs*grease melted
together, and to cover the taint with a Plaster made of Rozin, Pitch, Wax and
Turpentine melted together, and thus dress him daily till you have got out the
Core or sharp Gristle, for till that be out the Sorrance will not heal, or to
heal it up with your green Ointment.


Things good in General for the Cure of a Ring-bone.
To wash the place with Vinegar after you have shaved away the Hair, then use
green Vitriol, Euphorbium, Cantharides, Verdegrease, Oil de Bay, Venice
Turpentine, Oil of Turpentine, the powder of Tartar and Salt Arsnick, unslackt
Lime, the powder of Vitriol, Pepper, Ginger.

Particular Receipts for the Cure of a Ring-bone.
Scarifie the place about the Ring-bone with a Lancet, then take a great Onion
and pick out the Core, then put into it Verdegrease and unslackt Lyme, then
cover the Hole and roast the Onion soft, then bruise it in a Mortar, and so
very hot lay it to it four days together, and it will Cure it.

Another.
Take unslackt Lyme and burn it well, which you may know by its lightness, make
into fine powder, and lay it upon the place Swelled all along of a good
thickness, and bind a Linen Cloth upon it very fast, and so put him into the
water, and let him stand there a pretty while, then take him forth and unbind
his Foot, and he is infallibly Cured, for the burning of the Lyme does kill the
Ring-bone even unto the Root thereof; de Gray declares that he has Cured with
this Receipt about one hundred Horses; but when you are to dress your Horse you
are to bring him close to the water, and so soon as you have dressed him you
are to put him presently therein.

Another.
After you have Washed, Shaved and Scarified the place, then take gray Soap and
Arsnick pulverized, of each the quantity of a Wall Nut, which being very well
mixed, spread it upon the Sorrance, so far as the Ringbone goes, and having
thus spread it, apply upon it a few Hurds, and bind a clean Linen Cloth upon
it, and remove it not in twenty four hours, then take it away and stir not the
Scab, but only anoint it with fresh Butter till it fall away of it self, and so
heal it up with some healing Salve, whereof you have plenty in the First Part.
And this Medicine will Cure either Bone-spavin, Splint or Curb; let him come in
no water during his Cure.


The common way that our Smiths do* generally use for the Cure of this
Infirmity, is to take up the Vein on the inside of the Leg where the Sorrance
is, and then to ^ear the Ring-bone with a hot Iron, made about the thickness of
the back of a Knife, three times downright, and as many times cross it till it
look somewhat of a yellowish color, then prick three or four holes in it on an
equal distance one from another, in the seared Lines quite through the Skin,
with a Nail or other Instrument of Iron, which you think most proper and fit
for the Work: When you have so done, rub a Handful of common Salt very well in
upon it, which will fetch forth the Blood and Water, that was occasioned by the
scaring and pricking of it; Then apply this Charge to it, viz. half an Ounce of
Mastick and Frankincense, Burgundy Pitch and common black Pitch, of each as
much as contains the bigness of a Wall-Nut; Boil all these very well together
in an Earthen Pipkin till they be thoroughly melted and incorporated, and apply
it very hot upon the grieved place, with a Lath or any other flat stick, and
clap Flox or Hurds upon it, pressing it down hard with your Hand to make it
stick on the better.

Observations how to Order him.
Let it stick on till it come off of it self, and if Occasion requires apply
another fresh Charge to it.

If you turn him to Grass, let him remain the first Night in the Stable, which
will make it stick on so much the better. The Cure will be the sooner perfected
if you keep him upon dry ground, for if he goes much in the wet it will quickly
come off*


Things good to Cure the Red Water.
Take of the Root of the Herb, called, Emanuel, alias, bonus Henricus, or good
King Henry, or all Good, boil the Roots in Water and give it him, or
Mustard Seed beaten small, a good handful given him in White Wind Vinegar two
or three times together one after another, keeping his Belly rubbed with a good
long stick by two men, one taking one end of it, and another the other end.


A particular Receipt very good for it.
Give him these things here underwritten, well mixed and brewed together in a
Quart of strong Beer or Ale for three Mornings together, viz. Three spoonfuls
of the powder of the Lean of salt Beef dried, two spoonfuls of the powder of
Bolearmoniack, with about four or five Shallots peeled and bruised in a Mortar,
with the rest of the Powders, dissolve all these in the Beer as aforesaid, and
give it him. It Is not amiss to give him after his Drink a Pint of Butter-milk,
or for want of that a Pint of Cheese-Runnet. This is a very good and certain
Cure for it.

Things good in General to provoke Urine, or to cause a Horse to Stale.

Wild Bryar* balls beaten to powder is very good, Alheal, Water-Agrimony,
Birds-Foot, Parsley-roots or seed, Mustard Seed, Alexander and Horse-parsley,
or Wild parsley which is sold in Apothecaries shops, for Macedonian*parsley,
Burdock-seed is a great provoker of Urine, Asarabacca the Kernels within the
Husk of Ashen Keys, Brook Lyme, Pimpernel, Watercresses, Butchers-Broom, the
Root of the Butter-Bur, the Juice of the leave* of the Bur-docks, Champions,
Wild-Carrots, the Berries and Fruit of the Winter-Cherries, the Juice of
Garden-chervil, the Juice of Cuckoe-point boiled in Ale or Beer, the Seed of
Cucumbers, Dandelion, Dodder of Thyme, Dogs-grass, Elder, Elecampane, Eringo or
S^a-holly, the Root of Fern, Fennel-seeds, Filipendula, Drop-wort, Flax-weed or
Toad-Flax, the Flower-de lu^e, Gentian, Felt-wort or Baldmony, the Seeds of
Germander, the seeds of stinking Gladwin, Golden-Rod, Gromel, Groundsel,
Hartichoke weed, Hawk-weed, Herb Robert, Hops, the smoother not the rougher
Horse-tail, St. John's wort, the Berries or Leaves of Ivy, Garlic, Radish
roots, Horse*Radishroots, the seeds of Rochet, Kidney-wort, Knot-grass, Juniper
Berries, the Flowers of Lavender steeped in white Wine, Ladies smocks or
Cuckoe-Flowers, Lovage, Maidenhair, Wall-Rue, the Roots of Master-wort,
Mother-wort, Mug-wort, Nettle-seeds, dried Acorns beaten to powder and given,
Parsley, Piert, or Parsley-break stone, the powder of the Bark of Rest-Harrow,
Burnet, Smallage, the Roots of Spignel, the Seeds of the Star-thistle, Lady
Thistle, great Turnsole boiled in Water with Cummin, the Water that is gathered
from the Willow-Tree when it Flowreth, the Bark being slit to let it out, Honey
suckle leaves, Wormwood, Saffron, the Roots of Valerian with Fennel-seeds, Haws
bruised and laid asteep in Beer or Ale, Egg*shells dried and beaten to powder
and given in Ale or Beer, the Juice of Coleworts, Southernwood, Mallows stamped
and given him in Ale, Cherry-stone Kernels, Madder. But for a Horse that can
neither stale nor dung, take the Root of Male brake or Fern, the Male is to be
known, for if you cut it you will find the perfect Figure of an Eagle upon it,
put a piece thereof upon his Tongue, and it will cause him both to stale and
dung, a Flint-stone beaten to powder will make him Stale given him in Beer;
Ivy-berries dried and beaten to powder and given in White Wind is very good.

Particular Receipts to cause a Horse to Stale or Piss.
Take a quart of strong Ale and put it into a Pottle-Pot* then take as many
keen Radish-Roots washed, slit and bruised as will fill up the Pot, then stop
it up close and let it stand twenty four hours, then strain the Ale and Roots
very hard and give it him Fasting, and Ride him a little up and down, and set
him up warm, and you shall se^ him Stale, do this two or three Mornings
together.

Another.

Take a good Piece of fine Castle-Soap, about the bigness of a good big
Wall-Nut, and dissolve it in a quart of warm Beer with some bruised Parsley
seed, give it him in the Morning Fasting, and Ride him moderately after it, and
set him up warm, and it will cause him to stale.

Another.

Take three or four spoonfuls of bruised Bur-dock seeds, and boil it in a quart
of Beer, and give it him to drink lukewarm, putting a good piece of Butter to
it whilst it cools.

Another for the same.

Take half an Ounce of Fennel-seed, half an Ounce of Parsley-seed, half an
Ounce of Bur-dock-seed, half an Ounce of Nettle-seed, and half an Ounce of
Ivy-berries when they be thorough ripe; Put all these into a Pint of
White Wind, and a quarter of a Pint of Ale, and let them steep some time
therein, and give it him Fasting in the Morning for two or three Mornings
together, and exercise him after it. This is a most excellent Receipt, not only
for this Distemper but also the Wind-Cholick, Stone and Gravel, for it
wonderfully cleanses the Kidneys from Sand and Filth.

Another very good.

Take Burnet, Dill, Smallage and Anniseeds, of each a like quantity, well dried
and beaten to powder, and put a small spoonful of each of them to a Pint of
White Wind, or for want of that a quart of Ale, and give it him as you did the
other.

Another.

Take about a spoonful of these Powders here underwritten, and put them into a
Pint of White Wind, and as much Ale, and give him them Fasting in the Morning
with exercise after it, viz. Gromel-seed, Broom-seed, Parsley seed, and the
powder of the Root of Horseradish well dried.

Another Infallible Cure for the stoppage of Urine.

Kill as many Bees as you think you have occasion to use, and dry them very
well, and beat them to Powder, and give him about an Ounce of them at a time in
a Pint of White Wind, or for want of that a Pint of Ale, and at twice or thrice
giving them at furthest, they will so open the Passages of the Uriter Veins,
that they will make him Piss and stale very freely. This Receipt is also good
for the Strangullion.

Things good for the Pain or Ulcers in the Kidneys.
Plantine, Licoris, the Decoction of the tender tops of Broom, Broomrape boiled
in Wine is good for the Kidneys and Bladder, and provokes Urine, and breaks
the Stone, to Bath his Back with Sallet-Oyl and Nitrum warmed together, and to
cover him warm, then to drink the water wherein has been boiled Dill, Fennel,
Anniseeds, Smallage, Parsley-seed, Mustard Seed, Spikenard, Myrrh, Cassia* or
Sallet Oil and Deers Sewet melted together, and the Root of the Daffodil boiled
in Wine.

Things good in General for the Strangury or Strangullion.
To bath his Loins with warm water, then take Bread and Bay Berries and temper
them with sweet Butter, and give him two or three Balls thereof three days
together, or take a quart of New Milk and a quartern of Sugar, and after they
are well brewed together, give it him to drink Fasting in the Morning, and to
keep him from all sharp Meats, as Mowburnt-Hay, Bran and the like, or to boil
in the Water that he drinks good store of the Herb Mayth or Hogs Fennel, and
it will Cure him.

A particular Receipt for it.

Take some of the powder of a Flint-stone Calcined, with an Ounce of the Powder
of Parsley-seed, and as much of the powder of Ivy-berries, and boil them a
little in a Pint of Claret, and given him, is a very good Cure.


Things good for the Stone in General, or for the Stone in the Kidneys.
Alehoof, Alkanet, Birds*foot, the seeds of the Bur-dock, Parsley-seeds, the
Kernels of the Husks of the Ash-tree, the Bark of the Bay*tree root, Broom,
Bucks horn, Plantine, Carrot-seeds, the Berries or Fruit of the Winter Cherry,
expels the Stone out of the Reins and Bladder, the Juice of Garden-chervil,
Chich Pease or Cicers, the Root of Columbines, Coral*wort, Dogs-grass,
Doves-foot or Cranes-bill, Elecampane, Eringo or Sea-holly, Fennel, the powder
of the Root of Filapendula or Drop-wort, the Flower de luce, the Fuz bush,
Garden Rod, Herb Robart, the smoother not the rougher Horse-tail, St. John's
wort, the Berries of Ivy, Maidenhair, the Juniper berries, Kidney-wort,
Knot-grass, Wall-Rue, the Roots of Master-wort, Medlar stones made into powder
and given in Wine or Beer, wherein some Parsley-seed has been infused all
night, and a little boiled, the powder of Spear-Mint, Ground Moss boiled,
Mouse-ear, Mug-wort, Nettle seeds, Parsley piert or Parsley break-stone, the
Kernels of the Peach Tree, Pellitory of the Wall, Pimpernel, the Gum of the
Plum-Tree, the powder of the Bark of the Root of Rest-Harrow given in
White Wind, Winter Rochet or Winter-cresses* wild Briar-balls beaten to powder
and given in White Wind, the seeds of the great round leaved Dock, Cummin,
white Saxafrage, Burnet Saxafrage, the Seeds or Roots of Sorrel, the Milk of
the Sow-thistle given in Wine, Spleen-wort, the Seed of the Star-thistle,
Garden Tansie, the great Turn-sole boiled in water with Cummin, Vervain, the
Tears of the Vine given, but the salt of the Leaves is better, Vipers bugloss,
Dodder, Sallet Oil, the Lard of a Goat, Coriander seed, Castle Soap, the Juice
of the red Colewort, the Roots of Alexander, Wormwood, Southernwood, Galingale,
Mallows, black Soap, Hysop.

Particular Receipts good for the Stone in the Reins, Kidneys or Bladder.
Take Saxafrage, Nettle-roots, Parsley-roots, Sperage-roots, and Dodder, of
each a Handful, bruise them and boil them gently with White Wind until a third
part be consumed, then put to it of Salt a Handful, of Sallet Oil, and of the
Lard of a Goat, of each three Ounces, of Honey half a pound; when all this is
boiled, strain it and ring it very hard, and give him of this one Pint every
Morning fasting, blood-warm, and if it become too thick by boiling, dissolve
into it some White Wind; and after the first boiling it must be but only
warmed, and let him have it so long as it will last; Or a handful of
Maidenhair steeped all Night in a quart of strong Ale, and strained, and given
him is excellent.

Another.
Take of Ale or Beer a quart, and put it into a Pot, and put to it so many of
the reddest Radish roots clean washed and sliced into small Pieces as will fill
up the Pot, then stop it up so close that the Air get not in, and let it remain
twenty four hours, then strain the Roots from the Ale or Beer very hard, and
give it him in a Morning fasting, and ride him gently upon it, and after that
set him up warm covered and littered, and in a little while you shall see him
piss freely, let him have it several Mornings together, and during the Cure let
his Drink be white Water.

Another.
Make a strong Decoction (that is to say) boil the first quantity of water to
an half Pint three times over, of keen Onions clean pilled and Parsley, then
take a quart thereof, and put to it a good spoonful of London-Treacle, and as
much of the powder of Egg-shells, and give it him. And thus do diverse Mornings
if the Infirmity be great, otherwise when you see him offended.


Things good in General for the Cholick or Stone, or for the Gripings or
Fretting of the Guts by VVind.
Centaury, Costmary is good for the Gripings of the Belly, Camomel Flowers is
good for the Cholick and Stone, and is good given in a Glister for that
purpose; the Roots of the Sea holly boiled in White Wind, Rue boiled with Dill
and Fennel-seeds in Wine is good, Cinnamon, sixteen or eighteen of the Berries
of Holly purges the Body of thick and phlegmatic Humors, Hawthorn-berries,
Cardamum, Cloves, Pepper, Juniper Berries given him, or to put a Jagged Onion
into his Fundament, or to give him a Pipe of Tobaccho at his Fundament,
Hore-hound, Southernwood, or the powder of a Stags Pizel dried and given in
Beer, or the Heart of a Lark swallowed down whole, Hysop, Cowslips, Liver-wort,
Lungwort, the Urine of a Child given him to drink, Gentian, Aristolochia
rotunda, Enula Campana, or a Glister made of Soap and salt Water, or to give
him two drams of Myrrh in Wine, Nettle-roots, Sperage-roots, Dodder bruised and
boiled in White Wind, with some Salt amongst it, is good to give him Fasting,
the powder of the wild Briar Apple-balls.

For the dry Gripes.
Or you may give him by way of a Drink, or by Glister, this following Drench,
viz. Two good Handfuls of Mallow leaves boiled in three Pints of New Milk till
it comes to a quart; Strain out the Milk from the Mallows, and give it him
either way sweetened with Loaf-sugar lukewarm. This is a most Excellent Receipt
for the dry Gripes, for this will make his Body loose, which by this means will
free him from those tormenting pains he is troubled with.

Particular Receipts for the Cholick or Stone.
Take of White Wind a quart, Fennegreek four Ounces, Bay Berries and Pepper, of
each four Ounces, Grains and Ginger of each an Ounce, Watercresses two
Handfuls, Sage one Handful, Sengreen one pound, Mints a Handful, stamp the
Herbs and pound the Spices, and put them to the Wine and boil it, then strain
it and put two spoonfuls of Honey to it, and give it him lukewarm.

Another.
Take Cloves, Pepper, Cinnamon, of each one Ounce, all made into fine powder,
and well mixed, then put it into a quart of Sack, and let it boil a while, then
take it off, and put to it one spoonful of Honey, and give it him lukewarm,
then Cloth him up and Litter him, and let him Fast three or four hours after
it, then give him Hay, and one hour after that a sweet Mash or white Water.

Another for the Cholick and Stone.
Take of White Wind one Pint, of Burdock Seeds eight Ounces made into fine
powder, of Parsley-seed two Ounces, two Ounces in powder of Hysop, unset Leeks
and Watercresses, of each half a handful, of black Soap half-an Ounce, stamp
them well and strain them with the Wine, then put to it your Bur and
Parsley-seed, and so give it him blood-warm; this will break the Stone, and
bring it from him with much ease, and cure his Cholick.


Another for Griping and Fretting in a Horses Belly.
First, blood him in the Mouth with your Cornet Horn, and give him a Pint or a
Quart of Pork or Beef Brine cold, when you see occasion; After you have so
done, strip up your Shirt as high as your Elbow, anoint your Hand and Arm with
Sallet Oil, Butter or Hog's Grease* and put it into his Fundament, and draw
forth as much of his hard and baked Dung as you can well get; Then take a good
big angry red On^on and peel it, and Jag it cross-ways with your Knife, and
Roll it very well in Salt and Flower of Brimstone, and cover it all over with
fresh Butter, and put it up into his Body as far as you can well thrust it, and
Tie down his Tuel or Tail close between his Legs, to his Surcingle or Girts,
and walk or Ride him about a quarter of an hour or more; then Untie his Tail,
and you shall find he will purge freely; The excellency of this Receipt is,
That it will cleanse his Maw and Guts, and Kill the Worms within him; The next
Morning you may give him a comfortable Drink warm, made of an Ounce of Horse
Spice, boiled a little in a quart of strong Beer sweetened with either Honey or
common Treacle. Or you may give him a Cordial of three Pints of strong Beer,
with a Toast of Household Wheat bread crummed in it, and boiled together with a
little Mace, and when you have taken it off the Fire, dissolve into it two or
three spoonfuls of Honey, with a good big Lump of sweet Butter, and he will do
well.


Things good in General for the Dropsey.
To let Blood first, to take away the thin Wheyish Blood, the Kernels within
the Hu ks of the Ashen Keys, Broom, Chamomel, wild Carrets, Centaury, the
Berries of Elder either green or dry, Dwarf Elder, Hawkweed, Wormwood, Juniper
berries, Kidney wort, wild Marjorem, the Juice of Pellitory of the Wall, the
Seed of Plantain, Bayberries, Succory, the Bark of the Tamarisk Tree, Lady
thistle, Vervain, Peony Seeds, Coleworts, Smallage, Elm boughs, Sallow Leaves,
or whatsoever else that will make him Urine, Chiche steeped in water a day and
a night, Parsley stamped and mixed with White Wind, or Burdock seeds taken the
same way, Rue, red Sage, Winter Savoury, Time, Horse Radish, Roots, Rubarb,
Saldanella, Salt of Scurvey-Grass, Garden Scurvey-Grass, Rosemary tops,
Asarabica, Wood bitony, China-roots, the Juice of the white Lilly-Roots
tempered with Barley-Meal and baked, and given him for to eat is very good.

A Particular Receipt for the Cure of the Dropsey.
Take a Gallon of Ale, and set it upon the Fire, and scum off the Froth as it
rises, then put into it of Wormwood and of Rue, the tender tops and leaves
without stalks, very well picked, of each a Handful, and boil it to a quart,
then strain it, and dissolve into it three Ounces of London Treacle, and put
into it of long Pepper and Grains made into sine Powder of each an Ounce, then
brew them well together; an give it him blood-warm, and bath and anoint his
Legs that be swelled with Train-Oyl twice a day, till it go away, and give him
Mashes or white Water, and feed him with such Meat as he will best eat, and if
the Weather be seasonable turn him to Grass, and he will do well.

Things good in General for Gravelling.
To take off his Shoe, and with your drawing Iron draw the place till you come
into the quick, prick forth all the Gravel, and crush forth the matter and
blood clean, then wash it clean with your Copperas water taught you in my First
Part, then pour upon it Sheeps Tallow and Bay Salt molten together scalding
hot, and stop up the Hole with Hurds and set on the Shoo again, and at two or
three times dressing it will be whole; but till he be thoroughly well do not
travel him, neither let his Foot come into any wet, or after the Gravel is
gotten out, stop his Foot with Hog's Grease and Turpentine molten together,
pouring it into the Wound scalding hot, or to stop it with Hog's Grease,
Verjuice, Bees Wax, the Juice of Housleek beaten in a Mortar together, and melt
it, and dip Flax therein, and use it as you did the other; or to wash it with
Beer and Salt, or Chamberly and Salt; and to put into it scalding hot Pitch,
Virgins Wax, Deers Sewet, Bores Grease and the Juice of Housleek, and stop it
up with Hurds, and tack on the Shoo again, or to lay into it Flax dipped in the
white of an Egg, or to heal it with the powder of Galls and Tartar mixed
together.

Things good in General for Molten Grease.
First, to take blood from the Neck-Vein to a good proportion, to let out all
the inflamed Blood, and to give him Bran prepared or dried Bran, and if he
empties himself, to give him a restringent Glister, which you may find in my
First Part. But things in general to be given inwardly are these, Sallet Oil,
Sack, Honey, Cordial powder of Anniseed, Hempseed, Cummin-seed,
Fennegreek-seed, Powder of Elecampane Roots, Brimstone, Licoras, Coltsfoot. In
Maladies of this Nature you must forbear to administer such Drugs as be hot,
for that is the way rather to kill then recover your Horse, for lenitive and
gentle things are the only means to bring it away.

Particular Receipts for Molten Grease.
Take of Titian three Pints, three Ounces of Loaf-sugar finely powdered, of
Cordial powder an Ounce, of Live Honey four Ounces, and give it him to drink
Blood-warm.

Another for Grease fallen into his Legs.

When you have warmed him well by Riding him two or three Miles; then take
about half a Pint or more of Sack, and three or four pennyworth of Sallet-Oyl,
and give it him to drink, then ride him as far again, and he will purge out his
molten Grease; This done two or three times will Cure him for that Winter.

Another for Molten Grease.
You shall find another most excellent for this Purpose afterward.
After you have let him Blood, take half a Pint of White Wind, half a Pint of
Sallet-Oyl, of Rubarb and of Aloes two drams, of Seen half an Ounce, of Agarick
three drams, Bay Berries half an Ounce, Saffron two drams, Duck or Duke powder,
and of Cordial powder of each two drams, make what is to be powdered into
powder, and mix them well together, adding thereunto four Ounces of Live Honey,
give it your Horse after it is well warmed upon the Fire blood-warm, but be
sure you let him fast about three Hours before you give it him, and three
hours after you give it him, and let his Drink be either a sweet Mash or white
Water for five or six days after, and let him have in stead of Oats Bread made
for him, or Bran prepared; but if you give him Oats, put in amongst them
Fennegreek bruised; but if you desire to approve of another Receipt; Look in my
First Part for Balls for Colds, Glanders or Molten Grease.

Another very good for it.

To abate the stirring and working of his Body, and to bring and restore him to
his perfect Health again; Take this course for his Recovery, Take an Ounce of
Diascordium and dissolve it in a Pint of Sack, or for want of that in a quart
of Beer or Ale, and give it him cold in the Morning fasting, and Order him as
you do sick Horses, with Mashes of Malt, bursten Oats, warm Clothes, warm
Water, etc. But if you find that he falls from his Stomach, and dungs hard, to
Remedy these two Evils I direct you to the Directions how to Order sick Horses,
about the beginning of the First Part after the End of the Table of Simples,
where you may find Vinegar and Honey to bring him to a Stomach, and a Cordial
of Bread boiled in Beer with Butter and Honey put therein, to Loosen his Body,
and to bring him to Heart again, Which when you find him lusty and strong, you
may give him as much of the powder of Mechoachan as will lie upon a shilling at
thrice, in a quart of warm Beer or Ale; Or you may give him a Purge of Aloes.

Another also very good.

Take an Ounce of the best Aloes Succotrina you can get for Money, half an
Ounce of the Cream of Tartar beaten to powder, with as much of each of these
powders as are here underwritten, as will lie upon a Groat, viz. Licoris,
Flower of Brimstone and Ginger; Mix them altogether, and work them up in a
little fresh Butter at first, then divide them into three equal parts, and
cover over every part all over with fresh Butter, to keep the bitter taste of
the Aloes from offending him. Let your Balls be made about the bigness of a
small Wash-Ball, thick in the middle and sharp at both ends; stick them upon a
stick not too sharp at the end, and give him them in the Morning Fasting, with
a small Hornfull of warm Beer after every one of them, to make them pass down
the better; Let him have moderate Exercise after them, and Order him as you do
sick Horses, and he will do well.

General Simples good for a Surseit.

Angelica, the distilled water of Broom Flowers, the Leaves of Balm, with Nitre
given in Ale, or the Juice of Ivy-leaves so given, Liver-wort, Common Wormwood,
the distilled water of wild Poppey, etc.

A particular Receipt for a Surseit.
Take three Quarts of strong Beer, one Handful of Wormwood, one Handful of
Cellendine, one of Herb-grace, alias Rue, chop them gross, and boil them in it
till they come to a Quart; Then strain and squeeze the Liquor from the Herbs,
and put into it two spoonfuls of Honey, and two Ounces or more of Treacle of
Jeane, with a Lump of sweet Butter, and give it him Fasting in the Morning with
Exercise after it, and when you bring him Home, Cloth and Litter him up warm,
and two or three hours after give him a Mash and white Water.

Another for a Horse whose Coat stands staring, and do^s not thrive; Or that
has swelled Co^s or Legs by reason of Moulten Grease, settled and dried in his
Body, which commonly brings along with it Gauntness and Costiveness, with
several other Distempers, etc.

The only Way to Remedy and help these Distempers, is first to give him a Purge
of Aloes made up according to Art as you may find the manner how in Directions
for the Purging of Horses after the Table of Simples, and Order him as you do
sick Horses with Mashes, bursten Oats, scalded Bran, warm Clothing and warm
Water etc. About three or four days after he has done Purging and drank cold
Water, to bring him to a Stomach, give him Honey and White Wind, and to comfort
him and Loosen his Body, and to make him Stale freely, give him the Cordial of
Household Wheat Bread boiled in Beer, etc. You may find the manner how to make
this also in the Directions how to Order sick Horses after the Table of
Simples; As to the Ordering of his swelled Cods or Legs, you may apply to them
(after his Physic has done working) the common Charge of Soap and Brandy
scalding hot, and three or four days after Ride him into some River or clear
Pond, up to the mid side, and Flounce him backwards and forwards, which will be
a means to abate and take away the Swelling; You need not lay on your Charge
above once. These Directions are in case of a dry Surfeit. But if he be
troubled with a Cold, which you may soon know by his Coughing and Running at
Nose, then give him this Drink, viz. of the Powder of Anniseeds and Turmerick,
of each on Ounce, put into a Pint and a half of strong Beer, half a quarter of
Brandy, and about five or six Spoonfuls of White Wind Vinegar, (or for want of
either, Verjuice). Boil all these a little, and give it him lukewarm Fasting
in the Morning. If you find his Stomach lost give him his Cordial. But if you
find that your Horse is fat and strong, and has his Grease settled within him,
then give him the Purge of Aloes first, but if you find him both fat and ill
together, then give him this White Wind and Honey, and Cordial, to bring him to
a Stomach, and after them give him his Purge.

Observation.
These Heats and Colds which are occasioned by hard Labor or violent Riding,
does commonly bring along with them hard Pustules and Kernels under his Chaul,
which you may either sink or break with your common Charge of Soap and Brandy,
boiled together and applied hot* If you find that they break wash them with
Verjuice and Butter, or Vinegar and Butter melted together, and they will do
well.

Things good in General to Mollify Hardness.

Linseed, Fennegreek, Rosin, Pitch of Greece, Flower of Roses boiled together
with Turpentine, Honey and Sallet Oil, till it come to an Ointment, Malvar^sco,
Oleum, Rosatum, Brank-ursine, Mallows, Coleworts, Lard, Oil of Cypress with
Meal, Pellitory, Wormwood or Grease, Mustard Seed and Cummin boiled together,
or the Juice of the Roots or Leaves of Elder, Armoniack, Aloes, Opoponax
Nettles, Mercorella, the Roots of Cucumbers, Hog's Grease and Tar, Turpentine
and old Grease beaten together, Oil of Turpentine is very excellent to take
down a Swelling, Patch-Grease and Turpentine melted together, and stop his Feet
therewith, and anoint his Coffins therewith, or Salt and Water mixed together,
and Bath the Swelling therewith, and dip a Linen Cloth in the same, and lay
that upon it, and it will dissolve it.

What is good for bruised Kidneys.
The powder of the Herb called Crabs-Claws, Plantine, Licoris, Broom, etc.

Things good in General for a sore Mouth and Throat.
Wood-bine leaves, Bolearmoniack, Plantine water, to wash it with a Water made
of them* or to wash it with Bay salt and Verjuice warmed together. If the
Palate be sore, then let him Blood there, then take Honey, young Onions and
toasted Cheese boiled together, and anoint the Palate with it, or to wash it
with the Juice of Alehoof, the Juice of Golden Rod, Mallows or Marshmallows,
or Mint, or Mulberries, or Nettles, or Pellitory of the Wall, or Privet, or
Queen of the Medows, or Rag-wort, or Sage and Alum, or Self-heal, or Succory,
or the Juice of the English Vine, the Decoction of Rag-weed, Plantine boiled in
White Wind, Mustard Seed applied outwardly dissolveth the Swelling of the
Throat.


What is good for the Quinsey.
To let Blood under the Tongue, and if his Throat is so swelled that you can
get nothing hardly to go down it, lay a Poultess under his Chaul, and that will
open the Passage, then take a Bulls Pizzle or a Whale-bone, and Tie a Linen
Rag about it, and dip it into Milk, wherein Alum and the powder of a Dogs-turd
has been dissolved, and thrust it up and down his Throat, and put a Hornful of
it down after it; if he be so bad that he can eat nothing but what you give him
with a Horn, which must be comfortable and Cordial things; be sure let the
Hornful of Milk wherein Alum and Dogs-turd has been dissolved, be the last
thing you give him, or else it will do him no good, and to Tie him up to the
Rack half an Hour after it; you are to use it two or three times a day or
oftener as you shall see occasion, or four Ounces of the Juice of Cinquefoyl
given down at a time for certain days together cures it, or the Juice of
Cudiweed or Cotton-weed taken in Wine and Milk is a good Remedy against t, so
is Hysop boiled with Figs.

Another Receipt good for it.

After you have Blooded him under the Tongue, take as many Leaves of common
Mallows as you think fit for your use; Boil them very well in his own Piss and
apply it as hot (Poultiss-wise) to his Throat as he o^n well endure it, and you
shall soon find the wonderful effects of it, for it will open the Passage of
his Throat, and take down the Swelling occasioned by the Inflammation of it; Do
this two or three times if you see occasion, and apply your inward Medicine
also to it, as the Receipt above will direct you.

Things good in General to Kill Lice or Vermin.
The Decoction of the Herb or seed of Henbane, and wash him with it, to wash
his Body all over with Cows Piss for three or four days together, it is an
approved and certain Cure, and is as good as any I can give you. However I
shall give you some more Receipts, which is to anoint him with Quicksilver and
Hog's Grease mixed together, or take Stavesacre and green Copperas boiled in
Running water, and wash him all over therewith, and at twice dressing it will
Cure him, or Tobacco shred small and boiled in small Beer with some powdered
Alum, and when the Alum is dissolved, to wash him therewith.


Another very good to destroy them.
Take Hogs Lard, and anoint your Horse all over his Backbone, and under his
Mane, and about his Flanks, or any where elsewhere you find your Lice do come,
and it will destroy them; the reason is, that this food being so very
delicious, and so well liked of by them, makes them seed so much upon it that
it causes them to burst. Or to take Train Oil, which is Whale Oil* and anoint
his Breast and Flanks with it, and then dip a broad List of Woollen into it,
and sow it about his Neck, and this will destroy them.

Things good in General to keep the Flies off a Horses Head.
To anoint his Head with Oil and Bay Berries mingled together, or to rub his
Head all over with the water wherein Rue has been steeped in after it is well
bruised, or to anoint his Head or round about his Eyes with Lynseed Oil, and it
will keep them away, or with the water wherein Devils dung has been dissolved
is the best of all, or with the water of Pellitory of Spaein, or the leaves of
Ivy bruised with a little Water, and his Head washed therewith.

Things good in General for the Cure of the Leprosy or Mange.
To take Blood first from the Neck-Vein, good store, and scrape away the Scurf
with an old Curry-eomb, Oyster-shell or such like, then these things you are to
use as your discretion serves, Staves-acre, Chickweed, Elecampane, Mercury
Sublimate, the leaves of Bramble boiled in Lie, Cow-Piss, the powder of the
dried root of Briony, the powder RESALGAR is a composition of Sulphur, Orpiment
and unslackt lyme, and is a most strong ^^rrosiv^.
of the red Dock, or the powder of Arsnick, Resalgar or white Mereury mixed
with Hogs grease till it be killed, Urine, Tobaccho and Brimstone boiled
together is very good, or Salt, Verdegrease, Alum, Verjuice and Train Oil
boiled together and anoint him therewith, or Broom, Wormwood, Mustard Seed,
Elecampane, Chimney-soot and black Soap boiled together, or the Juice of
Hemlock, unslackt Lyme, Pepper and Ginger boiled in Beef-broth, and anointed
therewith is very good*

Particular Receipts for the Mange.

Take a quart of fair Running Water, and put into it half a pound of green
Copperas, and an Ounce of Alum, and an Ounce of Tobaccho chopped small, then
boil them together till they come to somewhat more then a Pint, and anoint him
all over with it very warm after you have rubbed off the Scabs, and Tie him to
the Rack three or four hours, twice dressing him cures him. Or the Ashes of
the Bark of the Ash Tree made into a Lie, and the Body washed therewith,
Calamint taken inwardly, the Decoction of the Leaves of the Fig tree, wild
Flower, etc.

Another.
First, let Blood, then take a quart of old Urine or Vinegar, and break it into
a quarter of a pound of Tobaccho, and set it on the Embers to stew all Night,
and wash the infected places, whether it be in the Mane or otherwise.

Another for any Mange or Universal Leprosy in a soul Surfeited Horse.
After you have let him Blood, and scraped off the Scabs or Scurf, take of
Verjuice and Vinegar a Pint, Cow-Piss a Pint, Train Oil a Pint* old Urine a
Pint, and put to them a Handful of wild Tansie, and a Handful of Bay Salt, a
quarter of a pound of Brimstone, as much Alum, two Ounces of Verdegrease, and
four Ounces of Bolearmoniack, boil all well together, with this very hot wash*
him well, and if you put to it a quantity of a Pint of Blood you take away, it
is not amiss, do this twice or thrice.

Another.
Take Mother of Salt Peter, the best and strongest, and wash the Sores
therewith so hot as he is able to suffer it, and in three or four times
dressing it will cure him, this will not only kill the Mange, but all
Scratches, Pains and Rats-tails, etc.

Another.
Take of Sopers Lees, and after you have scraped away the Scurf, wash him with
it, and in once or twice dressing he will be well, it cures the Mange not only
in Horses, but also Dogs, provided they get not to it with their Mouth.


An inward Drink with an outward Application, which I think is the best Remedy
that can be Invented for this Disease.
Take Anniseeds and Turmerick, of each an Ounce, finely beaten, of the blackest
Rozin powdered one Ounce, put them into a quart of strong Blood him first, and
about two or three days after give him this Drink.
Beer, heated lukewarm, and give it him in the Morning lasting, with a little
of the Flower of Brimstone at the Mouth of every Horn you give him, not
exceeding above an Ounce in all, and let him fast four or five hours after it,
and Order him afterward as you do a sick Horse. About two or three days after
his Drink, when he has a little recruited and recovered his strength again,
apply this outward application (but first curry off all the Scabs with an old
Curry-comb till the blood and water appear) viz. Take Oil of Turpentine and
Beer, of equal parts alike, with some Flower of Brimstone, well shaked and
Jumbled together in a Glass Vial, to incorporate them the better, and anoint
him all over with it, Tying him first with a strong Bridle to the Rack to
prevent him from biting at it, for it is a very terrifying, biting and sharp
Medicine, and will torment him for about half an hour or more and then the
smarting will be over. If you find your Horse full of good and in heart, you
may venture to give him two or three of these Drinks and Ointings, if you see
the Cure will not be performed without them; but if he be a very poor lean
Horse, then one is enough till he has recovered more heart and strength.

Things good in general for the Cure of the Scab, Tetter, or Ring-worm.
The water that is ^ound in the hollow places of a decayed Beech-tree, and
anoint him with it, the Juice of the leaves and roots of stinking Gladwin, one
part of Plantine water, and two parts of the Brine of Beef boiled together and
clarified, and anoint him with it, Plum-tree leaves boiled in Vinegar, kills
Tettars, the Juice of the Root of Monks Rubarb, which is a kind of Dock, some
call it Garden-Patience, is very good, the Oil of Wheat pressed between two
thick Plates of Copper, the Juice of Mercury mingled with Vinegar,
Watercresses, the Roots of Docks boiled in Vinegar and bathed therewith,
Cardimonium mixed with Vinegar.

To make a strong Lie of old Urine, Ash Keys and green Copperas, and bathe the
Knots therewith, and it will kill and heal them; or to cut the Head and Tail of
a Snake, and cut it into small Pieces and roast it, and anoint the Sore with
the Grease of it, and it will heal it in a shor time, and have a care you touch
no place but the Sorrance, for it will venom.

Particular Receipts to Cure the Tettar or Ring-worm.
Take two drams of Precipitate, and put it into a small Vial-Glass with fair
water, much more then will cover the powder, keep it close stopped, and with
this Water twice a day wash it, and it will infallibly Cure it; and after you
have dressed the Sorrance, shake the Glass, and let it stand till the next
dressing; But if it be in any fleshy part, you may kill it by Bathing the
Sorrance with the Juice of Southern-wood, Maudlin and Rue, of each alike
stamped together and strained, and Bathe the place with it twice a day till it
be whole.

Another.
Take the roots of Elecampane, and the roots of red Docks, of each alike, slice
them thin, and put them into three quarts of Urine, with two Handfuls of
Bay Salt, let it boil till one quart be consumed, then take it off, and with a
Clout fastened to a stick wash the Sorrance very hot, four or five Mornings
together, and it will Kill it.


A very good Receipt to Cure any manner of Scab, Itch or Scurf, in any part of
a Horses Body.
Mix Sallet Oil, his own Water, white Wine Vinegar, Salt, Butter and Brimstone
together, and anoin^ the grieved part with it twice a day, and it will Cure
them. Let your Quantities of all these things be more or less, according to the
Cure you undertake.

Things good in General for the Crown Scab, which is a stinking and filthy
Scab, breeding round about the corners of the Hoof.
Spread upon a Plaster this Ointment, take salt Bacon, Grease, Soot, Wax and
Pitch molten together, and lay to it; and if the Flesh grows proud, eat it away
with Verdegrease beaten to powder, or with burnt Alum, or scrapings of
Hartshorn or Ox-horn made into powder, or take Soap and Hog's Grease, and half
a pound of Bolearmoniack, and a quarter of a pound of Turpentine mixed well
together, and make a Plaster and bind it on fast, renewing it every day till
it leave Running, and then wash it with strong Vinegar made warm, and let him
come into no water during the Cure; or to Bathe him with old Urine sod with
salt, and that will dry up the Humors and heal it, or to wash it with green
Copperas, Alum and Honey boiled together in fair water, and wash the Sore with
it three or four times a day, and this will both kill and heal it without any
other Medicine.

Things good in General for a surbated Horse.
Take two new laid Eggs, and after you have well picked his fore-Feet, break
them raw into his Soles, then stop them up with Ox or Cow dung, and he will be
well by the next Morning; or Sugar Candy melted with a hot Iron between the
Shoo and the Foot, and when it is hardened take Nettles and Bay Salt, stamped
and laid upon it, or after his Foot is pared, to cool it stop his Feet with
Bran and Hog's Grease boiled together very hot, and to cover the Coffin round
with the same, or to stop them every Night with Cows dung and Vinegar mingled
together.


Things good in General for Sinews that are Cut, Pricked, Bruised or Shrunk, or
for any other Griefs in them.
Alheal is good for the Grief of them, Wood-bitony, Comfrey soddereth cut
Sinews together, the dried powder of red Wheat boiled in Vinegar is good, wild
Tansie, Oil of Chamomel, Mugwort cures the Contraction and drawing together of
the Sinews; or Tarr, Bean-flower and Oil of Roses mixed together, and laid to
the place hot, and if it do not presently good, then take Worms and Sallet-Oyl
Fried together, or else the Ointment of Worms, which you may have at the
Apothecaries, and apply either of them, for they Knit the Sinews again if they
be not quite cut asunder; but if there be a Convulsion, you must with your
Scissers cut the Sinew asunder, then take Rozin and Turpentine, Pitch and
Sanguis Draconis melted together, and clapped somewhat hot to the Sore, then
take Flax and clap upon that, for that will cleanse and defend, and is a very
excellent Medicine for any swollen Joint whatsoever. But if the Sinews be not
much swelled, but only stiff, then take of black Soap a pound, and seethe it in
a quart of strong Ale, till it wax thick like Tarr, and anoint the Sinews and
Joints with it, and it will supple them and stretch them forth be they never so
much shrunk; Or take a quart of Neats-soot Oil, a quart of Ox galls, a quart of
Aquavitae or Brandy, a quart of Rose Water, or a Handful of Rosemary stamped,
boil all these together till half be consumed, and strain it, and use it as you
see occasion.

A Receipt for a Cut Sinew.
Take the Leaves of Nep or Woodbine, and bruise them well in a Mortar with May
Butter, and apply it to them, is very good to Knit them together.


A Particular Receipt for the Shrinking of the Sinews.
Take a Handful of Chickweed, of red Roses dried the like quantity, put them
into a Pint of Ale, and a Pint of Canary, and let them boil together till a
fourth part be consumed; then put to them a Pint of Trotters Oil, and let that
boil also a good while, keeping them stirring, which being strained anoint the
grieved part therewith, chasing it in very well with your Hand, holding a hot
Fire-shovel or Brick bat before it at the same time, to make it sink in the
better; When you bind it up, put to it some of the Herbs, and at three or four
times Dressing it will be well. The Decoction of the Root of Scabius and Garden
Tansie boiled in Sallet Oil; Or the Decoction of the Leaves of Mullen, with
Sage, Marjorem and Camomel Flowers, and the grieved part bathed therewith, is
excellent good for them, etc.

Things good in General to Cure the Tongue of a Horse that is hurt.
To boil in Water Wood-bine leaves, Primrose leaves, black Berryleaves,
Knot-grass with some Honey, and put to it a little Alum, and two or three
times a day wash it with a Clowt Tied upon a stick, being lukewarm, or take Mel
Rosatum and anoint therewith, and be sure whenever you dress his Tongue or
Mouth, Tie him up to the Rack an hour after it, that so the Medicine may take
the better effect; or take red Honey, the marrow of powdered Pork, quick Lime
and Pepper made into fine powder, of each alike, boiled together till they come
to an Ointment, and anoint with it twice a day.

Particular Receipts for the Cure of the Tongue of a Horse that is hurt.
Take of Arman half an Ounce, and put it into the Fire till it become red hot,
then take it out and beat it to very fine powder; then take a Sawcer full of
live Honey, and of White Wind one Pint, mix and steep these with the Powder
together, and so let it boil over the Fire, keeping it stirring, then take it
off and let it cool, and so wash his Tongue Morning and Evening with it till it
be whole.

Another.
Take the Juice of Selandine, and wash the Hurt therewith nine days together,
and it will Cure it though it be half Cut asunder, for the Juice of the
Selandine will conglutinate and sodder the Tongue together, being cut or
wounded.

See more of this in the First Part. P. 151.
Things good for Venomed Things.
Garden Bazil or sweet Bazil laid to it is good for any thing Venomed by a
Spider, Wasp, Be or Hornet, Water-bistort or Snakeweed is likewise good; and
if he has drunk Horse-Leeches, Hens-dung and the like, give him three
spoonfuls of the Herb Sow-thistle dried in a quart of Ale.


Another for a Venom.
Take a Handful of Rue, and stamp with it the Fat of rusty Bacon, till it come
to a perfect Salve, and therewith dress the Sore till it be whole.


Another to be used either inwardly or outwardly.
If he has eaten any Venomed thing, Give him the Juice of Sage, Morning and
Evening in Wine or Ale; but if he be outwardly venomed, bruise the Sage, and
apply it to the grieved part twice a day, and it will take out the Venom.

See a more large Account of things of this Nature in the First. Part p. 152.
Things good in General for Ulcers.
Tarr, Hog's Grease, green or white Copperas, Saltpeter, Bees Wax, Honey,
Rozin, Verdegrease, Linseed Oil, all boiled together, and make a Salve of it,
and dress it with it. Euphorbium, Mastick, French Soap is good, or to wash the
Sore with white Wine and green Copperas dissolved together, and to heal it up
with Swines Grease, the Leaves of Lillies beaten in a Mortar, and make a Salve
of it, and lay it upon the Sore, and cover it with a Plaster, or Loam and
Horse dung mixed with Pepper and the white of an Egg; or to strew upon the Sore
of the powder of Galls, or to scald it once a day with Sallet-Oyl or Sack,
Frankincense, Cloves* green Copperas and Brimstone, and double as much Myrrh as
any of them, and put it upon a Chafing Dish of Coals, and receive the smoke of
it upon Hurds, and keep it close in a Box, and when you use it, wash the Sore
with Urine or Vinegar twice a day.

Things good in General for a Ulcer or Canker in the Nose.
Green Copperas and white Copperas, with some Alum boiled in Running water,
and squirted into his Nostrils lukewarm, three or four times one after
another, is good; but if the Canker be hot and very burning with great pain;
then take the Juice of Purslain, Nightshade, Lettice, and mix them together,
and wash the Sore with a fine Cloth dipped therein, or else squirted up his
Nostils, and it will allay the heat of it; Or to take Sage, Rue, Hysop, of each
a Handful, and seethe them in Urine and Water, and strain it out, and put into
it a little white Copperas, Honey and Aquavitae, and wash or squirt it into the
place; But if the Canker be killed heal it with this Water, take of Rib-wort,
Bitony and Dasies, of each a Handful, and Seethe them well in Wine and Water,
and wash the Sore therewith; Or take Crystal made into fine Powder, and strew
upon it Paul's Bitony bruised is very good.

Things good in General to Cure the Vives.
To Cut a Hole where the Kernels are, and pick them out with a Wire and ^^ll
the Hole with Salt, and at three days end it will run; then wash it with the
Juice of Sage, and heal it up with an Ointment made of Honey, Butter and Tarr,
or with your green Ointment in my First Part; or to wash the Sore wherein has
been boiled green Copperas and Alum, and to Taint it with Flax dipped in the
white of an Egg, beaten to an Oil, or to heal it up with Hogs Grease,
Turpentine and Wax molten together; or take a Sponge dipped in White Wind
Vinegar, and bind to the Sore, and renew it twice a day, till the Kernels do
Rot, then open the nethermost part of the softness, and let the corruption out,
and fill the Hole with Salt finely brayed, and the next day wash away the Filth
with warm water, and the next day after wash the Sore with Honey and
Fitch-flower mingled together till it be whole.

Particular Receipts for the Cure of the Vives.
Take Tar, tried Hog's Grease, Bay Salt and Frankincense powdered, of each as
much as will suffice, melt them together, and with a Clowt fastened to a stick,
scald the place four or five Mornings together, until the inflamed places do
become soft and ripe, then slit the Skin with your Incision-Knife, and let
forth the Corruption, and heal up the Sore with tried Hog's Grease and
Verdegrease made up into fine Powder, melt them upon the Fire, and let it not
boil more then a Waum or two, then put in some ordinary Turpentine, and so stir
all together till it be cold, and anoint the Sorrance with it till it be whole.

Another which is the best Cure for it.
Take a penniworth of Pepper beaten to fine Powder, Swines Grease a spoonful,
the Juice of a Handful of Rue, Vinegar two spoonfuls, mix them very well
together, and convey it equally into both the Ears of the Horse, and so Tie or
stitch them up, then shake his Ears that the Medicine may sink downwards,
which done, let him Blood in the Neck-Vein,
and Temple-Veins, and this is an infallible Cure.


Another very good for the same.
The Vives are Cured several manner of ways, as you find by the Receipts above,
but the most usual and common way that our Smiths generally use for the Cure of
this Infirmity, is for to let Blood on both sides the Neck-Veins, then to sear
the Swelling with a small hot Iron, from the Root of the Ear, down to the
bottom of it, till the Skin look yellow; the manner and form of the
Searing-Iroh must be somewhat like the shape and fashion of a great Arrows
Head, as you see by the Figure in the Margin, with three or four small Lines or
Strokes on each side, drawn from the Body of it. After you have seared it, to
take out the Heat of the Fire; and to make it sound again, anoint it with fresh
Butter or Hog's Grease, and he will do well.

What is good to Cure the Arraistes or Rats-tails, which is a kind of Scratches.
To Ride him till he be warm, which will make the Veins to swell, and the
better to appear, then let him Blood on the Fet-lock Veins, on both sides,
making him to bleed well, and the next day after to wash the Sores with warm
water, and then clip away all the Hair from about the Sores, and anoint the
grieved place with this Ointment, viz. Take green Copperas and Verdegrease, of
each two Ounces, and of Common Honey, four Ounces, beat your Copperas and
Verdegrease very small, and so work them with your Honey to an Ointment, and
anoint the Sores daily with it till it be whole.


Things good in General for the Cure of the Wind-Cholick.
See the Expellers of Wind in the First Part. p. 150.
Alheal, True-love or one Berry, the Berries of Holly, Holm or Hulver-Bush,
Juniper Berries, the Flowers of Lavender steeped in Wine, wild Parsnips, Jack
by the Hedge, Winter and Summer Savory, but the Summer is the best, Burnet,
Saxafrage, the leaves of the Willow-tree bruised, and the Juice given with some
Pepper in Beer, Cardamum, Fennegreek, Hawes beaten to powder, Rue, Cloves,
Cinnamon, an Onion peeled and Jagged, and put it into his Fundament, or to give
him a Pipe of Tobaccho at his Fundament lighted, and the Wind of his Body will
draw it out. If you intend to see more of this Nature, look for Cholick.
Angelica, Wood-bittony, Mullen, Mustard Seed, Centaury.

A Plaster to lay upon the Wound to keep in the Taint or Salve.
Take Pitch, Rozin, Mastick, Turpentine, Hogs grease, of each so much as will
suffice, melt them together and keep it for your use, when you use it, spread
it upon Leather and cover the wound therewith, this Salve does infinitely
comfort a Wound both green or old, be the same Fistula or otherwise.

Things good in General to Cure the Wind-Galls.
To open them the length of a Bean and thrust out the Jelly, then take the
White of an Egg and Oyl-de bay, and mix them together, and apply it with Hurds,
Plaister-wise, and in three or four days thus dressing, it will be Cured, and
after you have opened it, and the Jelly squeezed out, to lay Pitch and Rozin
melted together upon it, and to clap some Hurds upon that.

This is a very good Cure.
To lay to it Oil de-bay, Turpentine, Verdegrease, the white of an Egg and Red
Lead boiled together till they become a Salve, or the Roots of Cummin beaten
with Salt and laid to it, or to anoint them with the Juice of Onions, or Leeks,
or Ground Ivy and Wormwood sodden in White Wind, and laid to them; or after the
Jelly is let out, to Lap a wet woollen Cloth about it, and with a Tailors hot
Pressing Iron rub upon the Cloth till all the moisture is dried up, then daub
all over it Pitch, Mastick and Rozin boiled together, and lay Hurds upon it. In
all these kind of Cures you must first shave away the Hair, and open the
Sorrance, and squeeze forth the Jelly before you lay any Charge to it, and to
keep him out of the Water during the Cure.

Particular Receipts for the Cure of the Wind-Gall.
Take Tachamahaca, Mastick, Perozin, of each the quantity of a Hazel-Nut, and
of Stone Pitch to the quantity of a Wall-Nut, with a little Brimstone powdered,
melt all these together, and when it is molten put in as much Turpentine as a
Wall-Nut will contain, and spread it upon a Plaster, and lay it to the place
warm, and daub it all over with the same Salve, and Flox upon that, and let it
remain on till it fall away of it self.

Another.
Take of Oil of Vinegar, and dip your Thumb therein, and rub the Sorrance with
it every day till the Hair do fall off, which will cause the Wind-galls to
break out and bleed, then heal and cure them as you have been already taught.


Another for the Cure of the Wind-Galls.
Take about half a Pint of White Wind Vinegar, one Ounce of Roman Vitriol, one
Ounce of Mastick, one dram of white Copperas, and one ounce and a dram of
Euphorbium, boil all these together till a fourth part be consumed, then strain
it out, and put it into a Glass close stopped, and keep it for your use. The
manner of using it is to rub about a spoonful of it upon each side where they
are for three or four days together, and not clip away the Hair.

A Purgation for a Horse Sick of Grease or Costiveness.
Take a Pint of old White Wind, and set it on the Fire, and dissolve into it a
Lump of Castle Soap as big as a Hens Egg, and stir them well together, then
take it off, and put into it two good spoonfuls of Hempseed beaten, an Ounce of
Sugar Candy beaten to powder, and brew all together; then having warmed the
Horse, to stir up nis Grease and other foul humors, give it to him to drink,
and walk him up and down a little after it, to make the potion work, then set
him up warm, and after a little stirring him in his Stall, if he grow sickish,
give him liberty to lie down, then after two hours fasting give him a sweet
Mash, and feed as at other times: Or if you find him sick, give him a pint of
warm milk down his throat, and he will be quickly well. For Costiveness, Rake
out his hard dung, then boil an Ounce of each of these things in a quart of
Beer, viz. Anniseed; Fennegreek, Linseed, and the powder of Piony, and give him
a Pint of it lukewarm.


To Cure a Horse that is swelled after Blood-letting.
Take Lynseed Oil, Hog's Grease and red Lead mixed together, and melt them
together over the Fire, keeping them stirring till it becomes cold, or else the
red Lead will sink all to the bottom; then rub it once a day well in with your
Finger till the swelling be down, and this will dissolve the hardest Knot that
is; If it be in the Winter you must heat it in with a hot Fire-shovel; but if
it be in the Summer, the Sun will do the same thing.


Another for a Horse that has taken Cold after Blood-letting; Or that has
been Pricked by some rusty F^eam, so that it wrankles.
Take Soap and Brandy, and dissolve them together cold, and wash the place with
it is good for them; so is the Ointment or Oil of Populeon, They are both very
cooling things.
the place grieved being anointed with it. Or Pitch both white and black of
equal parts alike melted together, and applied hot upon the end of a Lath, and
Flox or Hurds stuck upon it while they come off of themselves, is also a very
good Cure.

Things good to Cure a Bone-Spaven.
Though this is a very hard thing to Cure, yet I shall give you such Receipts
as I find in an Eminent Author.

First, take up the Vein which feeds it, and let him Bleed well, and do no more
to him that day; the next day shave away the Hair from off it, and rub it hard
with a Rolling Pin, (having first anointed the place with Petroeleum, and
chafed it well with your Hand) or some other round and smooth stick Morning and
Evening, for four days together, and at the fourth days end slit down the Skin
with your Incision-Knife, the full length of the Spaven, but be very careful
you touch not the great Artery or Vein, both which do lie very near, for if you
do but hurt that you Maim the Horse past all recovery, having thus done lay to
the place the Herb called Flamula, bruise it and bind it on so fast that it
fall not off in two days more: Then for three days after take Cantharides and
Euphorbium, and incorporate them well together, (being before beaten to powder)
with black Soap and Bay Salt, and lay this to the place, and thus dress it
every Morning, and this will lay the Bone and Crust bare. After take Fearn
roots, Hounds-tongue and Boars Grease, incorporate all these together, and lay
to the place till you perceive the Crust to be loose, and to be wasted; and now
and then try to Loosen it with your Cornet, or other Instrument, and if you can
conveniently take it off, do so, which done heal up the Wound with your green
Ointment prescribed in my First Part. But if you find a Swelling begin to arise
in the Spaven place whereby you suspect it, then for the prevention thereof,
after you have first shaved away the hair, anoint the place with natural
Balsam, for two or three days together, then repress the humor with this
Charge take three Ounces of the Oil of Roses, Bole-armoniack one Ounce, Wheat
Flower half an Ounce, and the White of an Egg; Make all these into one Body,
and every day after you have anointed it with Balsam, lay on the said Charge.


Things good in General for all manner of Burnings or Scaldings, either by
Shot, Gunpowder or Wilde-Fire.
The leaves or roots of the yellow Lilly, Daffodil stamped with Honey, the
Juice of an Onion, the Juice of the red Lilly, Lettuce, the Juice of
Thorn-Apples boiled in Hog's Grease to the form of an Ointment, cures all manner
of Burnings or Scaldings whatsoever in a very short time, Water Plantine, the
Juice of Housleek, St. John's wort bruised, the Herb Tutsan or Park leaves, an
Ointment made of the Juice of Cowslips, and Oil of Linseed Cures all manner of
Scaldings or Burnings whatsoever, Ivy that grows upon Walls or Trees,
Brank-Ursine, the Juice of Elder-leaves, the Decoction or the distilled Water
of Archangel, the Flowers and Herb of Ladies Bed straw made into an Oil, by
setting it in the Sun, is good, the leaves of the Bur-dock bruised with the
White of an Egg, is a most excellent thing for all manner of Burnings by Fire,
the Juice of Coltsfoot, the Decoction of Dasies, Wall-wort and Agrimony cures
inward Burnings, being given inwardly, the Decoction of the leaves of
Brank-Ursine.

Particular Receipts to Allay Burning with Shot, Gunpowder or wild Fire.
Take Varnish and put it into fair Water, and beat them very well together,
then pour away the Water from the Varnish, and anoint the place burned with a
Feather dipped into it, and in a few days dressing it will kill the Fire, which
done heal the Sore with your carnifying and healing Salves.

Another.
Take Hog's Grease and set it on the Fire, and take off the Filth that shall
arise, and when it is well boiled, take it off the Fire and put it into an
Earthen Pan to cool for four or five Nights together in the open Air, then wash
it in fair Running Water so often till it become White, then melt it down
again, and keep it for your use, and anoint the place grieved, and it will Cure
him.

Another.
Take fresh Butter and the Whites of Eggs, as much of each as will suffice,
beat them well together till you bring them to a formal Ointment, and anoint
the places burned therewith, and it will speedily take away the Fire, and Cure
them soundly.

Another.
Take a stone of quick Lime, which must be well burned, which you may know by
its lightness, dissolve it in fair Water, and when the Water is settled* strain
the clearest through a fine Cloth, then put into the water either the Oil of
Hemp Seed or Sallet Oil, of like quantity with the water, and so beat them well
together, you shall have an excellent Unguent very precious for all sorts of
Burnings. And the Nature of these three Unguents be to leave no scars.
Wherefore we apply them for most sovereign Remedies, as well for Man as Beast.

To Help a Horse that is Costive in his Body.
Take a Decoction of Mallows one quart, Sallet Oil half a Pint, or fresh
Butter half a pound, Benedicta laxativa one Ounce, give him this Blood-warm
Glister-wise, then clap his Tail to his Tuel, and hold it close, and make him
keep it for half an hour at the least, and when it has workt, give him a
sweet Mash, and so keep him to Mashes and white Water for two or three days.

What is good to make a Horse draw up his Yard.
To Bathe his Yard and Sheath with White Wind made warm, then anoint it with
Oil of Roses and Live Honey mingled together, and so put up the Yard into the
Sheath, and with a short Bolster of Canvass keep it from falling down, and
dress him once every day till he be well, and let his Back and Fillets be kept
warm, and anoint him with Acopum, but if you have it not, apply this Charge
unto his Back and Fillets.

Take Bole-armoniack, the Whites of Eggs, Wheat-Meal, Sanguis draconis, Venice
Turpentine, and strong White Wind Vinegar, of each as much as you think fit,
mix them well together, and charge his Back with it, as also his Sheath and his
Stones.

Another.
Take the Ashes of Ashen wood, the whitest, finest and best burned, and searce
them, one pound of Red Clay dried, and made into fine powder, half a pound,
Bolearmoniack half an Ounce powdered, boil all these in as much Verjuice of the
Crab, as will make it liquid like Pap and with it anoint his Yard, Sheath and
Stones, Morning and Evening, and he shall be presently Cured.


A Receipt to Scour and Cleanse a Horses Yard, that is Foul and Furred by
Pissing within his Sheath.
Draw forth his Yard, and Rub and Pick off the Filth with your Hand, and
cleanse it well with Butter and White Wind Vinegar melted together, and squirt
some of it up into his Yard with a Syringe, and he will do well.

A Receipt to Prevent Diseases in a Horse the whole Year.
The first day of April open a Vein in the Neck, and if it be good take the
less; if bad, take the more; then from that day until the first of May give him
this which I shall prescribe, and let him have it Morning and Evening during
the whole Month of April, from the first to the last, which is before his
turning out to Grass, or Soyling, which shall be about the middle of May, and
let him have the same all the whole Month of October, (like as you must do in
April) after you have taken him from Grass about Bartholomew Tide, that which I
prescribe is this.

To Prevent Diseases.
Take a Bushel of Old Rye, sweet and clean, well purged, or made clean from all
Filth, and put it in a clean Iron Pot, dry, and without Water, put it over the
Fire* and put in your Rye and keep it continually stirring to the bottom, until
it be so parched that it becomes black, hard and dry, then take it from the
Fire and put it into some clean Vessel, and when it is cold keep it close
stopped for your use. When you use it, take two or three Handfuls of it, and
beat it into fine Powder, and mingle it amongst his Provender, at every
Watering, Morning and Evening, or at other times when you give him Oats; do
this these two entire Months of April and October, for all Men hold that in
these two Months the Blood turns and alters, as we alter his Diet, from
hard and dry Meat to Grass, and so likewise from Grass to dry Meats, for this
Rye thus parched and ordered, does refine the Blood, cool the Liver, and
purges the Spleen, so as the whole Structure of the Body is thereby better
^ured and freed from all such bad and unnatural Humors, which would otherwise
make the Body inclinable to sundry Maladies and Diseases, which this Rye
preventeth.

Things good to keep a Horse from Casting forth his Drink.
As it proceeds from Cold in the Stomach, or other Causes, as Cold in the Head
where the Rheum binds, about the Roots and Kernels of the Tongue, has as it
were strangled and made strait the Passages to the Stomach; therefore to
prevent this mischief you must give him Cordial and warm Drinks, as Malmsey,
Cinnamon, Anniseeds and Cloves, well brewed and mixed together, and to anoint
his Breast and under his Shoulders, with either the Oil of Cypress, Oil of
Spike, or the Oil of Pepper, and to purge him with Fumes or Pills, for such
Fumigation joining with these hot Oils will soon dissolve the Humors.


A Particular Receipt for the Cure of it.
This Infirmity comes also by Glut of Provender, or by eating of raw or green
Food, as new Pease or Beans, etc. You may also take this course for the
Recovery of him, viz. To give him comfortable Things, as Diapente boiled in
Beer or Ale, and the like; Or to keep him Fasting, and let him have no Meat,
but what he is willing to take out of your Hand, viz. Bread, Hay, Oats, etc.
Let his Drink be new Milk till his Stomach returns to him again. It Is also very
good to bring him to his Stomach again, to put a Piece of sour brown Bread
steeped in Vinegar, into a Bag, and hang it at his Nose for him to smell of it.

Things good in General for the hungry Evil.
To comfort his Stomach by giving him great Slices of white Bread, Toasted and
steeped in Sack, or to let him drink Wheat Flour and Wine mingled together; or
to make him Bread of Pine Nuts, and Wine mingled together, but there is nothing
better then moderate Feeding of the Horse many times in the day, with wholesome
Bean-bread well baked, or Oats well dried and sifted.

Particular Receipts for a Horse that has swallowed down Hens-dung, or a^y
other venomous thing.
Take a Pint of Sallet-Oyl, and two Spoonfuls of Sugar Candy beaten to powder,
and as much of the powder of Diapente, and brewing them well together give it
him to drink, and for want of Diapente, so much of the shaving of Ivory, or of
an old Stags-Horn especially, the Tips thereof burnt, or three spoonfuls of the
powder of Sow-thistle given him in a Pint of Ale or Beer.

Another.
Take of the Urine of a Man, as it comes warm from him, one Pint, of Bay Salt
a handful, stir them well together, and give it him, and after walk him up and
down for half an hour. If you desire to see more Receipts, you must look for
things that are good to expel Poison.

Things good for Pain in the Teeth, Loose Teeth, Wolfes Teeth and Jaw Teeth.
For loose Teeth the Cure is to prick all his Gums over with a Lancet, making
them bleed well, then rub them all over with Sage and Salt, or with the leaves
of Elecampane, and it will fasten them.

The Pains of his Teeth comes by means of Distillation of Humors, which is
Cured by rubbing all the outside of his Gums with fine Chalk and strong Vinegar
mixed together* or after they are so washed to strew upon them the powder of
Pomegranate Pills, or to cover the Temples of the Head with a Plaster of Rozin
and Mastick molten together. Now for the Cure of the Wolfes Teeth or Jaw Teeth,
Tie up his Head to some Post or Raster, and after you have opened his Mouth
with a Cord, so wide as you can see any part thereof, take an Instrument of
Iron made like unto a Carpenters Gouge, and with your left Hand set the Edge of
the Tool to the foot of the Wolfes-Teeth on the outside of the law, turning
the hollow side of the Tool downwards, knock it out as steadily as you can with
your Mallet, and put some Salt finely brayed into the holes. Now if the upper
Jaw Teeth does hang over the nether Jaw-Teeth, and so cut the inside of the
Mouth, then take your Gouge and Mallet* and pare the Teeth shorter by little
and little, turning the hollow side of your Tool downwards toward the Teeth,
by which means you shall not cut the inside of his Cheeks, then with your File
file them all smooth, without any ruggedness, and then wash his Mouth with
Vinegar and Salt.

Things good in General for the Crick in the Neck.
The Cure is to thrust a sharp hot Iron through the flesh of the Neck in five
several places, three inches distant from one another, and to have a care you
touch not any Sinew, and Rowel all of them with Horse-hair, Flax or Hemp, for
the space of fifteen days, and anoint the Rowels with Hog's Grease, and the Neck
will soon be restored, or to Bathe the Horses Neck with the Oil of Peter, or
the Oil of Spike very hot, and then Roll it up in wet Hay, or rotten Litter,
and keeping him very warm, without using any burning, wounding, or other
violence, he will do well, the leaves or roots of Down or Cotton-thistle given
inwardly, or the leaves or roots of the Fullers thistle, Eringo or Sea-holly,
or Vinegar and Patch-grease melted together, and chafed in very hot against the
Hair, and afterward Bathed in with Soap and Vinegar mixed together, is very
good.

A certain Way to Raise up the Crest that is fallen.
Is first to Raise it up with your Hand, and to place it where it ought to
stand, then having one standing on the same side the Crest falls from, let
him with one Hand hold up the Crest, and with the other thrust out the bottom
of it, so as it may stand upright, then on that side to which it falls, with
a hot Iron (somewhat broad on the Edge) drawing his Neck first at the bottom of
the Crest, then in the midst of it, and lastly at the setting on of the Hair,
and to draw it through the Skin, and no deeper then on the other side (from
whence the Crest falls) gather up the Skin with your Hand, and with two
Plasters of Shoo Makers Wax, laid one against the other at the edge of the
Wound, and with smooth Splints to stay the Skin, that it may shrink neither
upward nor downward, then with a Pair of sharp Scissers clip away all the spare
Skin which you had gathered with your Hand, then with a Needle and some red
Silk, stitch the Skin together in diverse places, and to keep the Skin from
breaking, stitch the Edges of the Plaster also, then anoint the Sore with
Turpentine, Honey and Wax melted together, and the Places which you drew with a
hot Iron, with Piece-Grease made warm, and thus do twice a day till it be
whole; and have great care that your Splints shrink not. But the best Cure for
this Infirmity, is to let him Blood, and to keep him very well, for strength
and fatness will ever raise the Crest.

Things good for a Horse that is Wrung, or hurt in the Withers.
If you find that by taking off the Saddle his Withers are swollen, clap on the
Saddle again, and lay upon the place some wet Litter, then take up a thin Turf
of Grass and Earth together, and put into the Fire, and let it there remain
till it become red hot, then take it out and moisten the Grassy side very well
with White Wind Vinegar, then take off the wet Litter, and lay the Turf very
hot with the Grassy-side next to the place, and so put on the Saddle again, and
let it so remain all Night, and this presently helps any Swelling in the
Withers, or any other part of the Back, as also any Swellings by Spur-Galls.
But if the Skin be broken or ulcerated, then take sweet Butter, Bay salt and
the powder of Frankincense, of each as much as will suffice, boil all these
together, and with a Clout fastened upon a stick, dip it into it scalding hot,
and scald it two or three times but if it be full of corruption, then make
incision on both sides beneath, that the Matterative stuff may the more easily
void away downwards, and heal it up with your powder of Lyme and Honey, or to
anoint it well with the Oil of Turpentine, and it will either assuage or break
the Swelling, and if it be broke squeeze forth the corruption, and drop some of
the said Oil into it Morning and Evening, and it will both cleanse and heal it;
but if the Skin be only Galled off, take Cream and Soot well mixed together, and
lay upon the Sore, and it will heal it presently, if the Wound be not very deep.

Things good in General for Swelled Cods.
If it come of Rankness of Seed, or of Blood, then let him have a Mare, and let
him Cover her two or three days together, and half an Hour after Ride him into
the Water above the Cods or Stones against the stream, and he will do well. But
if it come of other Causes, take the Lees of Claret Wine, or for want of that,
the Dregs of strong Beer and Cummin-seed made into fine powder, and a little
Wheat and Bean-Flower, boil them altogether to an Ointment, and anoint his Cods
warm therewith, then draw forth his Yard, and wash that and his Sheath also
with White Wind Vinegar, and three or four Hours after Ride him into the Water
above the Cods, and let him stand in the Water some short time, and to Ride him
against the stream, do this every day till the Swelling be assuaged, or take
the Roots of wild Cucumbers and white Salt, boil them in fair Water to an
Ointment, and anoint his Cods with it warm, and then apply this Ointment. Take
Goats-Grease, or Deers Sewet, the White of an Egg and Sallet Oil, boil them
gently, and anoint his Cods therewith, but this must be after he has been
ridden into the Water, and dry again.

A Charge for Swelled Cods.
Or take Bolearmoniack beaten into fine Powder, Vinegar and the Whites of Eggs
well beaten together, and anoint him therewith daily, till it be abated; and if
it Impost humate, where you find it to be soft, open it with a hot Iron, or
with your Incision Knife, if it break not of it self; and heal it up with your
green Ointment, taught you as aforesaid.


Another for any Bite or Bruise on his Cods, which cause them to Swell very
much.
They are both very cooling things.
To remedy this Accident, Wash and Bathe them very well with warm Whey Morning
and Evening for three or four days together, and anoint them after it with the
Oil or Ointment of Populeon till you find the Swelling abated, keeping his
Cods warm with a Linen Bag, made in the nature of a Purse, and drawn easily
over them. If you find that the Swelling is abated, you may then apply the
Common Charge of Soap and Brandy to it very hot, which will Knit the Strings of
his Cods together again; But if you find that they are so torn that you
question his Cure then the best way in my opinion is to Geld him.


A most Excellent Bath, which is not only good for Swelled or bruised Cods, but
for all manner of Bruises in any Part of the Body, from Head to Foot.
Take two quarts of the strongest Ale you can get; Then set it over the Fire in
a large Skillet or Pipkin, and put to it two good Handfuls of the Rind of the
black Berry Bush, and let it Simper away till it come to a quart, then strain
it forth and keep it for your use.

How you are to use it.
Bathe the grieved part Night and Morning with it very hot, and heated very
well in by the Fire, then dip a Linen Cloth in the same, and bind it up hot;
When you have done, peel off the Bark toward the Root, (when you gather it)
for that is the best.

This is a very great Strengthner of any weak Member, by either Bruise, Strain
or Pain.

Things good in General for Bursting or Ruptures in Horses.

Though I hold it incurable, yet I shall give you those things that works
much good, though no absolute Cure. These things are great Knitters, and are to
be taken inwardly, Valerian, Rupture-wort, Cross-wort, Cranes-bill, the powder
of the Roots of Chammack, the Leaves and Nuts of the Cypres, Elm leaves or the
Bark thereof, Corn-Flag; any of these things given inwardly, with the outward
means used, makes the Cure the more effectual; The outward means is this,
Bring the Horse into a place where there is a Beam overthwart, and strew it
thick with straw, then put on four strong Pasterns, with four Rings on his
Feet, and fasten one end of a long Rope to one of those Rings, with the loose
End of the Rope, and so draw all his fore-Feet together, and he will fall; then
cast the Rope over the Beam, and hoist him up so, that he may lie flat on his
Back with his Legs upwards without struggling, then Bathe his Stones well with
warm Water and Butter molten together, and the Stones being somewhat warm and
well mollified, raise them up from the Body with both your Hands, being closed
by the Fingers close together, and holding the Stones in your Hands in such
manner, work down the Gut into the Body of the Horse, by stroaking it downwards
continually with your two Thumbs, until you perceive that that side of the
Stone to be so small as the other, and so having returned the Gut to the right
place, take a List of two Fingers broad, thoroughly anointed with fresh Butter,
and Tie his Stones both together with the same, so nigh the Body as may be, yet
not over-hard, but so as you may put your Finger between, that done, take the
Horse quietly down, and lead him gently into the Stable, and keep him warm, and
let him not be stirred for the space of three Weeks, but forget not the next
day after you have placed his Gut in his true place to unloosen the List, and
to take it away, and as well at that time as every day once or twice after, to
cast a dish or two of cold Water up upon his Cods, and that will make him to
shrink up his Stones, and thereby to restrain the Gut from falling down, and at
the three Weeks end, to make the Cure so much the surer, take away the Stone on
that side he is bursten, so he shall hardly be bursten on that side again, and
during the Cure let him not eat much nor drink much, and let his Drink be
always warm.


A particular Receipt for the Rupture.
Take common Pitch, Sanguis draconis, Powder of Bolearmoniack, Mastick and
Frankincense, of each an Ounce, and make a Plaster thereof, and lay it upon
his Loins, and upon the Rupture, and let it remain there till it fall off of it
self, and it will Cure him; Conditionally you give him some strengthening things
inwardly, which you may find variety of, if you look for General Things good
for Ruptures.

Particular Receipts for the Botch in the Groin of a Horse, which is a hard
Swelling there, which will cause his Legs to swell, especially from the
Cambrels or Hoofs upwards.
The Cure is to Ripen it with this Plaster, Take of Wheat-Floure, of
Turpentine and of Honey, of each a like quantity, stirring it together to make
a stiff Plaster, and with a Cloth lay it on the Sore, renewing it once every
day till it break or wax soft, and then Lance it, so as the matter may run
downwards, then Taint it with Turpentine and Hogsgrease molten together,
renewing it every day once, until it be perfectly whole.

Another for the Botch in the Groin, or any Impos^humation.
As soon as you can perceive the Swelling to appear, lay upon it a Plaster of
Shoomakers Wax spread upon Allum-Leather, and let it lie until the sore grow
soft, then open it with a Lancet, or let it break of it self, when the Filth is
come out, wash the Sore very well with strong Alum water, then Taint it with
the Ointment called Aegyptiacum till it be whole.

A Receipt to Cure the Mellet, which is a dry Scab, that grows upon the Heel
of the fore-Feet.
Take of ordinary Honey half a Pint, black Soap a quarter of a pound, mix them
together, then put thereto four or five spoonfuls of Vinegar and as much Alum
finely beaten and imburned as a Hens Egg, and of Rye Flower two spoonfuls, mix
them very well together, and having clipped away the Hair, apply it to it
Plaister-wise, so far as the Sorrance goes, and let it so remain for five
days, then take it away, and wash all the Leg, Foot and Sorrance, with powdered
Beef-broth, and after Rope up his Legs with Thumb bands of soft Hay wet, in the
same Liquor, and he will be sound; you are to remember that whenever you are
to dress the Sorrance, you take off the dry Scab, or whatever crusty thing
shall be upon the place, and to wash it very clean.

A Receipt for the Hough-bonney.
To Ripen it either with rotten Litter or Hay boiled in old Urine, or else with
a Plaster of Wine Lees, and Wheat-Flour boiled together, to ripen the
Swelling, and bring it to Putrefaction, or else to drive the Swelling away; but
if it come to a Head to Lance it in the lowest part of the softness, with a
thin hot Iron to let out the matter; then to Taint it with Turpentine, Deers
Sewet and Wax, of each alike molten together, laying a Plaster of the same
Salve over it, to hold in the Taint until it be perfectly well.

Things good in General for the Cure of the Fig in a Horses Foot.
Cut away the Hoof so as there may be a convenient space betwixt the Sole and
the Hoof, to the end the Fig may the more easily be Cured; then put to the
Sorrance a piece of a Sponge, which you are to bind close upon it, which will
eat it off to the very Root, and heal it up with your green Ointment, in my
First Part, Or to cut it away close with your Incision*Knife, or else to burn
it off with a hot Iron, (which is the better way) then for two days after lay
tried Hog's Grease to it, to take away the Fire, take then the Tops of the most
angriest Nettles you can find, pound them very small, and so lay them upon a
Linen Cloth, just the bigness of the Fig; then take the powder of Verdegrease,
and strew it upon the chopped Nettles, (which must be done before you lay it to
the Sorrance,) and so bind it upon the Sorrance, renewing it every day once
till the Hoof have recovered the Sore.

To Cure Blisters.
Fret them in the Sun till they bleed, then take the Roots of Ivy, and stamping
them in a Mortar, mix them with as much Tar, Brimstone and Alum, till they
come to a Salve, and dress it therewith, and it will heal it.

Things good in General for Knots in the Joints, Hardness, Cramp^ or any
Inflammations.
The powder of Diapente beaten with Linseed Oil, or Sallet Oil, to an Ointment,
and applied once a day to the Grief, is good for the Cramp or Inflammation, or
Wine, Oil and Tar mingled together as it is boiled, is good, or Mustard, Hogs
grease and Bay Salt mixed together with Vinegar, and applied, is good, or take
a Plaster of Figs, and the roots of Fern and Rochet mingled with Hog's Grease
and Wine-Vineger, or take dry Pitch, Pitch of Greece, of each one part, of
Galbanum and Lime, of each four parts, of Bitumen two parts, of Wax three
parts, melt them altogether, and anoint the place therewith very hot, and it
will take away the Grief.


A particular Receipt to Cure a Knot that is moving in the Place where it grows
If you find in any part of your Horses Body a Knot or Kernel that feels soft,
and slips up and down in the Skin when you handle it; Take your Incision-Knife,
and slit the Skin right over against it, so wide, that you may pinch the Knot
out to cut it off; When you have so done, to stanch the Bleeding of it, Sear
the inside of it with a hot Iron, and stop the Wound, either with the powder of
Bolearmoniack or Hares Wool. The next day unstop it, and wash the Wound clean
with a Linen Rag Tied upon a stick, dipped in Verjuice or White Wind Vinegar;
Then dry up the moisture that you shall find therein with a Linen Rag also,
and heal it up with your green Ointment in the First Part, or what other
healing Salve you think best fit for the purpose.

Observation.
In all Wounds that you have in Cure, be sure you cleanse and wash them very
well before you apply any healing Medicine to them.


Another to take away the Knots under the Chaul, occasioned by Heats and Colds.
Brandy and Soap dissolved together over the Fire, and Chafed in very well hot,
with your Han I heated in afterward, by holding a hot Fireshovel before it,
will either sink or break them. Or Butter or Hog's Grease used after the same
manner is very good.

Observations upon Dressing of them.
Before you anoint them Sear away the Hair with a Candle, and in a Fortnights
time or little more they will remove, conditionally you give him some inward
Medicine for a Cold.

How to Cure Wounds made with the Shot of Gunpowder.
Search first if the Bullet be in the Wound, if it be, take it out with an
Instrument made for that purpose, but if you cannot get it out, you must have
patience, for Nature it self will wear it out of its own accord, without any
Impediment, for Lead is of that Nature that it will not Canker; then to kill
the Fire, drop in some Varnish into it with a Feather to the bottom, and stop
up the Mouth of the Wound with some soft Flax dipped likewise in the same; then
charge all the swollen place with this Charge. Take of Bolearmoniack a
quartern, of Linseed beaten into powder half a pound, of Bean-flower as much,
and three or four Eggs, shells and all, and of Turpentine a quartern, and of
Vinegar a quart, mingle them well together upon the Fire, and being somewhat
warm, charge all the sore place with part thereof, and clap a Cloth upon it to
keep the Wound warm, continuing so doing every day for four or five days
together, then at the fifth days end leave anointing it, and taint it to the
bottom with a Taint dipped in Hog's Grease and Turpentine melted together,
renewing once or twice every day till the Fire is killed, which you shall
perceive by the Mattering of the Wound, and by falling of the Swelling, for so
long as the Fire has the upper Hand, no thick Matter will Issue forth, but
only a thin yellowish water, neither will the Swelling assuage, and then of
Turpentine washed in nine several Waters half a pound, and put thereto three
Yolks of Eggs, and a little Saffron, and Taint it with this Ointment, renewing
it every day once till the Wound be whole; but if the Shot be got quite through
the Wound, then take a few Weavers Linen Thrums made very knotty, and dipping
them first in Varnish, draw them through the Wound, running them up and down in
the Wound at least twice or thrice a day, and charging the Wound on either side
upon the swollen places with the Charge aforesaid, until you perceive that the
Fire is killed, then clap on a comfortable Plaster upon one of the Holes, and
Taint the other with a saint in the Salve, made of washed Turpentine, Eggs and
Saffron, as is beforesaid. Some Farriers use to kill the Fire with the Oil of
Cream, and to heal up the Wound with Turpentine, Wax and Hogs grease melted
together, or to kill it with Snow-water, and charge the swelled place with
Cream and Barm beaten together, and to heal up the Wound by dipping a Taint in
the Yolk of an Egg, Honey, Saffron, well beaten together.

Of Bones being broken and out of Joint to Cure.
If the Bone do fall in its true Pl^ce^g in, it will give on a sudden a great
(...)
If your Horse has any broken Bone, then take a double strong Can vass, which
ought to be as broad as the Horses Fore-shoulders to his Flanks, then you shall
have another double Canvas, which shall come from between his fore-Booths up to
the top of the Wither, whereas meeting with the rest of the Canvass, and having
very strong Loops and Ropes fastened to them, sling him up upon some Beam, no
higher then that his Feet may touch the Ground, and if it be a fore-Leg that is
broken, raise him up then higher before then behind, and if a hinder, then a
little higher behind then before, so that he may rest most upon the Members
most sound, when he is thus slung, put the Bone into the right place, and wrap
it close up with unwashed Wool, newly pulled from the Sheeps Back, bound fast
to the Leg with a smooth Linen Rowler, soaked before in Oil and Vinegar
mingled together, and look that your Rowler lie as smooth and as plain as may
be; and upon that again lay more Wool dipped in Oil and Vinegar, and then Splint
it with three broad, smooth and strong Splints, binding them fast at both ends
with a Thong, and be sure to keep out his Leg straight for the space of forty
days, and Loosen not the Bones above thrice in twenty days, unless it shrink,
and so require to be new dressed and bound again, and fail not to pour on every
See my First Part for Conglutinating things, good in General, or Strengthners
of Parts out of Joint. p, 1^6.
day through the Splints Sallet Oil and Vinegar mingled together, and if at the
forty days end you find that the broken Places be soddered together with some
hard Knob or Gristle, then loose the bands, and ease the Canvass, so as the
Horse may tread more firmly upon his fore-Foot, which if he does, loose him
altogether, and let him go up and down fair and gently, using from henceforth
to anoint the place with soft Crease, or to take of Liquid Pitch one pound, of
Wax two Ounces, of the purest and finest part of Frankincense one Ounce, of
Amoniacum four Ounces, of dry Rozin and of Galbanum, of each one Ounce, of
Vinegar two pints; Boil first the Vinegar and Pitch together, then put in the
Amoniacum dissolved first in Vinegar, and after that the aforesaid Drugs, and
being united in one, strain it, and make into a Plaster, and use it according
to your occasion, or to take a quart of old Sallet Oil, and put to it of
Hog's Grease and of Spicma, Nitre, of each one pound, boiled together till they
begin to bubble above; then take it from the Fire, and when you use it, let it
be chafed in very hot, and then the former Plaster solded about it, which is
very comfortable for a broken Bone.

A Bath very good for broken Bones.

To a Gallon of standing Lie put to it these things here underwritten, viz.

Knot Grass two Handfuls.
Plantine two Handfuls.
Comfrey a Handful.
Wormwood a Handful.
Boil these very well in the Lie, and while it is warm Bathe the afflicted
Member therewith, and give him also at the same time inwardly the Buds of Elder
(gathered in March) boiled in running Water for several Mornings together, in
half a Hornful of Sallet Oil and Vinegar, and it will much avail to the
Knitting of the Bones.

A Receipt to Cure a Stifled Horse.
After you have Tied down his Head to the Manger, then take a Cord and fasten
it to the Pastern of the stisled Leg, and draw his Leg forwards, and so the
Bone will come right, by helping it with your hand, which being in, your care
then must be to keep it in with your hand, and then Tie the other end of the
Cord to the Rack, so as he may not put back his Leg, to dislocate the Bone for
an hour or two after, till it be settled and dressed; wherefore let his Keeper
stand by him all the while, lest he should lie down, or be unruly. Take Pitch,
which you must have molten in a Pot in a readiness, and with a Glout upon a
stick, anoint his Stifling three or four inches broad at the least, and ten
Inches long, and presently before the Pitch can cool, have a strong Piece of
new Canvass cut fit for that purpose, which being made very warm by a Fire,
clap it upon the place so neatly that the Bone cannot go forth again. This
Plaster must not lie toward the Flank and Foot long-ways, but cross-ways upon
the Joint, as it were about the Thigh, otherwise it cannot hold in the Bone.
Having thus done, anoint the Plaster on the outside all over with the said
Molten Pitch, and whilst it is warm, clap Flox of the Horses Color all over
the outside of the Canvass, and let the Plaster remain on till it fall away
of it self, and after that you may apply such good Unguents as you may think
most expedient for the Malady; but if the Bone be not out, then put in a French
Rowel, a little beneath the stifling place, and let it remain in fifteen days,
turning it once every day, and at fifteen days end take it forth, and heal up
the Orifice with your green Ointment in my first Part.


Another which is very good.
The only way for the Cure of this Imperfection, is the common way that
Farriers generally use, viz. To swim him in some deep River or Pond, till he
sweat about the Ears, which will put the Bone into its right place again; When
you think that he has swum enough, take him out of the Water, and throw an old
Blanket over him to prevent catching of Cold, and lead him Home gently; When
you have him in the Stable, put a Wedge of Wood about the breadth of a Sixpence
between his Toe and his Shoo on the contrary Foot behind, and when you find him
thoroughly dry, anoint him upon the grieved part with Piece-grease, or Oil of
Turpentine and strong Beer, of equal parts alike, well shaked and mixed together
in a Glass Vial; Chafe it in very well with your Hand, one holding at the same
time before it a hot Bar of Iron, or Fire-shovel, to make it sink in the
better; Or for want of them, you may apply unto it Brandy and Common Soap and
strong Beer mixed together, and used as you did the Turpentine. These are very
sharp Medicines, (especially the Turpentine) which will cause the place to
swell and heave up, but fear them them not, for they will work a speedy Cure.

To Cure the String-Halt.
Take up the Vein in the Thigh, and then anoint all the Leg and the Thigh from
the Body down to the very Foot, a long time together, holding a red hot
Fire-shovel to the place, and let him be anointed with this Patch or
Piece-grease is the Tallow that is gotten from Shoomakers shreds
Ointment.

Take of the Oil Petroilum, of the Oil of Worms, of the Oil of Nerval, of
Patch or Pe^ce-grease, of the Oil of Spike, of each one Ounce, of
London-Treacle two Ounces, and of Hog's Grease one pound, melt all these upon
the Fire; then take it off, and keep it stirring till it be thoroughly cold, and
with this anoint the Visited Member every day once, and then Wisp him with a
soft Thumb-band of Hay from the Pastern to the top of the Hoof, and thus do for
ten days together, rubbing and chafing in the Ointment very well a long time
together, holding a hot Fire-shovel near it, the better to cause it to sink
into the Sinews, Nerves and Joints. But after you have done anointing him, keep
him warm and well Littered, and let the Thumb-bands be daily made lesser and
lesser, and shorter and shorter, till you perceive him to Handle both Legs
alike, and your Horse to be Recovered; but you must not Ride him that he may
sweat much in a Month after; and so soon as warm Weather comes, turn him to
Grass in some dry Pasture, where is Water, and take him up again about
Bartholomew-Tide, or before the Cold comes; and whilst he coth remain in the
Stable keep him warm, and so he will be free of his String-halt, and be a sound
Horse again; To Anoint him also with Acopum is very good; With this Receipt De
Gray says, he has Cured sundry Horses of this Malady.

How to make your Unguentum-Theriacum, which is good for any Ach in the Joints,
Griefs in the Hip, Stifling Place, Legs, Shoulders, Pastern, or any other part
of the Legs, a Back Sinew-sprain only excepted.
Take Norvel, of Oil of Pamphylion, and of black Soap, of each two Ounces, and
of Tried Hog's Grease half a pound, melt them all upon a gentle Fire, and being
molten put into it of ordinary Treacle two penny worth, then take it from the
Fire, and keep it stirring till it be cold, then will it be of a dun color;
Keep it in a Gally-pot for your use, and when you use it, anoint the place
grieved with the same, rubbing and chafing it in very well, and heating it well
in with a hot Fire-shovel.

Hot Simples in General.

Agarick, Aloes, Alum, Anniseeds, Aristolochia, Assafetida, Asonteo,
Asarabacca, Arsmart, Archangel, Angelica, Alexanders, Alehoof, Balm,
Garden-Bazil, Bayberries, wild running Bitony smelling like Marjorem, Burrage
is hot and cold, so is Brank-ursin, Briony, Broom, Butterbur, Burdock,
Brimstone, Celandine, Chervil, Garden clary, Clowns wound-wort, Calamus,
Coloquintida, Garden cummin, Chamock, Cinnamon, Cloves, China, Darnel,
Elecampane, Fennel, Gentian, Garlic, Germander, stinking Gladwin, Golden Rod,
Gromel, English Galingale, Ginger, Glass-wort is so hot that it has a costive
burning quality, Galls, Grains of Paradise, Galbanum, Hemp Seed, Garden Hysop,
Honey, St. John's Wort, Juniper Berries, Ivy, Jack by the Hedge, Iris,
Knee-holm, Lavender, Lavender-cotton, Ladies smocks, Garden Lilly, Lovage,
Leeks, Mallows and Marshmallows, wild Marjorem, sweet Marjorem, Marigolds,
Master-wort, Melilote, French and Dogs Mercury, Spear-mint, Misle-toe,
Mother-wort, Mouse-ear, Mug-wort, Mustard Seed, Neesing-roots, Nutmeg, One
blade, Pepper, Rag-wort, Rest-harrow the wild Rochet, Rosemary, Garden Rue,
Saffron, Sage, Sanicle, Sarasens Confound, Savin, common Saxafrage, Burnet
Saxafrage, Scabius, English Scurvey-Grass, Self-heal, Smallage, Sope-wort,
Southernwood, Sea star-wort, Staves-acre, Garden Tansie, Time, Tutsan,
Turmerick, Valerian, Veruain, Would, Weld or Diars-weed, Fennegreek,
Scutchanele, London Treacle.

Cooling Simples in General.

Clove Gilly-flowers, Groundsel is an universal Medicine coming of Heat
whatsoever, Hawk-weed, Housleek, Knot-grass, Kidney-wort, Lettuce, Water-Lilly,
Licoris, common Liver-wort, Medlars, Money-wort, Tree-Moss, Ground-Moss, the
unripe fruit of Mul-berries, Mace, common Nightshade may be used either
inwardly or outwardly, and is no way dangerous as the others are, Navel-wort,
Orpin used outwardly, Water-Plantine, Land-Plantine, Pomegranate, Queen of the
Medows, Shepherds Purse, common Sorrel, Wood Sorrel, Sow-thistles,
Strawberry-leaves, Succory, Stone-crop, Star-wort, Spinach, wild Tansie, all
the parts of the black Thorn or Sloe-bush, Meadow trefoyl, Honeysuckles, both
the Vervains, Vine-leaves, Violets, Vipers-bugloss, Vinegar, the Leaves,
Flowers, Seed, and Bark of the Willow-Tree, Yarrow, Antimonium, Alkanet, Garden
Arach, Barberry-bush, Barley, Bilberries, Blew-bottle, Bucks horn, Plantine,
Bole-armoniack, Comfrey, Cranes-bill, Dandelion, all the kinds of Docks are
generally cold, Ducks Meat applied outwardly is a great Cooler of hot
Inflammations, Fumitory.

Things good in General for a Prick or Stub in the Sole of a Horses Foot.
To pull off his Shoo, and pare his Foot so deep that you may discover The Nail
or S^ub must be first drawn out and the Corruption let forth and made very
clean, before you dress it.
the Hole, making the Mouth of it about the breadth of a Twopence, then wash it
well with Chamberly and Salt, or green Copperas and Alum boiled together in
Water, then Tack on his Shoo again, and stop the Hole with Turpentine,
Hog's Grease and Verdegrease melted together, and lay Flax or Towe upon it, and
put over that Cows dung, and cover it with Leather, and splint it with two
cross splints, and renew it once in two or three days, and keep him out of wet
during the Cure. Or Taint it with Tallow and Turpentine melted together, and
anoint his Coffin all over with Bolearmoniack and Vinegar mingled together, and
take red Nettles stamped with Vinegar, and black or common Soap, and stop the
Wound therewith, or to wash the Wound with Vinegar and Salt; or if it be in the
Summer, take the tender Buds or Leaves of Elder stamped; if in the Winter, the
inner Rind of it, and melt some hot Tallow with it into the Wound. Or take
Turpentine, brown Sugar Candy powdered, and white Ginger powdered, and melt them
all in an Iron Spoon, and pour it hot into the Wound, and put Hurds or Flax
upon it, or Roch-Allum burned and made into powder, and fill the Hole
therewith, and lay Hurds thereupon, or Oil of Turpentine poured into it is
excellent good, for it will not only search it to the bottom, but take out the
Venom and heal it up. Or after you have cleansed it with Salt and Vinegar, take
Salt made into fine Powder, and four times so much Turpentine, and boil them
well together, and pour it into the Wound scalding hot, and put into it the
powder of Brimstone dissolved in White Wind, and lay Hurds upon it. Or take Oil
de bay four Ounces, of Orpin, of Cantharides and Euforbium, of each two Ounces
made all into fine powder, and set them on the Fire, keeping them stirring till
they become an Ointment, and with it dress him as before is taught. But if the
Foot be bruised, fear a Live Spider upon it with a hot Iron.

A Particular Receipt for a Stub in the Foot, or for any Overreach of the Toe
of the Hinder-foot upon the Heel of the sore-Foot, or for any Accidental Cut
with a Stone.
After you have well searched and made clean the Wound with Water and Salt, or
Verjuice, Beer and Butter; Take these things here underwritten, well beaten and
bruised together till they come to a Salve, and spread them upon a Linen Rag,
or brown Paper, with a Rag bound and Tied fast over it to prevent the coming of
it off; Let it lie on twenty four hours before you take it off; Continue so
dressing and washing it every twenty four hours till you find amendment; but
if you find it amend very fast, you need not dress it in two or three days. The
things you are to apply to it are these. viz. Common Soap about the bigness of
a good big Wash-Ball, a large Onion peeled and a spoonful of long Pepper beaten
to Powder, and mashed and bruised together with the rest.

Of Clifts and Cracks in the Heels cross and overthwart, which are a kind of
Scratches, and are Cured with the same Medicines as they are.
Falling Evil Cured, which is no other then the Falling Sickness in Man.
Take a pretty quantity of Blood from the Neck, and four or five days after let
him Blood in the Temple Veins, and on his Eye-Veins, then anoint his Body all
over with a comfortable Friction, then Bath his Head and Ears with Oil de bay,
Liquid Pitch and Tar mixed together, and of the same, put some of it into his
Ears, then make him a Cap or Biggin of Canvass, Quilted with Wool, to keep
his Head warm, then give him a Purgation or Scouring; but if the disease
continue still, then pierce the Skin of his Forehead with a hot Iron in diverse
places, and after anoint it with sweet Butter, for thereby you shall draw out
the gross Humors which do oppress the Brain, and keep him warm in the Stable,
during the time of his Physicking.

General Things to be Given inwardly for it.

The Seed of the Bolbonack, or the Satin Flower, the Leaves and Flowers of
Flea-wort, stinking Ground Pine taken with Oxymel or Honeyed Water is good,
given Evening and Morning for some time together, Bitony, the Flower of
Violets, the Roots of Peony, Master-wort of Gerrard, Anniseeds, the Leaves and
Bark of the Mastick Tree, the Gum of it has the same Virtue given in Ale, the
distilled Water of red Cherries.

A Particular Receipt.
A spoonful of the powder of dried Missle-toe that grows upon the Apple tree,
(which is shaped much like Ivy-leaves) given him in half a Pint of Canary, and
kept warm, is very good.

A Hip-shot Horse. There is so uncertain a Cure to be made of it, that I durst
say nothing of the Cure.

The Cure for the Hurle-Bone out of Joint.
Take Oil of Turpentine and strong Beer, of equal parts alike, and shake them
very well in a Glass-Vial, and anoint the grieved part therewith, as also the
Brawn and inside of his Thigh down to his Gambrels, and heat it in very well by
holding a hot Fire-shovel before it, while you are doing it; This will make him
sound in a few days, conditionally you continue using of it, working the Bone
gently in with your Hand, to bring it to its right place again. This is a very
sharp and biting Medicine, which will make his Skin puff and heave up, but you
need not fear it, for there is no danger in it; When you have anointed him Tie
him up to the Rack-staves for about half an hour, to prevent his biting of it
with his Teeth, which may prejudice him; while he stands in the Stable, put a
Wedge of Wood about the breadth* of a Six pence between his Toe and his Shoe;
but when you Ride him you are to take it out; but when you come home to put it
in again. Or after you have anointed him once with Oil of Turpentine and Beer,
and put in his Bone into its right place again, you may clap a Charge upon it
made of Oxycrocium and Paracelsus, (which you may buy at the Apothecaries)
which will strengthen it so very much, that it will keep it from slipping out
of its place again. But the most best, speedy and certain Cure is, (though it
does a little disfigure your Horse) is to Pin him, which every Smith either
does, or ought to know.

Quick-Scab to Cure.
To let him blood, then clip away the Hair where the Sorrance is, and take off
the scurf and scabs with an old Curry-Comb, or other such like thing, then with
fair cold water wash it well, and lay a Linen Cloth well wet in it to the
place, and do nothing to it in ten days after; and if you find it does not
heal, dress it as before; and so a third time and a fourth till it be thoroughly
healed; Or to take Mallows and Marsh-Mallowes, of each alike, and boil them in
fair water as much as will suffice, till they be soft; and with the Herb and
Decoction bathe and wash the Sorrance two or three days together warm: Then
take of common Honey a Pint, Copperas, Alum, of Glass and Verdegrease, all
made into fine powder, of each four Ounces, Turpentine and Quicksilver
mortified, of each two Ounces; boil all these together with the Honey unto an
Unguent, and with it dress him every day till it be whole.

Rot in a Horse Cured.
Let him first bleed under the Tail, then take of Mares Milk two quarts, or the
Milk of a red Cow then take a Lump of Arement, then take a young Horse about
the Age of fonr years, and of color black if it may be, if not of some other
color, run and chafe him about till he sweat much; then with a Spoon or some
other Instrument Rake off the Sweat from off his Head, Neck, Breast, Back,
Sides, Ribs, Buttocks, Legs, and in each part or member where you can get off
any, and so put your Arement and your Sweat into the Milk, mixing them well
together, and by equal Portions give it him three Mornings together, till he
has taken it all; and let him drink no drink after it in six or seven hours;
and immediately after his Drink, lead him forth into some Pasture where other
Horses be, to sneeze, stale or dung, to empty himself, which is very wholesome
for him so to do, before he either eats or drink, then set him up warm and well
Littered; and if the Season do serve, give him of the green Blades of Rye; if
not, give him Barley steeped in Milk three days, but renewed every day once;
Then after every of these Drinks, if you feel him cold in the Pastern Joints,
or that he trippeth or stumbleth as you lead him in your hand, do no more to
him, for he is past Cure; Otherwise, for nine days together after, Morning and
Evening, give him white Water only, unless now and then a sweet Mash; and
sometimes give him Milk with his white Water; if he be not above nine years old,
this will prolong his life, whereby he may do the more service. Mr. Gray
declares, that this Receipt a Knight taught him, who recovered sundry Horses
with it.

Swaying in the Back.
Take of the Fat of the fruit of the Pine Tree two Ounces, of Olibanum three
Ounces, of Rozin four Ounces, of Pitch four Ounces, of Bole-Armoniack an Ounce,
and of Sanguis Draconis half an Ounce, incorporate all these well together, and
lay it Plaister-wise all over the Reins of his Back, and let it remain till it
fall off of it self


Another most Excellent Receipt for Swaying a Weakness in the Back.
These Infirmities are seldom or never perfectly Cured. But the best Help for
them that I know of is, to give him inwardly some strengthening things, as
common Turpentine made up into Balls, with the powder of Bolearmoniack, and
powder of the dried leaves of Clary, and to apply outwardly at the same time
all over the Reins of his Back these strengthening Charges, viz* Oxycrocium and
Paracelsus melted together. Or Coleworts boiled in Sallet Oil, made thick like
a Poultess, with the powder of Bolearmoniack and Bean-floure. If you desire to
see more Variety of Charges, (though these are very good) look into the First
Part, and there you may find plenty, where you may pick and choose what you best
fancy.

Foundering in the Body to Cure.
To Cure this Distemper, is first to Rake his Fundament, and to give him a
Glister, which you have variety of in my First Part; Then take Sack or Ale a
quart, Cinnamon half an Ounce, Licoris and Anniseeds, of each two spoonfuls
beaten into fine powder, with five or six spoonfuls of Honey, put them all into
the Ale together, and warm them till the Honey is molten, and give it him
lukewarm to drink, and Ride him gently after it for the space of an hour, and
let him fast two hours more, and keep him warm Clothed and Littered, and let
his Hay be sprinkled with Water, and his Oats very clean Sifted from dust, and
give it him by little and little, and let his drink be warm Mashes of Malt and
Water, and when he has recovered strength let him blood in the Neck-Vein, and
once a day perfume his Head with Frankincense. There is no Drink nor Diet that
is comfortable, but is good for this Disease.


The Way of Gathering, Drying and Preserving of Simples and their Juices, viz.
Roots, Barks, Leaves, Herbs, Flowers, Seeds, etc.
CHAP. I. Of Roots.
1. Choose those that are sound, and not rotten nor worm-eaten, and let them be
such as have their proper taste, smell and color.

2. Those that are dry, hard and sound, are the best and fittest for your use.

3. If they prove soft, dry them in the Sun, or else string them and hang them
up by the Fire, but the dry and hard ones you may lay any where.

4. The small Roots will keep a year or two very well, but the larger sort of
them will keep four or five, but they are best in their prime the first year.

5. The best time to gather them is in the Summer, before they Run out to seed,
for then they grow hard and sticky, and lose their Virtues.

6. Those Roots that you may have all the year, as Plantine, Fennel or Parsley,
etc. trouble not your self to dry them.

CHAP. II. Of Barks.
1. Barks of such Trees as are frequently with you, as the Oak, Elm or Ash,
etc. Gather them but when you have present use for them; As for the Outlandish
you may have ready dried at the Druggist.

2. The Barks of Roots, as Fennel, Parsley, etc. is only that which remains
when the Pith is out, which is called a Bark, though very improperly.

CHAP. III. Of Leaves, of Herbs or Trees.
1. Of Leaves, gather such as are fresh and green, and full of Juice, and in
the picking of them be careful to throw away the dead and decayed Leaves, which
are not fit for any Physical use.

2. That Place they most delight to grow in are best for use, as Bitony
delights to grow in the Shadow, and therefore it is better then that that grows
in the Sun, because it is its proper place.

3. Those Herbs that Run up to Seed, and in Flowers their leaves are not so
good then as before they were spindled (some few only excepted) and therefore I
advise you, If through Ignorance you know them not, or through Negligence
forget them, rather choose to take the Tops then the Leaves.

4. The Sun is better to dry them in, then the Shadow.

5. The best Way to keep them after they be dried, is near the Fire, in a Bag
made of brown or white Paper.

6. It Is not certainly known how long Herbs will keep, but it is concluded by
most they will keep a year very well.

7. You may know when they are decayed by the loss of smell, color or both.

8. Those that grows upon dry Grounds, does usually keep longer then those that
grow upon moist, and those that are very full of Juice, will not continue their
Virtue so long as those that are drier, because more subject to Putrefaction
and Corruption.

9. Those that you do thoroughly dry will keep better then those that are ill
dried.

CHAP. IV. Of Flowers.
1. The Flower, which is the Glory and Beauty of the Plant, is of excellent use
in Physic, if it be gathered when it is in its prime.

2. When you intend to gather them let them be thoroughly dry, and the Sun
shining; for if you gather them when they be wet they will not keep.

3. When you have gathered them dry, them thoroughly upon a Table, or in the
Window where the Sun comes, before you put them up in Papers, to hang near the
Pire.

4. If you find their Smell and Color continue, you may be assured their
Virtues are not lost.

CHAP. V. Of Seeds.
1. The Seed contains the vital faculty and spirit of the whole Plant, and
therefore has in it equal Virtues with it.

2. Gather them not till they be full ripe, and from the places where they
delight most to grow in, and let them be thoroughly dried in the Sun before you
lay them up.

3. These having the spirit of the whole Plant in them, are not so subject to
corrupt as the others are, and therefore you need not keep them so near the
Fire as you do the Herbs.

4. They will continue good and sound four or five years; but they are best in
their prime the first and second.

CHAP. VI. Of Juices.
1. The Juices that you are to press out of Herbs, Plants, Tops and Flowers
must be done when they are young and tender.

2. If you intend to preserve them some time, you must gather them when they be
thoroughly dry.

3. When you use them they must be bruised in a Stone-Mortar with a wooden
Pestle, and put afterward into a Canvass bag, and the Juice pressed out in a
Press, and when you have so done set it over the Fire in an Earthen Pipkin or
Skillet, and clarify it by taking off the scum that shall arise; You may know
when it is well clarified, for then the scum will not appear on the top.

4. This being Clarified according to your mind, you may preserve it for your
use, (in the Winter when you can get no Herbs) these two ways. First, by
putting it into a Glass when it is cold, and pouring so much Sallet Oil over it
as will cover it, let the Oil lie about the thickness of two Fingers above the
Juice; This Oil being of a light Body will always get uppermost, and keep out
the Air from entering, and so preserve it the better from putrefaction. When you
have occasion to use it, pour it out into a Porringer or any other convenient
Vessel, so much as you think you shall use, and take off the Oil that comes out
with it, with a little Cotton or with a Spoon, and put the remainder back again
in the Glass, (if you leave any) and it will quickly sink under the Oil again,
etc. The second way of preserving it is after you have Clarified it, to boil it
over again, (being first cold) to the thickness of Honey, and this way it is
used for the Diseases of the Mouth.


The Way of Making and Keeping all Necessary Compounds, Viz. Electuaries,
Pills, Waters, Ointments, Plasters, Charges, Poultisses, Oils, Syrups by
Infusion and by Decoction, or by Juice.
CHAP. I. Of Electuaries.
1. If you desire to preserve your Horses Health abroad as well as at Home,
then make up some Electuary with some Herbs, Rooes and Flowers, suitable to the
Diseases you think he may be most Afflicted with, whether they be Coughs,
Colds, or any other Illness, and put it into a Gallypot.

2. If you intend any Physic for present use, let the Herbs, Roots, Seeds and
Flowers be always in a readiness, ready dried in your House, that so you may
not want them when you come to use them.

3. They will keep best whole, for being beaten and made into powder, they will
be soon penetrated by the Air, which will cause them to lose much of their
Strength and Virtue.

4. If you find them not dry enough to beat, make them fit for the Pestle by
drying them by the Fire.

5. When you use them, beat them as small as you can, and then Sift them
through an indifferent fine Sieve.

6. To one Ounce of this Powder you may add three Ounces of clarified Honey,
and make up what quantity of Electuary you please, according to the occasion
and use you have for it.

7. Your Honey must be clarified by the Fire, by scumming off the scum from it
that shall arise.

8. Mix the Powders and this Honey very well together in a Mortar, before you
put them up for your use.

9. The usual Dose of Cordial Electuary is from one Ounce to two Ounces,
dissolved in a pint or a quart of strong warm Ale or Beer, and given him in the
Morning or Evening fasting, and to fast two or three hours after it.

CHAP. II. Of Pills or Balls.
1. The Invention of these Pills or Balls at first were for the Purging of the
Head, as I have told you in some of my Physical Observations. And as such
Infirmities as lie nearest the Passages were best removed by Decoctions,
because they pass to the grieved part soonest, so in the Infirmities of the
Head or other parts of the Body more remote from the Stomach and Bowels, are
best removed by Pills or Balls, which are longest in Digestion, and therefore
the better able to call the offending Humor to them.

2. The Way of Making them is very familiar, for with the help of a Pestle and
Mortar, and a little of your care, you may make any Powder into Balls, you have
Directions at large for the making of them after the best Receipt for the
Glanders.

3. The Manner of Giving them are twofold, viz. either upon the end of a
Stick, with his Tongue first drawn forth on one side of his Mouth, or in a
Horn-full of strong Beer.

CHAP. III. Of Distilled Waters.
1. Waters are distilled out of Roots, Herbs, Flowers and Fruits, and are best
when they are distilled in their greatest strength and vigor.

2. Distilled Waters are the weakest of all Artificial Medicines, and made more
weak by distilling them in a Pewter Still, being good for very little unless
mixed with other Medicines. But the strongest Way of Stilling them is in Sand.

3. When they are distilled put them up into a Glass, and bind on the Top of it
a Paper pricked full of Holes, that so the fiery* Vapors may Exhale, for else
they will cause them to Mother, which will corrupt the Waters. Then cover them
close, and keep them for your use.

4. Stopping them with Cork is the common Way though not the best, because that
Way will make them grow Musty, and not much better is Paper, if it be suffered
to touch the Water; But the best and most approved Way to keep them is to Top
them with a Bladder, being first wet in Water, and bound over the Glass.

5. Those Waters that are distilled in a Pewter Still will not keep above a
year good, when those that are distilled in Sand will keep twice as long.

CHAP. IV. Of Ointments.
There be many Ways of making Ointments, but the most familiar and easy is the
common Way, viz. To bruise those Roots, Herbs or Flowers you intend to make it
of, and to two Handfuls of the bruised Herbs, add a pound of tried Hogs Seame,
Mash and beat them very well together in a Mortar, then put them into an
Earthen Pot (covering it with paper to keep it from filth) and set it in the
Sun, or in some other warm place for four or five days that it may melt, then
take it forth and boil it gently over the Fire for some little time, then
strain it out while it is hot, pressing the Herbs very hard to get what Grease
you can out of them, then add to it as many more fresh Herbs bruised and set in
the Sun, and Ordered in every thing as before; but if you think them not yet
strong enough, you may repeat the Herbs over again the third or fourth time,
for the fuller of Juice the Ointment is, the stronger will it be; The last time
you boil it, boil the Herbs and all with it, and when they be crisp and the
Juice consumed, (which you may know by the leaving of its bubling while it is
on the Fire) it is enough, then strain it out very hard in a Press, and to every
pound of Ointment add two Ounces of the best common Turpentine you can get, and
as much Bees Wax, which will take away the offensiveness of the Grease, which
is very prejudicial to Wounds as well as Oil.

CHAP. V. Of Plasters.
1. The Emplaisters of the Greeks consisted of very many Ingredients, viz.
Gums, Rosin, Wax, Herbs, Seeds, Roots, Juices, Liquoris, Minerals, Metals,
Stones and Excrements of Creatures, etc. which said Metals they reduced to
powder, and mixed them with their satty substances, which the rest of the
Plaster consisted of while it was hot, keeping it continually stirring up and
down to prevent the sinking of them, that they may the better stiffen and
incorporate together; which after it was somewhat cold and hard, they made them
up into Rolls, and when they needed it they melted them again by the Fire.

2. The Arabians made up their Medicines with Meal, Oil and Fat, which needed
not so much boiling as the other did. But seeing these are so difficult to
make, and when made, so rarely used in Farring, I shall advise you to let them
alone, and buy them rather of the Druggist, when you have occasion to use them,
then put your self to the needless trouble of making of them.

CHAP. VI. Of Charges.
1. The Use of these are for Strains, Sprains, or any other Weakness in the
Legs, Shoulders or Back, and are made of several things, viz. Pitch, Rosin,
Mastick, Oxycrocium, Paracelsus, add Hernium, Galbanum, Clip away the Hair
before you apply it.
Frankincense, Turpentine, Meal, Bolearmoniack, etc. The manner of using them is
to melt what things you have occasion for in an Earthen Pipkin, and lay it on
with a Lath all over the grieved part, then clap upon it some Flax, Hurds, Tow,
Wool, Deers Hair or such like thing, then heat the Charge again, and daub it
all over the Flax, Tow or Wool the second time, scalding hot; then daub it
over again the third time as you did before, pressing it all the time close
with your Hands to the grieved part to make it bind on the faster, and let it
remain there till it fall off of it self.

2. If his Charge be on his Legs, be careful that he come not into the Water,
for that will soon fetch it off. But to prevent this, choose rather to keep him
in the Stable, and Water him there till he be somewhat amended.

CHAP. VII. Of Poultisses.
1. Poultisses are vulgarly called Cataplasmes, which is as much as to say a
thick Poultess made of Meal and Herbs, which is a very excellent Medicine to
ripen and break Sores, ease Pains, cool hot Inflammations, dissolve hardness,
ease the Spleen, disperse Swellings, and digest Humors.

2. When you are to make them, you are to take those Roots and Herbs as are
most proper and suitable to the Disease and Member afflicted, chopping them
first small, then put them into clear running Water, and boil them to a Gelly,
then add to them a little Meal of Lupins, (or for want of that Barley-Meal,)
with a little Sallet Oil, or rough sweet Suet, which I account better; Then
spread it upon a Linen Cloth, and apply it to the grieved part, bound fast
with a Tape or Pack thread that it fall not off.

CHAP, VIII. Of Oils.
1. Sallet Oil is made from the Expression of Olives, which is so temperate,
that it exceeds in no one quality.

2. Of Oils, some are Simple, and some are Compound.

3. Simple Oils are such as are made by Expression of Fruits or Seeds, as
Linseed Oil, Rape-seed Oil, and Oil of sweet or bitter Almonds.

4. Compound Oils are made of the Oil of Olives, and other Simples, as Leaves,
Flowers, Roots, etc.

5. The Manner of making up those Herbs or Flowers you intend to make your Oil
of, must be first bruised, and then put into an Earthen pot, and to two or
three handfuls of them so bruised put a pint of Sallet Oil, and then cover up
your Pot close with a paper (to keep it from Filth) then set it in the Sun for
about a Fortnight; then warm it on the Fire, and press out the Oil from the
Herbs very hard, and add so many more Herbs to the Oil, and use them in every
thing as before; The oftener you repeat your Herbs, the stronger will your Oil
be. When you think it is strong enough for your use, boil the last Herbs (you
put in it) and Oil together, till the Juice be consumed, (which you may know by
the leaving of its bubling) and the Herbs grown Crisper. Strain it while it is
hot, and put into some convenient Earthen or Glass-Vessel, and set it up till
you have occasion to use it.

CHAP. IX. Of Syrups by Infusion, by Decoction and by Juices.
1. A Syrup is a Medicine of a Liquid Form, Composed of Infusion, Decoction and
Juice.

2. Those Syrups that are usually made by Infusion, are made of such Flowers as
lose their Color and Strength in Boiling; As Violets, Roses, Peach Flowers.
They are thus made, viz. To every pound of Flowers well picked, add three Pints
of Spring Water made boiling hot on the Fire; Put them in an Earthen Vessel,
and put the Water to them, then cover it close, and let it stand by the Fire to
infuse about twelve or thirteen hours, then strain it out (in such Syrups as
Purge, as Peach-Flowers, Damask Roses, etc. the usual and best way is to repeat
to their Infusion fresh Flowers diverse times, which after you have strained it
out into some convenient Vessel, add to every pint of it two pounds of Loaf
Sugar, then melt it over a gentle Fire again, taking off the Scum that shall
arise, and your Syrup is made.

2. Those Syrups that are made by Decoction are made of Compounds, yet any
Simple Herb may be made also into a Syrup; Take the Root, Herb or Flower you
intend to make into a Syrup, and bruise it a little in a Mortar; Then take it
forth, and put to every Handful of Roots, Herbs or Flowers, a pint of Running
Water, and boil it till half the Water be consumed; After you have so done,
strain it through a Woollen Cloth, letting it Run out at leisure without
pressing; And to every pint of this Decoction add one pound of Sugar; then boil
it again over the Fire till it come to a Syrup, which you may know when it is
well done, if you take a little of it now and then in a Spoon, and let it cool.
Be sure you take off the Filth that does arise while it is a boiling; And when
you think it is enough, strain it hot through a Woollen Cloth, and press it out
and keep it for your use.

3. Syrups that are made by Juices, usually are made of such Herbs as are most
full of Juice, and are best made this Way, viz. Take the Herbs and beat them in
a Mortar with a Wooden Pestle, then press forth the Juice, and Clarify it as
you were taught before in Juices, then set it over the Fire again, and let it
boil till a quarter of it be consumed, and to a Pint of it add a pound of
Sugar, and boil it up to a Syrup, keeping it scumming all the while; When you
think it is well boiled, strain it through a Woollen Cloth, as you did the
other, and keep it for your use.

4. If you make Syrups of Roots that are hard, as Grass-Roots, Parsley, Fennel,
etc. Bruise them very well first, then lay them asteep in that Water you intend
to boil them in, which will cause the Virtue of them to come forth so much the
better.

5. Your Syrups that are well made will keep somewhat above a year, but such as
are made by Infusion will not keep so long.

6. The best Way to keep them when made, is in Glass or Stone-pots, and to bind
a Paper about the Mouth of them.

CHAP. X. Of Decoctions.
1. Decoctions are made either of Fruits, Barks, Roots, Leaves, Flowers or
Seeds, and is made after the same manner as is showed you in your Syrups.

2. Those Decoctions that are made of Wine are more durable then those made of
Water.

3. If you make a Decoction for to cleanse the Passages of Urine, and to open
Obstructions, choose rather to make it of White Wind, because it is of a more
penetrating and subtle Nature then Water.

4. Decoctions are of the best use for the Cure of such Diseases as lie Lurking
in the Passages of the Body, Stomach, Bowels, Kidneys, Passages of Urine and
the Bladder, etc. which are more powerful in Operation, in passing quicker to
the aforesaid Diseases then any other sort of Medicines.

5. All the difference that are between Decoctions and Syrups made by
Decoction, is only this, Syrups are made to keep, Decoctions only for present
spending.

9. You may sweeten them with Sugar or Syrup, or such things as you imagine
most fit for the Disease you give it.

7. If you make a Decoction of Roots, Herbs, Flowers and Seeds together, boil
the Roots a good while first* because they retain their Virtues longer; so then
the next in Order according to the same Rule, are, first, Barks; secondly,
Herbs; thirdly, seeds; fourthly, Flowers; And fifthly, Spices; which are put in
last, because their Virtues do soonest come sorth.

8. All Decoctions are to be kept in a Glass close s^opped, and the cooler you
set them the longer they will keep, their usual time of lasting is not above a
Week at most.

9. The usual Dose you are to give him at a time is a quart or more, according
to the Age, Strength and Constitution of your Horse, Season of the year,
strength of the Medicine, and quality of the Disease.

Roots th t are hot in the First Degree.

Liquoris, Dogs-grass, Marshmallows, Burrage, China, Valerian, Bazil, Parsley,
Bugloss, Pilewort, Lillies, Peony male and female, wild Parsnips, Burrdocks,
Spatling Poppey, Kneeholly, etc.

Herbs hot in the second Degree.
Lovage, Water-flag, Fennel, Butter-bur, Hogs Fennel, Swallows-wort,
Carline-thistle, Devils-bit, Spignel, Mercury, Sarsaparilla, etc.

Hot in the third Degree.
Ginger, Angelica, Asarabica, white Dittany, Doronicum, Elecampane, Hellebore
white and black, stinking Gladdon, Filapendula* Aron, Sow-bread, Birth-wort,
Galangal, Cellandine, Snake-root, (...) and black, Master-wort, Rest-harrow,
etc.

Hot in the fourth Degree.
Leeks, Onions, Garlic, Pellitory of the Wall, etc.

Roots that are very Temperate.
Cinquefoyl, Turmentil, Mallows, Bears-breech, Mechoachan, Jallop, Eringo,
Asparagus, our Ladies thistle, etc.

Roots Cold in the first Degree:
Plantine, Comfrey the greater, Sorrel, Madder, Beets white and red, Rose-root,
etc.

Cold in the second Degree.
Hounds-tongue, Alkanet, Succory, Endive, Dazies, etc.


Cold in the Third.
Mandrakes, Bistort, etc.

Cold in the Fourth.
Henbane.

Roots dry in the first Degree.
Calamus, Aromaticus, Bears-breech, Madder, Burr-docks, Pile-wort, Red Beets,
Eringo, Self-heal, Knee-holly, Endive, etc.

Dry in the second.
Hounds-tongue, Zedoary, Plantine, Mercury, Reeds, Devils-bit, parsley,
Butter-bur, Fennel, Spignel, Lovage, Alkanet, Marshmallows, Valerian,
Sprattling poppey, Bazil, Water-flag, our Ladies thistle, Cyprus long and
round, ^orrel, Smallage, Aspodel male, swallow-wort, etc.

Dry in the third.
Cellendine, Angelica, Hogs Fennel, Turmentil, Ginger, Birth-wort long and
round, Aron, Sow-bread, Carline thistle, Bistort, Briony white and black,
Sarsaparilla, Asarabica, Virginian snake-root, China, Doronicum, Dittany,
Galangal of both kinds, Hellebore white and black, Elecampane, Rest harrow,
Peony Male and Female, Filapendula, Orris English and Florence, stinking
Gladdon, etc.

Dry in the Fourth.
Costus, Pellitory of Spain, Garlic, Onions and Leeks, etc.

Roots Moist are,
Dasies, Burrage, Valerian and spatling poppey, Bugloss, white Beets, Liquoris,
Dogs-grass, parsnips, Skirrets, etc.


Of hot Medicaments Appropriate to the Parts of the Body.
1. Heating the Head.
Doronicum, Fennel, peony, Spikenard, Winters his Cinnamon, Bitony, Costmary,
Cardus benedictus, Cowslips, Eyebright, Featherfew, Goats-Rue, Herb Mastich,
Lavender, Laurel, Lovage, Maudlin, Mellilot, Time, penny Royal, Rosemary,
Celandine, Scurvey-Grass, Sneese-wort, fena, peony Male and Female, Chamomel,
sage, Nutmegs, Jallop.

2. Heating the Throat.
Devils-bit, pilewort, Archangel white and red, Alewort.

3. Heating the Breast and Lungs.
Birthwort long and round, Calamus, Aromaticus, Cinquefoyl, Elecampane,
Liquoris, Orice squills, Cassia Lignea, Cinnamon, Bitony, Bays, Bawm,
Calaminth, Camomil, Distaff, Thistle, Fennel, Germander, Hysop, Hore-hound,
Indian-leaf, Maidenhair, Nettle, Oak of Jerusalem, Organy, periwincle, Rue,
scabius, Time, Figs, Raisins, Orris English and Florentine.

4. Heating the Heart.
Angelica, Butter-bur, Basil, Cinnamon, Citrons, Carline-thistle, Turmentil,
Valerian of both sorts, pimpernel, Bay Berries, Bawm, Broom, Cardus Benedictus,
Rue, Goats Rue, Rosemary, southernwood, seen, saffron, spicknard,
Juniper Berries, Mace, Nutmegs, Wall-nuts, Mustard Seed, Doronicum, Bugloss.

5. Heating the Stomach.
Avens, Fennel, Galangale, Ginger, Radish, Spicknard, Enula, Cassia Lignea,
Cinnamon, Citrons, Lemmons, Sassafras, Bays, Bawm, Broom. Hysop, Indian Leaf,
Mints, Time, Parsley, Sage, Smallage, Wormwood, Rosemary, Cloves, Almonds, Ben,
Nutmegs, Pine-Nuts, Annis, Caraway, Cardamums, Cummin, Elecampane, Fern.

6. Heating the Liver.
Carlin thistle, China, Dogs-grease, Fennel, Gentian, Parsley, Rhubarb,

Smallage, Turmerick, Sparagus, Agrimonia, Ale-cost, Ash, Bays, Asarabacca,
Centaury the less, Chamepitys, Germander, Fox Gloves, Hops, Horehound, Hysop,
Ladies-thistle, Thyme, Maudlin, Pimpernel, Celandine, Samphire, Sage, Elder,
Scordium, Watercresses, Chamomel, Bitony, Annis, Caraway, Cummin, Cinquefoyl,
Parsley, Rubarb, Kneeholly, Rhapontick.

7. Heating the Spleen.
Ash, Round Birth-wort, Thistle-Fern of both sorts, Fennel, Gentian, Parsley,
Sparagus, Bays, Agrimony, Centaury the less, Chamepitys, Dodder, Germander,
Hops, Horehound, Hart's-tongue, Maidenhair, Thyme, Smallage, Samphire, Sage,
Scordium, Sena, Tamarisk, Watercresses, Wormwood, Bitony, Wall-flower^, Annis,
Caraway, Fennel.

8. Heating the Bowels.
Ginger, Valerian great and small, Zedoary, Alehoof, Alexanders, Chamomil,
Ginger.

9. Heating the Reins and Bladder.
Bazil, Burdock, Carline-thistle, China, Cyprus long and round, Dropwort,
Knee-holly, Marshmallows, Parsley, Smallage, Sparagus, Spicknard, white
Saxafrage, Valerian, Sassafras, Agrimonia, Bitony, Brooklime, Bays, Broom,
Chervil, Costmary, Camomil, Clary, Germander, Hops, Melilot, Thyme, Nettleseed,
Organy, Pimpernel, Pennyroyal, Rochet, Samphire, Scordium, Toad-flax, Vervain,
Gromwell, Restharrow, Licoris, Pellitory of the Wall, Elder, Turpentine,
spatling Poppey, Filapendula, Dogs-grass.

10. Heating of the Womb.
Peony, Valerian, Angelica, Pimpernel, Briony, Aristolochia rotunda, Mugwort,
Rue, Mercury, Featherfew, Savin, Bitony, Elder, Spicknard, red Fetches,
Rosemary, Indian Nut, Juniper berries, Oringes, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Cassia
Lignea, Saffron, Cardamums, Ash, Pepper, Castoreum, Birthwort long and round,
Galanga greater and lesser, Hogs Fennel.

11. Heating the Joints.
Branca ursina, Costus, Ginger, Hermodactils, Jallop, Mechoacan, Agrimony,
Arsmart, Camomil, Costmary, Carden cresses* Cowslips, Melilot, Rosemary, Rue,
Sciatica cresses, Water cresses, Sage, Bays.

Of Cold Medicaments Appropriate to the Parts of the Body.
1. Cooling the Head.
Lettice, Purslain, Mandrake, Plantine, Nightshade, Henbane, Water Lillies,
Roses, Poppy, Violets, Gourd, Cucumber, Melons, Opium, House leek, Wood Sorrel,
Strawberry leaves, Violet leaves, Fumitory, Willow leaves.

2. Cooling the Throat*
Bramble leaves, Orpine, Privit, Strawberry leaves, Poppey, Oringes, Lemons.

3. Cooling the Breast and Lungs.
Endive, Lambs Tongue, Plantine, Polipody, Purslain, Water Lillies,
Bramble-leaves, Coleworts, Violet leaves, Mallows, Bugloss, Cichory; Poppeys,
Quinces, Strawberry leaves, Barley; Mulberry leaves, Prunes, Sanders,
Fennegreek, Gum tragant, Arabic.

4. Cooling the Heart.
Dandelion, Sorrel, Wood-sorrol, Water Lillies, Violet-leaves, Cucumbers,
Gourds, Barberries, red Corans, Citrons, Pomegranates, Sanders, Camphire,
Vipers Bugloss, Lettice, Burnet, Strawberry leaves, Water Lillies.

5. Cooling the Stomach.
Cichory, Sorrel, Asparagus, Water Lillies, Rudive, Purslain, Myrtle, Roses,
Violets, Cucumbers, Barley, Quinces, Citrons, Oringes, Pomegranates.

6. Cooling the Liver.
Asparagus, Gramen, Water Lillies, Sorrel, Strawberries, Gichory, Sow-thiltle,
Endive, Purslain, Lettice, Roses, Bugloss, Burrage, Poppey, Barley, Lemons.

7. Cooling the Spleen.
Willow, Hemlock, Fumitory, Oil of Vitriol, spirit of Salt, Oil of sulphur,
which three last you must not exceed above 90 or 100 drops, put into a quart of
Ale or Beer.


8. Cooling the Reins and Bladder.
Grass, Strawberries, Water Lillies, Purslain, Willow, Lettice, Cassia,
Fistula, Violets, Roses, Poppey, Citrons, Lemons, Barley.

9. Cooling the Womb.
Bistort, Comfrey, Bursa pastoris, plantine, stinking Arach, Balaustins,
Water Lillies, Willow, Henbane, poppy, pomegranats, Medlars, Myrtles, Red Coral.

10. Cooling the Bowels.
Cassia, Fistula, sow-thistle, Bucks-horn, Orpine, Plantine, Fumitory, Mallows,
Alth^a.

11. Cooling the Joints.
Henbane, Housleek, Lettice, Nightshade, Willow, poppy, Opium.


The Properties of Purging Medicaments.
1. Purging Cheler 1. Mild; As Cassia Fistularis, Tamarins, Manna, Calabrina,
Aloes succotrina, Rheubarb, Damask-Roses* Violets. 2. Strong, as, Asarum,
scamonie.

2. Purging Phlegm. 1. Mild, as Myrobalans, Chemulan and Emblican,
Carthamus-feeds, Mechoachan. 2. Strong, as Agarick, Jaiiup, Turpethum,
Coliquintida, Hermodactyls, Euforbium, sagapenum, Briony, spurge, sow*bread,
Elaterium, squills, Turbech, Ground Pine.

3. Purging Watery Humors, 1. Mild, as soldanella, German Orrice. 2. Strong, as
Elaterium, Cambogia, Hedge Hysop Ensula.

4. Purging by Vomit. 1. Mild, warm Water, sat Broth, Oil with water, Butter,
Roots of Garden-Cucumber, Orach, Mellon, Asarum. 2. Strong, as white Hellebore,
Tobacco, Sulphur of Antimony, Merchrius vitae, Crocus Metallorum, Turpethum,
Minerale, Gutta gamba.

5. Purging by Urine. 1. Mild, as Roots of parsley, Smallage, Eringo, Ruscus,
Asparagus, Pimpernel, leaves of Pellitory, Asarum, Chervil, Scordium,
saxafrage, Seeds of Gromwel, Winter-cherries. 2. Strong as Sal tartari,
Succini, Absynthii, Oleum tarti, Baccarum, luniper, Vitrioli, Sulphuris, Cerae,
Wood and Bark of Guajaccum, Sassaphras.

6. Purging by the Throat, Mercurius dulcis, Sublimatus and Praecipitatus,
Turpethum Minerale, Unguentaque Mercuriata,

7. Purging by Sweat, 1. Mild, as Angelica, Pimperhil, Turmentil, Gentjan,
Carduus, Scabius, Zedoary. 2. Strong, as Lignum Guajaccum, Sassaphras,
Bezoar-stone, Aurum Diaphoreticum, Antimonium Diaphoreticum, Bezoar-joviale and
Minerale, Sal tartari, Sulphur Auratum.

8. Purging by the Nose. Roots of Orris, Bind-weed, Leaves of Beet, Marjorem,
Sage, Bitony, Ivy, Ginger, Roots of Pellitory of Spain, white Hellebore, Leaves
of Sneesewort, Tobaccho, Pepper, Mustard, Euforbium.


The Properties of Altering Medicaments.
Softening Things, the Roots of Lillies, Altheae, Wild Cucumber, Briony, Leaves
of Mallows, Pellitory, Violets, Elder, Dwar-Elder, Flowers of Chamomil, Seeds
of Fennegreek, Lime, Fat, Figs, Fresh Butter, Hog's Grease, Bears grease, Old
Oil.

Loosening things. Lillies, Lynseed, Fennegreek, Fat, Butter, Althaea, see more
in my first part.

Abol^shing Things. Herb Mercury, Chamomil, Melilot, Elder, Fennegreek and
Lynseed, Old Oil, Butter, Orris, Time, Pennyroyal Hysope, Mug-wort, Seed of
Annis, Fennel.

Opening Roots, Smallage, Fennel, Asparagus, Parsley, Holm, Cichory, Eringo,
Gentian, Fern, Madder, Tamarisk, Ash leaves, Fumitory, Wormwood, Agrimony,
Maidenhair, Liver-wort, Chamepitys, Dodder, Horehound, Calamint, Pennyroyal
Scurvey-Grass, Brook-lyme, Watercresses, Hops, Seeds of Annis, Ameos, Lupins,
Almonds, Cinnamon, Vinegar, Endive, Garlic, Onions, Pellitory, Turmerick, etc.

Binding things; Roots of Turmentil, plantine, Comfrey, white Lillies, peony,
Bistort, Rhubarb roasted, leaves of Amomum, Agnus Castus, Cypress, Cinquefoyl,
Bawm, Flea-wort, Horse-tail, Ivy, Knot-grass, Solomon's Seal, Bay, Myrtles, Oak,
Purslain, Shepherds purse, Medlars, Rice, Lentiles, Galls, Mirtle-berries,
Barberries, Acorns, Mastick, Dragons blood. Alum, Coral, bole-Armoniack Iron,
Sumach, Pomegranate Rind. See more of this Nature before spoken of.

Drawing things; Birth-wort Roots, Roots of An money, Bindweed, Taragon,
Gentian, pellitory, Crow-^oot, Daffadil, Aron, Garlic, Onyons, leaves of
Sciatia cresses, Calamint, Ditany, pimpernil, Ivy, Seeds of Nettles,
Euphorbium, Ammoniacum, Galbanum, sagaponum, pitch, Rozin, Cantharides, pigeons
and Hens dung, soap; see more in this part before spoken of.

Striking back Things; Roots of plantine, leaves of Housleek, purslain,
Duckweed, Endive, Lettice, Night shade, sumach, Hen-bane, red Roses.

Dissolving things. Roots of Asphodil, Birthwort, Briony, leaves of Arach,
Beets Chamomil, Chickweed, Dill, Maiden hait, Althaea, Mints, pellitory, Bawm,
Cleavers, Mallows, scordium.

Cleansing things Roots of Aron, Asphodil, Birth-wort, Celandine, Orrice,
Gentian, Solomon's seal, Tamarisk, leaves of smallage, Tansey, Wood, Hysop,
Watercresses, Horse-hound, Agrimony, Tansey, pimpernel, pellitory, Arach,
Beets, Aloes, sugar, Honey, Fenne greek-seeds, Turpentine, Vitriol, Whey.

Pain-removing things; Roots of Eringo, Orris, Rest harrow, Waterflag,
Marshmallows, leaves of Arach, Beets, Chamomil, Chick-weed, Dill, Maidenhair,
Fennel, Marjorem, Time, parsley, Rosemary, Rue, saffron, Fennegreek-seed, Hogs
and Hens-grease.

Things good to clear the wind. Costus, Galingal, Garlic, Fennel, parsley,
smallage, spicknard, Zedoary, Camomil, Dill, Juniper, Marjorem, Organy, savory,
Wormwood, ^chenanth, Bay, Nutmeg, pepper, Ginger, Annis, Caraway, Cummin.

Humour-d^ssolving things, Roots of Turmentil, Zedoary, Virginian snake weed.
Ginger, leaves of Cardus benedictus, scordium, Butter-bur, Rosemary, sage, Rue,
Flowers of Saffron, Bezoar-stone, Cochenele, Treacle.

Things good to drive away poison, Angelica, Birthwort, Bistort, ^ugloss
Costus, Cyprus, Carline, Doronicum, Enula, Garlic, Gentian, smallage,
Turmentil, Vipers bugloss, Zedoary, Bitony Cardus, Calaminth. Agrimony, Avens,
Juniper, Organy, pennyroyal, Rue, scordium, Wormwood, Centaury, Bay Berries,
pepper, Citrons, Anniseeds, Animi, Cardamums, Caraway, Fennel, Bezoar, saffron,
Cochenele, Dragons, plantine. See more in this part.

Astonisting things. Mandrake-roots, leaves of Mandrake, Hemlock, Henbane,
poppey, Opium, spirit of Darnel and Darnel meal.


To stop the Running of the Glanders for present sale.
Take some Frank in cense and strew it upon a Chafing dish of Coals, and let
him receive the smoke through a Tunnel, into the Nostril that runs, and it
will stop it for some time.


The best Receipt for the Cure of the Glanders that is, which if your Horse be
Youthful, and his Strength and Lungs not too much wasted, you need not fear the
Cure; For if any thing in the World will Cure this Disease, this Receipt will.
Take a small Faggot made of the green Boughs of the Ash-tree, and set it on
Fire in some Chimney-corner, clean swept for your use, then having a Gallon of
the best Ale you can get in a readiness, quench so many of the Coals that is
made thereof therein as will make it pretty thick, then strain it through a
Linen Cloth into some convenient Vessel, fit for your use, then double it over
again to make it the stronger, by quenching fresh Coals therein; then strain
the Liquor from the Coals as you did before, and when it is cold put it into a
Bottle close stopped for your use* for if you do not put it in cold, it will
quickly sour, which will spoil it. If you make it strong enough you shall find
that the Coals will drink up a quart or more of your Ale, when you use it,
shake the Bottle to make it all alike, then pour out of it so much as you think
fit for your use, and warm it lukewarm, and put a small drenching Horn full of
it into each Nostril of your Horse, if he runs at both, if not* but one will
serve; do this Morning and Evening during his Cure, and ride him gently after
it for about an hour, Then let him feed a while upon Hay, and after that you
may give him some drink; Three or four quarts of this Liquor will perfect the
Cure at the farthest; if you find, that the Kernels under the Chaul do waste,
which this Liquor will take away in four or five days at the furthest, you need
not much question the Cure* you are to keep him in the House during his Cure.
After you have given him this drink for about a week together you may rest him,
by forbearing to give him any more for a day or two, then give it him again*
and so use it till you have Cured him.

It Is convenient if the Horse be very strong and lusty, before you give him
this Drink, to cleanse his Body with this Scouring, which is both safe and sure.

Take an ounce of the best Barbados Alloes you can get for money, and beat it
very fine, then mix it very well with fresh Butter, and after you have so done
divide it into three parts, and cover every part all over with Butter, as big
as a good Wash-Ball; then give them the Horse in a Morning fasting upon the
point of a stick, and stir him a little after it, then bring him into the
Stable, and keep him warm, and let him fast two or three Hours, then give him
a Mash of Malt, and after that some Hay.


The best of all Receipts for the Ordering and Making up of Pills or Balls of
Alloes, for the Scouring or Purging of a Horse that is sick, either of Cold,
Surfeit, Molten Grease, Worme^, or any other inward Illness, etc.
Take an Ounce of the best Barbados Aloes, or of Aloes Hepatica with half an
Ounce of the Fylings of Steel Needles, and put them both together Or with the
Help of the Fire and your warm Hands, you may work up by it self into Balls the
b^itlest sort of ^loes that is.
in a Mortar, and beat and rub them round about with your Pestle, till the Aloes
be finely powdered, then drop into it sixteen or twenty drops of B^andy. (or for
want thereof, Water) and rub them round with your Pestle* and they will
incorporate and become one Body, which you may work and make up with your Hand
like unto Paste, into what form or shape you please; Divide them into two or
three Balls, and give him them Fasting in the Morning one after another in a
Hornful of cold strong or small Beer, and exercise him after it, then bring him
Home, and set him up warm Clothed and Littered, and no question but he will
purge very well.

Some Observations upon i^.
If you chance to put too much Brandy into it, it will be so thin that you
cannot work it up into a Paste. If this Misfortune happen to you, put a little
of the powder of English Liquoris to it, and that will so qualify the thinness
of it, that you may work it up into a Body very well; Or you may make up your
Aloes after the same manner only with the powder of Liquoris, or with any other
Powder, which you think most proper for your use.


How to know the Goodness of the Fylings of Steel Needles.
If it look bright and be clean from dirt it is good; but if you find it of a
rusty color it is naught; You may buy it at the Needle-makers in Crooked Lane,
near the Monument, for 6 d. the pound.


Another Receipt very good for the said Distempers.
Take an Ounce of Barbados Aloes, or Aloes Hepatica, with a dram of each of
these Roots here underwritten, finely beaten and searc'd viz. Gentian,
Aristolochia rotunda and Elecampane, put them into a Mortar together, and make
them up as in your former Receipt. Or you may make up your Aloes with the
powder of Crude Antimony.

Another Excellent Purge or Scouring, which is good to free a Horse from the
same Distempers as the others did, and is the best way I know of for Or you may
dissolve your Aloes in cold Brandy, being first beaten into fine powder, and
put therein.
the dissolving of Aloes.
Take an Ounce of the best Barbados Aloes, or Aloes Hepatica, and beat it in a
Mortar to a fine powder, then put it into a Bladder, and wet the powder very
well with Brandy wine, then Tie it up hard that it receive no Vent, and put it
into a Skillet of Water, and set it over the Fire, and you shall find that in a
little more then a quarter of an Hours boiling* your Aloes will be quite
dissolved. Then take it off the Fire, (having first in a readiness a quart of
strong Beer indifferent hot) and untie or clip your Bladder with a Pair of
Scissers, and let out your Aloes into the Beer, and put also into it an Ounce
of fresh Butter, with the Yolks and Whites of two New laid Eggs; Brew and beat
all these very well together, till you think they are cool enough to give him,
and Order him as in the former Receipt. If your Horse be strong and lusty, and
that you think this is not a sufficient Dose strong enough for him, you may
either add more Aloes, or else you may put into it as much of the powder of the
Root of Jallop and Liquoris, as will lie upon a Sixpence, which will
strengthen his Purge very much and make it work very freely, kindly and safely.

Some more Physical Observations in the Giving of Purges or Scourings.
1. When you give your Horse a Purge or Scouring, either for Surfeit, Cold, or
any other Illness, let him fast about three hours before he takes it, and
about three or four hours after it.

2. Let the first thing he eats after he has fasted his limited time, be a
Mash of Malt or boiled Oats, and let him not have it till his Physic has
wrought twice or thrice with him, which will set it working so much the more
freely.

3. If you give him Hay first, before you give him his Mash, 'twill so bind his
Physic upon his Stomach, that it will spoil the Operation and working quality
thereof, to the no little prejudice of his Health.

4. The best time in my opinion is to give it him about four or five in the
Afternoon, for then it is possible you may see the Working of it the next
Morning, which if you give it him in the Morning (which is the usual time of
giving a Horse Physic) it may work in the Night, and so prevent you of seeing
the Operation thereof.

5. According to the strength of your Horses Body, and the quantity or quality
of the Physic you give him will be the Operation of it, for in some Horses it
will work in twelve hours, in others not in twenty four, and again in others
not in forty eight.

6. Let him have no Water, till after his Physic has done working, and then
let it be a little Aired before you give it him, with a Handful or two of
Wheat-bran put amongst it.

7. If you fear your Horse is troubled with Bots or Worms, and that you find
him to begin to dung loose after his Purging, then put a Tobaccho-pipe at the
same time ready lighted into his Fundament (breaking off some part of it before
you put it in, lest it prove too long) and the Wind from within his Body will
draw it out, as orderly as if it were taken at your Mouth, so that the Smoke
being thus received into his Body will so suffocate and choke them, that it
will make them to let go their hold, which being loose will be the more easily
thrown out by the Purge in his Excrements.

A Particular Receipt for Splaiting of the Shoulder, which is a Torn Shoulder.
Put a Pair of straight Pastornes on his Feet, keeping him in the Stable
without disquieting of him; then take of Dialthaea one pound, of Sallet Oil one
Pint, of Oil de bay half a pound, of fresh Butter half a pound; Melt all these
together in an Earthen Pot, and anoint the grieved place therewith, and also
round about the inside of the Shoulder, and within two or three days after,
both that place and all the Shoulder will swell, and either prick it with a
Launcet or Fleam in all the swelling places, or else with a sharp hot Iron, and
then anoint it still with the Ointment before said; but if you see that it will
not go away, but swell still, and gather to a Head, then Lance it where the
Swelling does gather most, and is softest under your Finger, and then Taint it
with your Green Ointment, which you may find in the First Part.


Things good in General to Cure a Shoulder Pight, which is a Shoulder out of
Joint.
To make him swim in a deep Water up and down a dozen Turns, for that will
make the Joint to go into its right place again; then make two Pins of
Ashen-wood the bigness of your Finger, being sharp at the Points and five
inches long, then slit the Skin an Inch above the Point, and an Inch beneath
the Point of the Shoulder, and thrust in one of these Pins from above
downwards, so as both the ends may equally stick with the Skin; and if the Pin
of Wood will not easily pass through, you may make it way first with an Iron
Pin, then make other two holes cross to the first holes, so as the other pin
may cross the first pin right in the midst with a right Cross; and the first
pin should be somewhat flat in the midst, to the intent, that the other being
round may press the better without stop, and close juster together; then take a
piece of a little Line, somewhat bigger then a Whip-cord, and at one end make a
Loop, which being but over one of the Pins ends, so that it may lie betwixt the
Pins ends and the skin, and fasten the last end with your pack-thread unto the
rest of the Cord, so as it may not slip; And to do well, both the Pins and the
Cord should be first anointed with a little Hog's Grease, then bring him into
the Stable* and let him rest the space of nine or ten days, and let him lie
down as little as may be, and put a Pastorn shoo on the sore leg, and at nine
or ten days end you may anoint the place with a little Dialthea or Hog's Grease,
and so turn him out to Grass, and let him run there till the pins be rotted
off. If you work him in a Cart after, a Months time, it will settle his
shoulder the better, and make him the more fit to ride.

The Cure for the Canker in the Mouth.
Take Alum half a pound, Honey a quarter of a pint, Columbine leaves and Sage
leaves, of each a handful, boil them together in three Pints of running Water,
until a Pint be consumed, and wash the sore places therewith, (with a Rag Tied
upon a stick) till they bleed, Morning and Night till they be Cured.

The C^ring of the Gigges, Bladders or Flappes.
Pull out his Tongue, and slit them with an Incision-Knife, and thrust out the
Kernels or Corruption, and wash the place with Vinegar and Salt, or
Allum-water, and they will do well again. But to prevent their coming at all is
to wash it often with Wine, Beer and Ale, and so shall no Blister breed
thereon, nor any other Disease.

To make Useful unto you those several Weights and Measures, which are set down
by some Authors, in some Physical and obscure Characters, (and therein
contained many Excellent Receipts); Take them as follows,
VIZ. ss The Character of the half-pound lb A pound lb ss A pound and a half An
Ounce j ss One Ounce and a half A Dram ss A Dram and a half A Scruple ss A
Scruple and a half gr. A Grain, which is the least of all Weights, M. A
handful. P. A Pugil. p. A. part. A. Of each alike,


Note that Twenty Grains Make A Scruple. Three Scruples Make A Dram Eight
Drams Make An Ounce. Twelve Ounces Make A pound.


FINIS.
A TABLE Alphabetically set down, showing, where the Diseases of a Horse do
Grow, either inward or outward, in any Part of his Body, and how you may Know
them, and what were the Causes that Bred them. The Pages Direct You to their
Cu^es, which are found only in the Second Part.
A.
ACcloyed or Cloyed, is no other then Pricked with a Nail in the Shooing, vide
Pricked page 396 Arristes vide Rat-tails 377 St. Anthonies Fire is a vehement
burning disease in the Flesh, and is of the Nature of Noli me tangere or
Wilde*Fire, and is named of some, The Singles of an horse, which is very hard
and difficult to Cure 233 and 234 Anticor or Heart-sickness, is caused many
times by too much seeding without exercise, and sometimes by hard and
immoderate Riding, and careless looking after him afterward, which makes the
Blood of this useful Creature (a Horse) so corrupted and inflamed, that unless
it find some way to vent it self forth, it soon puts a Period and End to his
Life. This Disease has its Seat and Residence near the Heart, and is known by
a Swelling in the middle of his Breast against the Heart, from whence it
derives its Name 234 Attaint upper, is a Swelling of the Master, or Back-S^new
of the Forelegs, near the Pastorn-Joynt, and comes ordinarily by an
Overreach 235 Attaint Nether is the same with the other, coming sometimes by a
Wrench, and sometimes by a strain; All the difference of them is, whereas the
other is upon the Foot-lock Joints, this is under it, and is usually upon the
Heel or Frush, and is not always visible to the Eye; but it may be felt by the
heat and burning of it, and by its softness, which will arise by a Swelling
like a Bladder or Blister, wherein will be corrupt and vicious matter like to
Jelly, which will make him complain very much ib. Anbury is a kind of Wen^ or
spungy Wart, growing upon any part of a horses Body 279 Apoplexy, vide Palsy
Ach or Numbness in the Joints comes by Cold, taken by hard and violent
exercise or labor 232 Avives, Vives or Five^; see Vives
B.
Bloody Flux, vide Flux bloody 310 Back-swayed, vide Swaying in the back*
Barbes are a common Disease, and few horses are without them, they are known by
two Paps under his Tongue, which seldom prove hurtful to him, till they be
inflamed with corrupt blood, proceeding from vicious humors, which will make
them raw, and grow beyond their usual length, and cause them to become very
painful to him, which will hinder his feeding. You must clip them away with the
Scissers. 301 Blood-spaven, is a soft Swelling which grows through the Hough,
and is commonly full of blood, and is biggest upon the inside, and being fed by
the Master-Vein, makes it greater then the swelling on the outside; It runs
down the inside of the Hough down the Leg to the Pastorn; This Disease is
occasioned from the corruption of the Blood, taken by hard Riding when the
Horse is young and tender, which by overmuch heating, makes it so thin and
flexible, that the humor falling downwards resideth in the Hough, which makes
the Joints stiff, and causes him to go with great pain and difficulty. This
Disease not growing hard makes it more easy to Cure then the Bone-spaven 260
Bone-spaven is a great Crust as hard as a bone, if it be let run too long, it
sticks, or rather grows on the inside of the Hough, under the Joint, near
to the great Vein, which makes him to Halt very much, it comes at first like
a tender Gristle, which by degrees comes to this hardness; It is bred several
Ways, either by immoderate Riding or hard labor, which dissolves the Blood
into thin humors, and falls down, and makes its residence in the Hough,
which causes the place to swell, and so becomes a hard Bone, which occasions
this name of Bone-spaven, it comes also hereditary from the Sire or Dam, which
are troubled with the same d^sease. 261 Blood-running Itch comes by the
Inflammation of the Blood, being over-heat by hard Riding, or other sore
labor; It gets between the skin and the flesh, and makes a Horse to rub,
scrub and bite himself, which if let alone too long, will come to a grievous
Mange, and is very infectious to any Horse that shall be nigh him; What cures
the Mange cures this disease. 369 Bots and Worms in general are of three
sorts, viz. Bots, Trunchions and Maw-wormes: Bots are usually found in the
great Gut near the Fundament, Trunchions are found in the Maw, and if they
continue there too long, they will eat their Passage through, which will
certainly bring death, if not killed. The third sort are called plain Worms,
which remain in a Horses Body, which are of an evil effect also. Bots are a
small worm with great heads and small tails, breeding in the great Gut
adjoining to the Fundament, which may be taken away by your hands, by picking
them away from the Gut where they stick. Trunchions are short and thick, and
have black and hard heads, and must be removed by Medicine. Maw-wormes are of a
reddish color, somewhat long and slender, much like unto Earth-wormes, about
the length of a Man's Finger, which also must be taken away by Medicine. They
proceed all from one cause, which is raw, gross and phlegmatic matter
engendered from foul feeding, which causes all these three sorts of evil
creatures to breed. The Signs to know when he is troubled with them is, He
will stamp with his feet, kick at his Belly, turn his Head toward his tail,
forsake his meat; He will groan, tumble, wallow, and also frisk his tail to and
fro 303 Bunches, Knots, Warts and Wens, come sometime by eating of foul meat, by
bruises, by hard riding and sore labor, whereby the blood becomes so putrified
and foul, that it turns into evil humors, which occasions these kind of
sorrances. 278 Blood-shotten Eyes, or all diseases of the Eyes come of two
causes, viz. either inward or outward; The inward Causes proceed from evil
Humors that resort and flow to the Eyes, or by some stroke or blow that is
given him thereon. 290 to 291 Bleeding at Nose comes commonly among young
horses, proceeding from great store of blood, or by means that the Vein ending
in that place, is either opened, broken or fretted; It is opened many times by
reason that the Blood abounds too much, or that it is too fine or too subtle,
and so pierces through the Veins; Or it may be broken by some violent strain,
cut or blow, Or it may be fretted or gnawn asunder, by sharpness of the blood,
or by some other evil humors contained therein. 306 Botch in the Groyn comes
by reason that a horse being full of humors, and suddenly labored, causes
them to resort to the weakest parts, and there gather together and breed a
Botch, and especially in the hinder parts of the Thighs, not far from the Cods;
The Signs be these, His hinder Legs will be all swollen, especially from the
Gambrels or Hoofs upwards; and if you feel with your hand, you may find a great
Knob or Swelling, and if it be round and hard it will gather to a head. 388
Blisters are certain hollow risings between the skin and the flesh, proceeding
either from some Burn, Scald or Chasing, and are very full of thin water. 389
Burstness, vide Rupture
C.
A Canker is a very filthy and lothsom Sorrance, which if it continue long
uncured, it will fester and putrify the place so where it is, that it will eat
to the very bone, and if it happens to come upon the Tongue it will eat it
asunder; if it lights upon the Nose, it will eat the Gristle through, and if
it comes upon any part of the flesh, it fretteth and gnaweth it in great
breadth; you may easily know this Sorrance, for where it is the places will be
raw, and bleed often, and many times a white Scurf will grow upon that place
infected with it. It proceeds many ways, either by Melancholy and filthy
Blood engendered in the Body, by unwholesom Meat, or by some sharp and salt
humors coming by Cold not long before taken, which will make his Breath to
stink very much. 302 and 318 Clifts and Cracks in the Heel, comes several
ways, either by over-hard riding or labor, which occasions Surfeits; or by
giving him unwholesom Meat, or by washing him when he is hot, which corrupts
his Blood, and causes the Peccant humors to fall down and settle where the
Sorrances are, which makes his Heels very raw, and run very offensively with
stinking Water and Matter, which prove very troublesome to the poor Creature*
266 Cods and Stones Swelled, comes several Ways* Either by some Wound, or by
the sting of some Venomous Creature, or by Fighting of one Horse with another,
or by means of some evil Humors, which corrupt the Mass of Blood, which fall
down to the Cods sometimes after Sickness, or Surfeiting with Cold, and then it
is a Sign of Amendment, and sometimes from having too much plenty of Seed. 386
and 387 Cord is a straight Sinew in the Forelegs, which comes from the
Shackle-Vein to the Gristle in the Nose, between the Lip, the length of a Bean.
Or there b^ two strings like threads that lie above the Knee and the Body, and
runs like a small Cord through the Body to the Nostrils, which causes a
Horse to stumble, and sometimes to fall, and is a defect, which is very common
amongst young Horses. You may know this Infirmity by his stiff going, and
stumbling without any visible Sorrance. 341 Cholick is commonly occasioned by
Wind, which makes it bear this Name of Wind Cholick; It causes very violent
pain, by Griping of the Belly of a Horse, which will make him strike at it, and
sometimes to lie down and tumble, and stamp with his Feet, and be so painful as
to make him forsake his Meat. 362 Colt-Evil, is a Disease that is subject both
to a Horse or Gelding. It comes to a Horse with an unnatural Swelling of the
Yard and Cods, proceeding of Wind, filling the Arteries and hollow Sinew, or
Pipe of the Yard* or else through the abundance of Seed; And to a Gelding for
lack of Natural Heat to expel their seed any further. 330 Cold or Poze in a
horses Head, is gotten by means and ways unknown, according to the Temper and
Constitution of a Horses Body, and the best Keeper, that it cannot warrant his
Horse from this Infirmity. You must know, that if the Horse be subject to bad
Humors, you must endeavor to expel them, by Purging of his Head. Now according
as the Cold which a Horse has taken, is new or old; great or small, according
as the Humors do abound in his Head, and as those Humors be thick or thin, so
is the Disease more or less dangerous: If he has but a new taken Cold, he will
have small Kernels like Wax Kernels under his Chaul about the Root of his
Tongue* but if he has great, then you may imagine his Cold of a longer date.
His Cold may be new also, if you find him Rattle in his Head, or avoid thin
Matter out of his Nose or Eyes, or if he hold down his Head in the Manger, or
when he drinks, his Water comes up again out of his Nostrils, or if he
cheweth between his Teeth Matterative stuff, but if he casts foul stinking
Matter out of his Nose, and Coughs grievously; Then it is a sign he may have
the Glanders or Consumption of the Lungs 242 to 250 Consumptions are of two
sorts; One is called, A dry Malady, the other A Consumption of the Flesh. The
first comes by violent Heats and Colds, with fretting and gnawing Humors,
descending out of the Head, which fall upon the Lungs, which causes at first
thin Matter to Run from the Nose; but after some certain time it grows thick,
tough and vicious, which cease and causes a Maceration and Leanness of the
whole Body, whereby he droopeth and pineth away, and though he does eat and
drink, yet he does not digest it kindly, to do him good The Signs to know this
Malady is, His Flesh will soon consume away, his Belly is gaunt, and the Skin
thereof so hard stretched, or rather shrunk up that if you strike it with your
Hand it will sound like a Tabor, neither will his Hair shed in due season, as
other Horses do, he will Cough, and that but Huskingly, as if he had swallowed
some small Bones; And is a Disease hard to be Cured. The other Consumption is
that of she Flesh which also is occasioned by a Cold, which for want of a Cure
in time, causes this Maceration and Leanness throughout the whole Body, and
comes several Ways, either by violent Heats, or immoderate Labor, or Riding
him into the Water before he be thoroughly Cold, and setting him up negligently
afterward. 333 and 334 Cramp or Convulsions are all of one Malady, they are
forcible Contractions of the Sinews, Veins and Muscles, in any Member or part
of the Body, which proceeds several Ways, Either from some Wound or Sinew cut
asunder, or for want of Blood, or by over-heats and sudden cooling afterward;
Or lastly, by overmuch Purging him; The Signs to know this Malady is, That
the Infected will be so stiff, that the whole strength of a Man is not able to
bow it, he will be Lame and well as it were in a moment. There is also another
kind of them, which seizes upon a Horses Neck, and Reins of his Back, and so
almost universally over his whole Body, which proceeds several Ways, Either
from some great Cold, which may be catched several Ways, or by loss of Blood,
whereby a great Windiness enters into the Veins, and so benumbeth the Sinews.
This is also known by his Neck and Head standing awry, his Ears upright, and
his Eyes hollow, his Mouth dry and clung, and his Back will Rise like a Camel,
which must be Cured by giving him something to make him Sweat, and by Loading
him with warm Woollen Clothes. 239, 240 Costiveness, is when a Horse is so
bound in his Belly, that he cannot dung but with great pain and trouble, It is
a Disease very dangerous and perilous to him, and is the Origin of several
Maladies; you may know it by several Symptoms, sometimes it proceeds from
Glut of Provender, or overmuch feeding, sometimes by eating too dry and hard
meats, which sucketh and dries up the moisture of a Horses Body, viz. Beans,
Pease, Wheat or Tares, etc. Not but that they are very wholesome food, and the
heartiest Meat a Horse can eat; but feeding too much upon them over-heats his
Body, more then any other Grain whatsoever, which shuts up a Horses Office of
Nature, so that it makes him he cannot dung: And besides, they are very windy
food, which causes many bad humors and obstructions in the Body; sometimes
Costiveness comes also by much Fasting, in the Dieting of them for Races or
Hunting, which does suck up (like a Sponge) the phlegmatic moisture of the
Body. 378 and 381 Crown-^^^b is a filthy, stinking and cankerous disease,
breeding round about the Feet, upon the Coronets or top of the Hoof, next the
Hair, which causes much pain unto him; It comes to him, by reason he has
been bred in some cold wet Soil, striking corrupt Humors up to his Feet, and
is more troubled with these in the Summer then the Winter. The Signs to know
it are these; The Hair about the Coronets will be thin and staring like
Bristles, and run with Matterative Water. 372 Camery or Frounce, are small
Warts or Pimples in the most of the Palate of a Horses Mouth, which are very
soft and sore, and are bred also sometimes in his Lips and Tongue; It is
occasioned many ways, sometimes by eating of wet Hay whereon Rats or other
Vermin has pissed upon, sometimes by drawing frozen dust amongst the Grass into
his Mouth, and sometimes by licking up of Venom; The Signs show themselves,
which are the Pimples or Whelks, and soreness of them, with the unsavoriness of
his food that he has eaten before* and his falling from his Meat. 301 C^rb is
a long Swelling beneath the elbow of the Hough in the great Sinew behind, above
the top of the Horn, which makes him halt and go lame when he has been
heated; It comes to him several Ways, either hereditary, or by some bruise or
strain, or by heavy loading him when he was too young. 263 Casting out of his
Mouth and Nostrils his drink, proceeds from a cold Stomach, or by some Cold
taken in his Head, where the Rheum binds upon the Roots and Kernels of the
Tongue, which has as it were strangled and made strait the Passages of the
Stomach. 383 Canker in the Eyes, comes of a rank and corrupt Blood, descending
from the Head into them, where it breeds a little Worm like the Head of a
Pismire, which grows in the corner next his Nose, which will eat in time, if
let alone, through the Gristle of his Nose, and so pass into his Head, and kill
him. You may know it by the great and small Pimples within and without the
Eyelids, and the Eye it self will be full of corrupt matter. What cures it in
the Mouth cures this. 302, 318 Chops, Clefts or Rifts, in the Palate of a
Horses Mouth, proceeds either from course and rough Hay full of Thistles, and
other pricking stuff, or by ^oul Provender full of sharp seeds, which by
frequent pricking the Bats of his Mouth, does cause them to wrankle and breed
corrupt blood, which may turn to the Canker. What Cures the Canker in the
Mouth, if it comes to this disease, cures this; but to prevent the Canker wash
his Mouth with Vinegar and Salt, and anoint it with Honey. 418 Canker in the
Mouth, is a rawness of the Mouth and Tongue which is full of Blisters, and
cannot eat his meat; It proceeds from crude and undigested meat, rankness of
blood, or unnatural heat coming from the Stomach. 302 and 418 Crick in the Neck
is a kind of Convulsion, which I shall speak but briefly hereof, because I have
handled it fully before in all the Kinds thereof. It is when the Horse cannot
turn his Neck any manner of ways, but hold it right forth, insomuch that he
cannot take his Meat from the ground, but with great trouble and pain. 384
Crest-fallen is, when that part which a Horses Man^ grows on, which is the
upper part thereof, and called the Crest, leans either to one side or other,
not standing upright as it ought to do. It comes for the most part from
Poverty, occasioned by ill keeping, and especially when a sat horse falls
away suddenly upon any inward sickness. 385
D.
Dropsey is a disease which causes a universal Swelling of the Body through
the great quantity of Water that lies between the Skin and the Flesh,
occasioned by Melancholy Blood, Water and Wind which will make his Belly and
Legs to Swell, but his Back, Buttocks and Flanks will be dried and shrunk up to
the very Bones, and if you thrust your Finger hard upon the place swollen, you
shall leave the print thereof behind, for the Flesh wanting natural heat, will
not return again to its place. Other Signs there be to know this disease, viz.
he will be evil colored, heavy, dull, and of no Face, Strength nor Spirit, and
therefore proceeds principally for want of good Nourishment and Digestion,
which passes into Melancholy. It proceeds also either from the Spleen or the
Liver, or both, the Blood being putrified and turned into a thin Water, and
sometimes for want of good Exercise, or overmuch rest. He will be also short
Breathed, lose his Stomach, and be very dry, and though you bring him to the
Water he will drink little, but only pudder long with his Nose in it. In a
word, he will be as if he had a general Consumption over his whole Body, and
his Hair will peal off with the least rubbing. 363 Dimness of Sight or
Blindness, is occasioned several ways. Either by some strain, violent Riding,
hard Labor, and overcharging him with a Burden beyond his Strength, whereby
the Strings of his Eyes are stretched beyond their due Compass hereditary.
Lastly, by some blow or wound. The Sign is, want of Sight, or the ill effected
color of the Eye, 288
E.
A Boney Excretion, is occasioned most an end by Causticks, or burning
Corrasives, which are put to Wounds that lie close to the Bone; as when the
Wound is in the Leg, or about the Pasterns, for the Flesh being very much
burned by them, cause then Excretion to grow upon the Bone, which by the little
Experience of the Farrier the wound is healed, but this Excretion does remain;
and sometimes it comes by a Shackle, or the Galling of a Lock or Fetters, that
has bin long continued upon the Foot. What Cures the Bone-spaven cures this.
262 and 379 Enterfering comes several Ways, Either hereditary from the
Parents, or by some stiffness in his Pace, or by evil and too broad Shooing,
which makes him to go so narrow behind with his hinden Feet, that he fretteth
one Foot against another, so that there grows hard mattery scabs, which are
so sore that they make him to go Lame. The Signs are his ill going, and the
visible Sign of the Scabs. 284 Eyes blood-shotten. See Blood-shotten Eyes. 288
to 293 Eyes Lunatic. See Lunatic Eyes. 293
F.
Feltick is no other then a Galled Back. Fraying is stiffness taken in his Legs
and Feet. 287 to 288 Farcin or Fashions is a creeping Ulcer, and is the most
lothsom, stinking and filthy disease that can come to a Horse. It proceeds
first of corrupt Blood engendered in the Body by over-heats and colds, which
begins first with hard Knots and Pustles, which at last by spreading and
dilating it self, will overrun the whole Body of a Horse, but it commonly
begins in a Vein, or near to some Master-Vein, which feeds and nourishes
the Disease; It com^th sometimes also by Spur-Galling with rusty Spurs,
Snaffle, Bit, or the like; As also by the Bit^ng of some other Horse infected
with the said Disease; Or if it be in the Leg, it may come by Enterfering one
Leg with another, and by many other ways, 323 and 324 Water Farcin comes to a
Horse by his feeding upon low Watery Grounds, and in Pits or Holes where the
Grass grows above Water, which in picking out the Grass he licks up the Water
with is* which will cause*Horses sometimes to swell under the Belly and Chaps*
which when you come to prick it with a hot Iron (bent back again about the
length of a Fleam) there will Issue from it abundance of yellow, gray and oily
Water. 328 Flanks, is a Wrench, Crick, Stroke, or other Grief gotten in his
Back, which word we are beholding to the French sor. Now there is another sort
of Flanks, which is quite different from the other, which is a kind of
Pleurisy, which is when he is over run with too much Blood, which endangereth
a Mange, or else falls dangerously sick thereby, who by reason that he has
been often blooded before, his Body now requires it, whereof he missing,
falls into a lothsom and dangerous Malady. 300 Falling of the Fundament
comes several Ways, either by Weakness, being poorly Fed, or by some Cold,
which occasions a Scouring and Flux of Blood. 311 A Fever, according to the
Learned Physicians, is an unnatural and immoderate heat, which proce^deth first
from the Heart, and so spreads it self through all the Arteries and Veins of
the Body, stopping all the natural Motions thereof, and there be several sorts
of them, viz. Quotidian, Tertian, Quartan and Pestilent, and are all of one
Nature, though some be more Malignant then others are; Only a Hectic Fever is
of a Nature far different from the former, and so likewise a Pestilent Fever.
Vegetius speaks of Summer, Autumn and Winter- Fevers, without making any
great difference between them, more then that one is worse then another, by
reason of the time and season of the year he has it in; I shall show you first
the Causes from whence they proceed, and then give you the Signs how you may
know it. It comes by hard Labor or Exercise, as of too much Traveling, and
especially in hot Weather, and sometimes by extreme heat of the Sun, and also
by extreme Cold of the Air, and sometimes it is bred of crudit or raw
Digestion, which happens by too greedy eating of such Corn as was not thoroughly
or^ed nor cleansed. Now the Signs to know a Fever are these, The Horse does
continually hold down his Head, and is not able to lift it up, his Eyes are so
Swelled, that he cannot easily open them for Matterative stuff, and will fall
away and consume in his Flesh, his Lips and all his Body is Lush and Feeble,
his Stones hang down, he will covet much to lie down, and often to rise again;
If his Ague come with a cold Fit, he will shake and quiver, and when the Cold
Fit is over, he will burn, and his Breath will be hot and will fail, and his
Flanks beat, he will Reel as he goes, he will Covet much to drink, and
evermore keep his Mouth in the Water, although he will drink but little. These
are the certain Signs of a Fever as I know of. 321 Fistula is a deep, hollow,
crooked Ulcer, for the most part springs from Malignant Humors engendered in
some Wound, Sore or Canker not well Cured, sometimes it comes by a Bruise
which has Festered inwardly, which either burst forth of it self, or was
opened by the Farrier, sometimes it comes by a co-Wrench or pinch of a Collar
in drawing, or by being wrung with the Tree of a Saddle. The Signs to know it,
is the hollowness of it descending downwards from the Orifice, which is much
straiter at the Mouth then the bottom, and sends forth thin Matter from the
same. 319 and 370 Foundering in the Feet, comes evermore by hard riding, or
sore labor, by great heats and colds, whichdistemper the body, and stirs up
peccant and malignant humors, that inflames the Blood, melts the Grease, and
causes it to descend downwards into his Feet, and there setleth, which causes
such a numbness and pricking in his Hoofs, that he has no sense nor feeling of
them, for he is hardly able to stand, which if he do, it is but after a feeble
manner, for you may soon push him down with your hand; besides, he will stand
shaking and quaking, as if he had a Fit of an Ague. This disease comes several
ways, sometimes by watering him when he is very Fat, and his Grease molten
within him, and then suddenly cooled, by setting him upon cold Planks without
Litter, or taking his Saddle off too soon, or else by letting him stand when he
is hot in some shallow water up to the Feet-locks; by which means, through the
extraordinary coldness of it, causes the Molten-Grease to descend into his
Feet, and there to cake and congeal, which is the true reason of this Malady. A
Horse also may be Foundred by wearing strait Shoos in the heat of Summer, and
Traveling upon hard Ground. To know when a horse is foundred upon his
sore-feet, and not on his hinder-feet. You may know it by this, He will tread
only upon his hinder-feet, and as little as he can on his fore-Feet, and go
crouching and crimpling with his buttocks. Sometimes he will be Foundred on his
hinder feet, and not on his fore-feet, (but this is very seldom) which you may
know by his seeming very weak behind, and will rest himself as much upon his
fore-feet as he can, being very fearful to set his hinder-feet to the Ground.
271 Foundering in the Body, comes by eating too much Provender suddenly when
he is too hot, and panting, whereby his meat not being well digested, breeds
evil humors, which by little and little do spread through all his members, and
at length does so oppress all his Body, that it takes away his strength, and
make him in such evil condition, that he can neither go nor bow his Joints, and
being once laid, is not able to rise again, neither can he stale nor dung but
with great pain. Itcometh also if he drink too much upon Traveling when he is
hot, and not riding him after it. The Signs to know it, He will be Chill and
quake for Cold after drinking, and some of it will come out of his Nose, and
some few days after his Legs will Swell, and after a while begin to Pill and
have a dry Cough, which will make his Eyes to Water, his Nose to run with a
white Phlegmatic stuff, and cause him to forsake his Meat, and make him hang
down his Head for extreme pain in the Manger. Foundering is a French word, and
signifies no more then a Surfeit given in the Body of a Horse. 272 and 399
Chest-Foundered is discovered by this infirmity; He will often covet to lie
down, and stand stradling with his Forelegs. 275 Fa se Quarter is a Rift,
Crack or Chink on the outside, but most commonly on the inside of the Hoof,
which is an unsound Quarter, seeming like a Piece put therein, and not all of
one entire Piece; It comes several ways, sometimes by ill Shooing and Par^ng,
sometimes by Gravelling, or a prick with a Nail or Stub, which will make him
halt, and waterish Blood will issue out of the Chink or Rift. 335 Flux comes
several ways, vide Lask or Looseness. Bloody Flux or Flix are of several kinds,
sometimes the fat of the slimy filth that is avoided, is sprinkled with a
little Blood, sometimes the Excrements is like waterish blood, and sometimes
like pure Blood, and all these do spring from one and the same cause, which is
the Ulceration of the Guts. Now you may know by their several mixtures, whether
the Ulceration be in the inner small Gut, or in the outward great Gut, if it be
in the inner Guts, then the Matter and Blood will be mixed together, but if it
be in the outward Gut, then they be not mingled together, but come out
severally, the Blood most commonly following the Matter. It comes commonly of
some sharp Humor, breeding by filthy raw Food, or sore Travel, or Labor,
being violently driven through many crooked and narrow Passages, do cleave to
his Guts, and with their heat and sharpness fret them, causing Ulceration and
grievous pains. It comes also by some great Cold, Heat or moistness, or by
means of receiving some violent Purgation, as Scamony, Stibium, or such like
violent Simples applied in too great a quantity, or it may come by weakness of
the Liver. 310 The Fig, this disease bears its name from a hard piece of Flesh
growing upon the Frush or Heel, which resembles the shape and fashion of a
Fig. It comes by reason of some hurt received in his Foot (being not thoroughly
Cured) or by some Stub or Nail, Bone, Thorn or Stone, and sometimes by an
overreach upon the Heel or Frush. 389 Falling-Evil is a disease that is seldom
seen, which is no other then the Falling Sickness, proceeding from ill Blood,
and cold and thick Phlegm gathered together in the forepart of the Head,
between the Panicle and the Brain, which being dispersed over the whole Brain,
does suddenly cause the Beast to fall, and bereave him of all sense for a time.
It is more subject to Italian, Spanish and French Horses then to English, Some
are of opinion, that at a certain course of the Moon, Horses and other Beasts
many times do fall and die for a time, as well as Men. This Disease is known by
these Signs, When they are fallen, their Bodies will quiver and quake, and
their Mouths will foam, and when you think they are dying, they will rise up
immediately and fall to their Meat. You may know whether they will fall often
or not* by putting your Fingers to the Gristle of their Nostrils, and if it
feel cold, he will have most, but if it be warm, he will seldom fall. 239, 397
Frenzy, vide Madness.
G.
Gigges, Bladders or Flappes in the Mouth of a Horse, are small Swellings or
Pustules, with black Heads on the inside of his Lips, under his great
Jaw-teeth, which will sometimes be as great as a Wall-Nut, and so painful
withal, that they will make him let fall his Meat out of his Mouth, or at least
keep it in his Mouth unchawed. They do proceed from foul Feeding, either of
Grass or Provender, you may feel them with your Finger. 418 Gangrene, is a
running and creeping Sore, that as far as it runs mortifies the Flesh, causing
it to rot, so that of necessity, that Member wherein a Gangreen is Radicated
must be cut off. 329 Grease Mol^tn, is when his Fat is melted by over-hard
Riding or Labor: You may know it by his Panting at the Breast and Girting
place, and heaving at the Flank, which will be visible to be seen the Night you
bring him in, and the next Morning, and besides, his Body will be very hot and
burning. ib. Glaunders is such a lothsom and filthy disease, and withal so
infectious, that it will infect those that stand nigh him. It comes first of
Heats and Colds, which begins with a thin Rheum, and ascends up to the
Head, and setleth near to the Brain, and so venteth it self at the Nose, which
in time grows thicker and thicker, till it comes of a yellowish Color, like
unto Butter, which is then very hard to cure, but if it comes to a viscious,
and of a tough and slimy substance, and the Color be Green, and stink much,
having run some Months with some reddish Specks in it; then the most
Experienced Farrier may fail in the Cure thereof, and the Horse die under his
Hands; for then it is most certain, if he has those last Symptoms, that his
Lungs are Ulcerated, and his Cure not to be performed without great difficulty.
Besides, these inward Signs to know this Disease, I shall give you one
outward, one which is, He will have some Kernels and Knots that may be felt
under his Chaul, and as they grow bigger and more inflamed, so does the
Glaunders more increase within the Body of the Horse. I would advise you before
you begin his Cure, to prepare his Body for four or five days together with
scalded Bran, and give it him instead of his Provender, for this will dry up
the moisture and bad humors in his Body, then let him Blood in the Neck* and
the next day Rake him, and give him the Glister in the First Part. 254 and 414
Graveling comes to a Horse in traveling, by means of little Gravel stones
getting betwixt the Hoof and the Shoo, which setleth at the Quick, and there
festereth and fretteth. 364
H.
Hoof-Brittle, or Brittle-hoof, comes either by Nature or Accident. It comes
Naturally by the Sire or Dam; Accidentally by a Surfeit that fell down into his
Feet, or else in that he had been formerly Foundred. 335 to 340 Hair falling or
shedding from his Mane or Tail comes by Heat taken, which has engendered a dry
Mange therein, which occasion^th their she^ding; sometimes it comes by a
Surfeit, causing Evil Hu mours to resort to those Parts, etc. 345 Headache is a
pain that comes either of some inward cause, as of some choleric humor, bred
in the Panicles of the Brain, or of some outward cause, as of extreme heat or
cold, or of some sudden blow or noisome favor. The Signs to know it are, The
Horse will hang down his Head and Ears, his Sight will be dim, his Eyes
swollen and waterish, and he will forsake his meat. See the First Part.
Hoof-cast, or cas^ing of the Hoof, is when the Coffin falls clean away from
the Foot, which comes by means of some Foundering, Prick or Stab, which
breaks on the top round about the Coronet, which in time causes it to fall
off. 336 Hoof-bound is a shrinking in of the Hoof, on the top thereof, and at
the heel, which makes the skin to stare above the hoof, and to grow over the
same; It comes to a horse several ways, either by keeping them too dry in the
Stable, by strait Shooing, or by some unnatural heat after Foundering. The
Signs to know it are, He will halt much, and his hoofs will be hot, and if you
knock them with a Hammer, they will sound hollow, like an empty Pottle, and if
they are not both Hoof-bound, you may know which is the grieved Foot, by the
smalnes of it. Some call this Sorrance a dry Foundering. 377 Hide-bound, is
when the skin sticks so fast to the Horses Back and Ribs, that you cannot
pull it from his Flesh with your hand. It comes to a horse several ways,
sometimes by Poverty, sometimes for want of good ordering, sometimes by
over-heating him by hard Riding, and carelessly letting him stand in the Wet
and Rain, and sometimes of corrupt and filthy Blood Siccicating the Flesh,
which wanting its natural course, causes this shrinking of the Skin together,
which makes him illy disposed, and to have a gaunt, shrivelled and shrunk up
Belly to his Flanks, making his Hair to stare, and his Legs to swell, with many
more Signs; but let these serve in stead of more. 258 Hip-shot is when the
Hip-bone is removed out of his right place; It comes to him many ways,
sometimes by a wrench or stroke of a horse, sometimes by slip, strain, sliding
or falling. The Signs to know it are, He will halt and go sideling in his
going, and the sore Hip will fall lower then the other, and the Flesh in
process of time, will consume away, and if you suffer him to run too long, it
will never be restored to its pristine Estate. 397 The Hurle-bone is about the
midst of the Buttock, and is very apt to go out of the Socket with a Slip or
Strain, the Cure of it you may find in p. 397 Hoof-swelled, comes sometimes to
young Horses, when you over-Ride, or hard laboring them in their youth, which
make them to swell in that place, by reason the blood falling down there,
setleth, which if it be not speedily removed, will beget a wet Spaven. 340 Haw
in the Eye, is a Gristle growing between the nether Eyelid and the Eye, and
will put it quite out, if it be not taken in time away. It comes to him by
gross, rough and phlegmatic humors, which falls from the Head, and knitteth
together, which in the end grows to this Infirmity. The Signs of it are, the
watering of the Eye, and unwilling opening of the nether Lid. 288 Hough-bouey,
is a round boney swelling like a Paris Ball, growing upon the very top or elbow
of the Hough, and comes ever of some stripe or bruise, or by bruising himself
in his Stall, by offering to strike at the Horse that stands next him,
strikes against the Bar that divides them. 389 Hoof-loosened, is a dissolution
or dividing of the Horn or Coffin of the Hoof from the flesh, at the setting on
of the Cronet. Now if the parting be round about the Cronet, it comes by means
of Foundering; If it be in part, then it comes by some prick of some
Channel-Nail, Quitter-bone, Retreat, Graveling or Cloying, or such like thing,
The Signs to know it are these, When Loosened by Foundering, it will break
first in the forepart of the Cronet right against the Toes, because the Humor
does always covet to descend toward the Toe; but if it proceeds from Pricking,
Graveling and such like Cankered thing, then the Hoof will loosen round about,
equally even at the first; but if it proceeds from a Quitter-bone, or hurt upon
the Cronet, then the Hoof will break right above the place that is grieved, and
very rarely seen to go any further. 336 Hungry-evil is a great desire to eat,
it comes from some great emptiness or lack of meat, when the Horse being even
at the Pinch, and almost Chap-fallen; It comes many times by Cold outwardly
taken, sometimes by Traveling in Frost and Snow, and in barren places, which
outward cold makes the stomach cold, whereby all the inward Powers are become
weakened. The signs to know it, are a change and alteration in his feeding,
having lost all temperance, and snatching and chopping at his meat, as if he
would devour the Manger. 383
Imposthumes are swellings which come several ways, either by gathering of
filthy corrupt humors in any part or member of the Body, making that to swell,
which grows at last to an Inflammation, and breaks out into foul, mattery and
running Sores, which proceed from corrupt food or bad blood, and at the first
very hard and sore; There are two sorts of them, hot and cold; you must first
ripen them before they can be healed; sometimes they are occasioned by some
blow upon the Ears, or bruise by a Hempen Halter, or of Cold taken in the
Head, which remaining in the Body, make their Passage through the Ears; It is
known by much burning, and his unwillingness to be handled about that place.
346 and 347
K.
Kibed heels is a scab breeding behind, somewhat above the nether Joint, growing
overthwart the Fet-lock. It comes many ways, sometimes by being bred in cold
Grounds, sometimes for lack of good dressing after he has been ridden or
labored in foul ways, which dirt sticking to his Legs, ^retteth his skin, and
makes scabby rifts, which are very painful to the Horse* causing his Legs to
swell, especially in Winter and Springtime, and then he goes very stiffly.
What Cures the Scratches cures this disease. 266 Kernels under the Chaul of a
Horse, comes by Heats and Colds, which brings the Glanders. I refer you
therefore to the Cure of the Glanders. 157
L.
Lask, Looseness or open Flux of a Horses body* bringing him to extreme weakness
and faintness; It comes sometimes from cold taken, sometimes by reason that
Nature is offended with too many choleric humors, descending from the Liver or
Gall down into the Guts, sometimes by drinking too much cold water presently
after he has had his Provender, for by that means the Water getting to the
Provender causes it to swell and breed Crudities, and ill humors in the
Stomach, and so conveyeth themselves down into the Guts, sometimes by sudden
Traveling or hasty Running upon a full Stomach, before his Meat be well
digested, sometimes by drinking cold Water when he is too hot, and not
presently warmed in his Belly, sometimes by licking up a Feather, or Hens dung,
with many other ways which will occasion it; stop it not too suddenly, for
Nature it self is the best Physician; but if you find he has had it so long,
that Nature is become weak and feeble, then you are to seek out for some Remedy
for the Cure of it. 307 Lampass is a Swelling that proceeds from abundance of
Blood, resorting to the first Furrow of the Mouth, joining to the fore-Teeth,
which will cause the said Furrow to swell as high as his Gathers, which will
hinder his Feeding, and make him let fall his Meat half chawed, out of his
Mouth again. This is a natural Infirmity which every Horse has first or last.
And every common Smith can Cure. 30 Ligs are little Pustles or Bladders within a
Horses Lips; There are many other Diseases that belongs to the Mouth, viz.
Bloody Rifts, Gigs, Camery, Inflammation, Tongue-hurt, Barbs, and are all Cured
by this one Receipt hereunder written, except the Lampass, which every
Countrey-Smith can cure, viz. Take Wormwood and Shirwit, and bruise them in a
Mortar, with a little Honey, and anoint the Sores with it, and they will do
well. Leprosy is a Cankered Manginess spreading over all the Body, which is
very infectious, comes of abundance of Melancholy, corrupt and filthy Blood,
infected by Surfeits taken by over-hard Riding or Labor. The Signs to know
this Disease are, The Horse will be all Mangy and Scurfey, full of Scabs and
raw places about his Neck, and not very pleasant to look on, and be always
rubing and scrubing. 369 Lice comes of Poverty, and will breed most about the
Ears, Neck and Tail, and over all the Body; they may be catched also by
running abroad in the Winter in Woods, or places full of Trees, for the
dropping of the Trees falling upon his lean and thin Body breed them, sometimes
he may catch them from another Horse; You may know when he has them by this,
He will rub and scrub himself against Walls and Posts, and will be always poor
when he has them. 369 Low-worm is a disease hardly known from St. Anthonies
Fire, or the Shin^les, having the very self-same Symptoms. It Is a Worm that
is bred in the Back of a Horse between the Skin and the Bone, and runeth along
the Neck to the Brain, and when it comes to touch the Panicle thereof, it
makes him stark mad; It Is known by these Signs, viz. After a long and
wearisom Journey, he will be Sick, and fall from his Meat, and stretch out
himself at length with his Feet, bonding his Back, and straining to Piss, but
cannot, but if he does Stale, it is but little, and that in his Sheath, which
in time will make him so Mad, that he will gnaw the Manger, Rack-staves, or any
thing within his reach. Some Farriers take this disease for the Staggere, and
so kills many a good Horse. The Cure hereof being not put down in the diseases
I have here inserted it. Take Six Heads of Garlic clean pilled, of Acrement a
quarter of a pound, Rue, and that Turmentile that bears the yellow Flower, of
each one pound, bruise them in a Mortar together, and put so much White Wind to
them, that after they be strained, there may be of the Juice and Wine two
quarts; Then after you have Blooded him in the Tail pretty well, divide this
Pottle of Liquor into six parts giving him one part every Morning, till he has
taken all of them; And this will perfectly Cure him, vide St. Anthonies Fire.
p. ^33 Lungs, the diseases of them comes from Heats and Colds, by hard Riding,
which Iet run too long without Cure, causes them to putrify, corrupt and rot.
You may know this Infirmity by the beating of his Flanks* and working of his
Ribs* but most chiefly when he Cough^th, and then the more slowly they do beat
and heave, the more old and dangerous is the disease. He will draw his. Wind
short, and but little at once, and groan often, especially when he lies down
and rises up again, out of his Nose will issue forth Corruption, and will seem
to shewsomthing between his Teeth. 333 and 334 Lethargy or Sleeping Evil, is
most subject to Dun and white Horses. It proceeds from Phlegm, cold and moist
Humors which gets into the Brain, does so stupifie and benumb it, which
brings this sleepiness upon him, and is the true Sign of this disease. 354
Lunatic Eyes look sometimes as if they were covered with White, and sometimes
they will look clear, and alter their color, according to the Moons, from
which they take their Name, vide Moon-Eyes* 288
M.
Mattering of the Yard, vide Yard Matter^d 331 Melancholy is called the
Staggers, but the true Name thereof is the Stavers, vide the Saggers. 335
Mo^foundred comes from the French, which signifies Molten Grease, or
Foundering in the Body. 364 and 399 Moon-Eyes bear that Name, by reason that at
certain times of the Moon they will seem very well, and atother times they seem
covered over with a white Phlegm, which is the worst sort of Blindness that is,
and is not to be Cured, for the more you tamper with it, the worse it is;
therefore my advice is, that you let them alone, for they will go in and out
till they go quite out* It may be called a Lunatick-Eye, which comes several
ways, sometimes from the Sire or Dam, sometimes from evil humors residing in
the Head, which descend down to the Eyes, and they come also by hard riding, or
laboring, which the poor Beast was put to perform more then he was able. 288
Mallender is a kind of a dry and hard scab, which has chinks and chops in it,
and hard, stubborn and long staring hairs, like to Hogs bristles, growing about
it, upon the inward part of the Forelegs, just against the bending of the
Knee. It is an evil Sorrance which Cankereth and Corrupts the Flesh, and
makes him go Lame at first going out; It comes to him several ways, sometimes
by corrupt Blood, by hard Labor, or Riding, sometimes for lack of clean
keeping and rubbing; and usually those horses that has most hair upon their
Legs, as the Flanders and Freezla^d Horses has, are most subject to this
disease. 275 Mange is a most infectious and filthy disease, which will make him
rub and scrub against every thing he can lean against, and if you remove not
his Fellow Creatures that are in company with him, at home or abroad, they are
subject to catch it from him. The Signs to know it are, His Hair will stare,
and in many places pill away from his Skin, and a Scurf will arise thereon; it
comes sometimes also by over-heats and colds, by hard Riding or Labor, whereby
the Blood is corrupted, or by feeding upon unwholesom Meat. 369 Mourning of the
Chine, in plain English is no other then the Glaunders, which has its first
Source and Origin from heats and colds by hard Riding or Labor, which being
let run too long, comes to this filthy disease, the Glaunders; which in time
does waste the Liver, and putrify the Lungs, which will in Conclusion kill the
poor Creature, if not taken in time. 254 Those that have opened a Horse that
has died of this disease, have found the Pith and Chine sound and good, and
therefore this Malady in reason cannot be called the Mourning of the Chine, but
the Glaunders. Madness or Frenzy is divided into four Passions. The first is,
when some bad Humors or Blood gets into the Panicle of the Brain, but in one
part only, it quickly makes him dull of Spirit and Sight; which you will know
by this Sign, He will turn round like one that is Giddy; the reason is, because
the outward part of the Head is grieved only. The second is, when the Venom of
such bad Blood does infect the middle of the Brain, then he becomes Frantic,
leaping against Walls or any thing else that stands in his way. The third is,
when corrupt and bad Blood fills the Veins of the Stomach, and infecteth as
much the Heart as Brain, then he is said to be mad. The fourth and last is,
When the Blood infecteth not only the Brain and Heart, but even the Panicles
also, and then he is said to be stark mad, which you may know by biting at
every man that comes near him, and by gnawing the Manger and Walls about him,
and at last he will be so very mad that he will tear his own skin in pieces.
354 Malt-long or Malt-Worm is a cankerous sorrance about the hoof just upon the
Cronet, which will break out into Knobs and Branches, which will run with
waterish sharp Lie, or Humor, which will Venom the whole Feet, Which are Signs
enough to know them. 340 Molten-Grease see Grease-Molten. Mules, vide
Scratches, for what cures them cures these. Mellet is a dry Scab that grows
upon the Heel of the fore-Feet. 388
N
Navel-gall is a bruise on the back, or Pinch of a Saddle behind, which if let
alone too long, is difficult to Cure It Is called a Navel-gall, because the Hurt
is right against the Navel. 353 Nightmare is a Melancholy blood that does
oppress the heart, making himsweat more in the night then in the day, which
does take from him his rest; the way to know it is, by taking notice of him in
the Morning, whether he Sweats in the Flanks, Neck and short Ribs, which if he
do, you may be sure that he has it. 239
O,
Overreach is a painful Swelling of the master Sinew, which is by reason that
he does overreach and strike that Sinew with the Toe of his hinder Foot, which
makes him to halt and go lame. vide Attaint upper and nether. 235
P.
Pissing of blood comes several ways, sometimes by riding him too hard, by
laboring him beyond his strength, or by carrying too heavy a burden upon his
back; sometimes it comes by reason of some Vein broken in his Body, and then
clean blood will issue forth many times; sometimes it comes by some Stone
fretting upon the Kidneys, by hard Riding or Labor; And lastly, it comes by
Journeying him in Winter, being newly taken up from Grass, and traveling him
before he is thoroughly cleansed from his Grass, which cannot be well under a
week or two. Your Eyes are the Witnesses of this disease, for he will Piss
water like to Blood. 315 Powle-evil is a Fistula growing betwixt the Ears and
the Powle, or nape of the neck, which proceeds from evil humors that approach
unto that place, or else of some blow or bruise, for that is the weakest and
tenderest part of all the head, and therefore soonest off^nded, which rude
Carters do little consider of, whilst in their fury they beat them upon their
Head with their Whip-stocks; And therefore no Horses more subject to this
disease then they; This disease comethmost in the Winter. The Signs to know it
is by the Swelling of the place, which in process of time will break of it
self, rotting more inward then outward, therefore is more dangerous, if not
Cured in time. 317 Pursiveness or shortness of Breath comes two ways, Natural
and Accidental; Natural is when he is Cock-thropled, for that his Thropel or
Windpipe being so long, that he is not able to draw it in and out, with so
much ease and pleasure as other Horses do that are loose thropled, for that the
Windpipe being too strait that should convey his Breath to his Lungs, and vent
it forth again at his Nose, makes him pant and fetch his Breath thus short;
Likewise, when his Pipe is too much filled with fat or other Phlegmatic stuff,
which suffocates him, and makes his Lungs labor the more; It comes secondly
by Accident, when he is hard ridden after a full stomach, or presently after
drinking, which caus^th phlegmatic humors to distill out of the Head into the
Windpipe, and so fall upon the Lungs, where they rest and congeal, etc. It
comes also by Heats, Colds, Glaunders, and the like; And brings with it a
great many Inconveniences, viz. Dullness and Heaviness in Travel, subject to
sweat much, and ready to fall down upon every little strain. 252 Pricked is
called Accloyed, Cloyed or Retrait, etc. Most of which Names are borrowed of
the French, and signifies no more then a Prick, by the negligence or
unskilfulness of the Farrier, in driving of the Nails, by their weakness, ill
pointing or breaking of them; which if not presently taken out, will in time
break out into a foul sore; You may know it by his going lame; but if you
desire to know it more certainly, pinch him round his Hoof with a pair of
Pinchers, and when you come to the grieved place, he will shrink in his Foot;
Or you may try him where he is pricked by throwing water upon this Hoof, for
that place where he is pricked will be sooner dry then any of the rest. With
many other Signs there are which your Ingenuity may find out. 396
Planet-struck or Shrow-running, is a depriprivation of feeling or motion, not
stirring any of his Members, but remain in the same form as when he was first
stricken. It comes to a Horse several ways, sometimes by choler and phlegm
superabundantly mixed together, sometimes from Melancholy Blood, being a cold
and dry humor, which oppress and make sick the hinder part of the Brain,
sometimes of extraordinary heat or cold, or raw digestion, striking into the
Veins suddenly; Or lastly, from extreme Hunger, occasioned by long Fasting, The
Signs whereof you have had already, viz. Numbness and want of Motion. If this
Disease comes of Heat, You may know it by the hotness of his Breath, and the
free fetching of his Wind; If it proceed from Cold, then you may know it by his
stuffing and poze in his Head. 239 Palsy or Apoplexy is a Disease depriving
the whole Body of Sense, and which is called a General Palsy, and has no
Cure. But when he is deprived but of some part and Member of his Body, (and
most commonly it is in his Neck) then it is called a particular Palsy; The
Signs to know it are, He will go Grovelling and side-ways like a Crab, carrying
his Neck as if it were broken, and goes crookedly with his Legs, beating his
Head against the Walls, and yet forsakes not his Meat nor Drink, and his
Provender seems moist and wet. It proceeds from foul Feeding in Fenny
Grounds, which breed gross and tough Humors, which joyneth with Crudities and
raw Digestion, oppress the Brain, or it comes by means of some wound or blow
given him upon the Temples. 354 Pearl, Pin and Web, or any unnatural spot or
thick Felm over the Eye, comes by some stroke or blow given him, or from
descent of the Sire or Dam. The Pearl is known by a little round, thick white
spot like a Pearl, (from which it has its Name) growing on the Sight of the
Eye. 288 The Pains is a kind of Ulcerous Scab full of Fretting Matterish Water,
and breeds in the Pastorns betwixt the Fetlock and the Heel, which comes for
want of clean keeping, and good rubbing, after the Horse has been Journeyed,
by means whereof the Sand and dirt remaining in the Hair, fretteth the Skin and
Flesh, which comes to a Scab, and therefore those Horses that have long Hair,
and are rough about the Feet, as the Friezland and Flanders Horses are, are
soonest infected with this Disease, if they be not the cleanlier kept. The
Signs be these, His Legs will swell with the vehemence and heat that is caused
from the venom and filthy water that issues from the scabs, for it is so sharp
and scaulding* that it will scauld off the Hair, and breed scabs so far as it
goes. What Cures the Scratches cures these. 266 Pestilence, Plague, Murrain or
Garget is all one disease, which is very Infectious and Contagious; It comes
to a Horse many ways, sometimes by over-hard Riding or Labor, whereby a Horse
is surfeited, sometimes by the Contagiousness of the Air, and Evil Vapors and
Exhalations that springs out of the Earth, after great and sudden Floods, or
coming into Fenny or Marish Ground that has always been bred in pure and
wholesome Air. The Signs to know this Disease are these; 'Twill come suddenly
upon him, but after three or four days drooping, he will swell under the Roots
of his Ears, like the Swelling of the Vives, and under the Chaul, and come up
to his Cheeks through the Malignancy thereof, and become very hard, he will
forsake his Meat, and be very sleepy, hanging down his Head in the Manger, his
Eyes will be yellowish, he will Breath short, which will be very hot and
offensive, and sometimes he will break forth in a Carbuncle or Boil in his
Groine, as big as a Goose-Egg, and his Stones will hang Limp and Flaging, but
not always. If you cannot recover him, but that he dies, bury him very deep,
that no scent, if possible, may remain on him to infect the rest. 314
Q.
Quinsey is no other then a sore Throat, which if not carefully taken in time,
will soon put a period or end to his days. It comes sometimes by Cold and
Phlegmatic Humors settling there, or for want of Blooding, when he is overrun
therewith. 368 Quarters false, vide false Quarters. Quick-scab does putrify
and corrupt the Blood and Flesh, and at last breaks forth into a lothsom and
infectious Disease much like unto the Mange or Leprosic. It comes by a Surfeit
taken by over-Riding or hard Labor, it is called a Quick-scab, because it
runs from one Member to another, for sometimes it will be in the Neck, and
at other times in the Breast, sometimes in the Main, and then another time in
the Tail. 398 Quitter-bone is a hard Round Swelling upon the Cronet, between
the heel and the Quarter, and grows most commonly on the inside of the Foot.
It comes to a Horse many ways, sometimes by Gravel underneath the Shoo,
sometimes by some Bruise, Stub, Prick of a Nail, or the like, which being
neglected, will Impostumate and break out about the Hoof, it comes sometimes
also by evil humors which descend down to that place, whereof that Quitter-bone
springs. 355
R
Red-water is that which issues from any Wound, Sore or Ulcer, which so long
as that remains in them, it does so poison them, that till it get out, they are
not to be Cur^d. 357 Ri^g-bone comes two ways; Naturally, or Accidentally;
Naturally, from the Stallion or Mare, Accidentally by some blow of a Horse, or
any other Accident, the Pain whereof breeds a viscous slimy Humor, like a
Gristle upon the top of the Cronet, and sometimes goes round about it, which
resorting to the Bones that are of their own Nature, cold and dry, waxes hard,
and cleaves to some Bone, which in process of time comes to a Bone; the Signs
to know it are, There will be a hard swelling round about the Cronet of the
Hoof, which will be higher then any place of it; besides, his Hair there will
stare and be bristly* and make him halt. 356 R^t^enness is to have his inward
Part, viz. His Liver Lights and Lungs so wasted and consumed, that he is not to
be recovered by Ar^* Rheumatick or waterish Eyes, comes by the Flux of Humors,
distil^ing from the Brain, and sometimes by some stripe received; The Signs to
discover it is, The continual watering of the Eye, and his close shutting of
his Lids together, accompanied sometimes with a little swelling. 288 Rupture,
Incording or Burstness is, when the Rim or thin Film or Chaul, which holds up
his Entrails, be broken or over-strained, or stretched, that the Guts fall down
either into his Cod or Flank, which comes several ways, either by some stripe
or blow, or by some strain in leaping over a Hedge, ditch or Pale, or by
teaching him to bound when he is too young, or by forcing him when he is full
to run beyond his strength; or by your sudden stoping him upon uneven ground,
whereby he stradling and slipping his hinder Feet, teareth the Rim of his
Belly, The Signs to know it are these, He will forsake his Meat, and stand
shoring and leaning on that side that he is hurt; And if you search on that
side with your Hand, betwixt his Stone and his Thigh upwards to the Body, and
somewhat above the Stone; you shall find the Gut it self big and hard in the
feeling, whereas on the other side you shall find no such thing. 387 and 388
R^t-tails is a most venomous disease, and not much unlike to the Scratches of a
horse. It comes to him several ways, sometimes by too much rest, and the
Keepers negligence in not rubing and dressing him well; and by reason of too
much rest and good keeping without exercise, the blood corrupting in his body
falls down into his Legs, which causes this disease. 377 Retrat is no other
then a Prick in the Foot by a Nail, vide Pricked. 395 Rheum comes by Cold,
which makes his Teeth loose, and seem long by the shrinking up of his Gums,
which will spoil his feeding, that all the Meat will lie in Lumps in his Jaws,
vide Colds 241 Rot is a disease so like unto a Dropsey, that it is hard to
distinguish it from the same; mistake not this disease for rottenness; for if
he be rotten, his Liver and Lights are so putrified, that they are not to be
recovered: But this Rot is of the Nature of a Sheeps Rot that is said to be
rotten, when his Liver is become soul and tainted, yet we do eat his flesh, and
affirm it to be good meat, whereby the Sheep is not rotten, but has a Disease
called the Rot; It comes several ways, sometimes to young Horses feeding in
Wet or Fenny Grounds, and sometimes when they are overheated in their
breaking, whereby their Blood is enflamed, putrified and corrupted, causing
Obstructions in the Liver, which cause putrefaction, and so knots and pustils
do engender therein, which breeds this Disease. The Signs are these, he will
lose his Stomach, pant much, beat and heave in his Flanks, swell under his
Belly, his Hair will stare, his Legs swell, burn and dint when you press it
with your Finger, and his Coat will not shed at those usual times as other
Horses do, and will be so faint and feeble that he will lose his courage and
mettle. 398 Running of the Reins, vide Mattering of the Yard. 131
S.
Shedding of the Seed comes sometimes from abundance and rankness of the Seed,
sometimes by Strains, or putting too heavy a load upon his Back, and sometimes
by weakness of the Stones and Seed-Vessels, not being able to retain the Seed
until it be digested and thickened. 331 Strain or Sprain is the Sinews stretched
beyond their strength, by reason of some slip or wrench. 294 Shackle-gall is on
the Pastornes, vide Gall 284 Surbating is a beating of the Hoof against the
Ground; It comes sometimes by means of evil shooing, lying too flat to his
Feet, sometimes by Traveling a Horse too young before his Feet are hardened,
which many times does occasion a Foundring, sometimes by hardness of the
Ground, and high lifting up of the Horses Feet; and those Horses that are flat
footed, their Co^^ns are so tender and weak, that they be most subject to this
Sorrance. The signs to know it is, he will Halt on both his Forelegs, and go
stiffely and creeping although he were half Foundred. 373 Spleen, see the
Nature of it. 329 Screw is the Nature of a splint, only the splint is on the
inside of the Knee, and the screw is on the outside 263 Swellings and Tumors
comes by Heats and Colds, taken by hard Riding, or fore Labor, whereby the
Horse being overmuch heated, the Grease falls down and setleth in his Legs
and other parts, which grow dry and hard, and breeds splints, spavens, curbs,
Ring-bones and the like sorrances, which in time are no other things then
proper Tumors, Besides, it does occasion other Knots and swellings. See the
First Part for the Cure of them. Scratches are of several sorts and kinds,
though they are called by several Names, viz. Crepances, Rats-tails, Mules,
Kibes, Pains, etc. being no other then the very Scratches which are certain dry
Scabs, Chaps or Rifts, that breed between the Heel and the Pastorn-Joynt, and
so goes many times above the Pastorn, even up to the very Hoof of the hinder
Legs, but sometimes they are upon all four Legs, though not very common, They
proceed several ways, sometimes by dry melancholy Humors which fall down upon
his Legs, sometimes by fuming of his own dung lying under his heels, or near
him, sometimes by the Negligence of the Groom, in not rubbing his Heels well,
especially after a Journey or hard Labor, when he brings in his Horse from
Water, and does not rub his Legs and Heels dry from the Sand and Dirt which
does burn and fret them, and so cause Swellings, and those Swellings cause
Scratches: sometimes it comes by corruption of the blood after great heats and
surfeits, taken sometimes by being bred in Fenny, Marish and watery Grounds;
and sometimes they come to a Horse after a very great Sickness taken by
Surfeit; Or lastly, by over-hard Riding or Labor, whereby his Grease is
molten, which falls down and setleth in his Pastorns and Feet-locks, which
does occasion this Sorrance. The Signs to know it are these, The staring,
dividing and curling of the Hair; it begins first with a dry scab upon his
Pastorn Joints, like unto chaps or chinks, and are in several shapes and
forms, sometimes long, sometimes downright, sometimes overthwart, which will
cause the Legs to swell, and be very gourdy, and run with fretting, waterish,
matterative and offensive stuff, which will make him go so lame at the first
setting out, that he will be hardly able to go. It Is good to clip away his long
shaggy hain from his Pastorns, (if he have any) which will in some measure
prevent them, or or at least curb them. 266 Sit-fast or Stick-fast is a hard
Knob, which is as hard as a Horn that grows in a Horses Skin, under the Saddle,
fast to his Flesh, which comes by a Saddle-Gall or Bruise, which not
Imposthumating, the Skin falls dead, and looks like a hard piece of
Leather. 352 A Surfeit is occasioned by Heats and Colds; The Signs to know it
is, He will not thrive, but be gaunt Bellied, and dried up in his Body, and
cannot Cough but Gruntingly. His Coat will stand staring, and does not lie
smooth, sometimes his Cods will swell; And when it falls out of his Body into
his Legs, they will swell also and stink, by reason of the thin, moist, white,
yellow, thick and stinking Water or Matter that flows from them, which will
make them so stiff, that he is not able to go over the Threshold. 366 Not
Staling or Dunging comes several ways, sometimes by being too high kept, and
but little exercise given him; therefore exercise is as wholesome for a Horses
Health, as good Food is nourishing to his Body, sometimes it comes when you
suddenly travel him, when he has been newly taken from Grass, before his Body
is emptied of it, and dry meat put into the room thereof, The Signs to know
this Grief is, He will lie down and tumble with extreme pain, as if he had the
Bots. 357 Staling of Blood, vide Pissing of Blood. Selender is a kind of Scab,
and is the same with the Mallender, only the difference is, that the Mallender
breeds upon the bending of the Knee, on the inside of the Forelegs, and the
Selender is bred on the bending of the Hough in the Legs behind, proceeding
both of like causes, and requires like Cure. 275 Stinking Breath is occasioned
by means of corrupted and infected Lungs, and you may know it by the Smell,
vide Lungs infected. 333 A Splint in the beginning is a very Gristle, and will,
if let run too long, become to be as hard as a Bone, and will be greater or
smaller according to the cause of its Coming, sometimes as big as a Wall-Nut,
sometimes as big as a Hazel-Nut; It is found for the most part upon the inside
of the Shank between the Knee and the Footlock Joint, and is very hard and
difficult to Cure; It is so painful to Him, that it will not only cause him to
Halt, Trip, Stumble, but also fall in his Travel; It comes to him by means of
too hard Travel, or sore Labor, whilst he is very young, or by oppressing him
with too heavy a burden, whereby the tender Sinews of his Legs are offended; It
comes also Hereditary, from the Sire or Dam being troubled therewith, and is
known by the sight and feeling, for if you pinch it with your Thumb and Finger,
he will shrink up his Leg. 263 Stumbling comes two ways; First, Naturally;
Secondly, Accidentally; Naturally, by reason that the Sinews of the Forelegs
are somewhat straight, so that he is not able to use his Legs* with that
freedom and nimbleness he should; which to Cure him of this Disease, is to cut
him of the Cords, viz. A Slit made upon the top of his Nose, and with your
Cornet raise up the great Sinews, and cut them asunder, and heal it up again
with some good Salve, and this will do him no harm but good, for it will give
him the use of his Legs so perfectly, that he will seldom or never trip more.
Secondly, Accidentally, by either Splint or Windgalls, or by being foundred,
pricked, s^ub'd, graveled, Sinew-strained, hurt in the Shoulder or Withers, or
by carelessly setting him up when he is too hot, which makes him go very
stiff, which stiffness causes stumbling. 341 Stavers or Staggers, is a
Giddiness in the Head, which when it seizes the Brain, comes to Madness; It
is caused several ways; sometimes by corrupt blood, or gross and tough humors
oppressing the Brain, and is very common to most Horses, and very dangerous if
not taken in time; sometimes it comes by turning him out too soon to Grass
before he be cold, which by hanging down his Head to Seed, stirs and make
thin Humors that fall down to the head, and so by degrees seizes the Brain,
which brings this mortal Sickness; It comes also by sore riding and hard
labor; which inflames and putrifies the Blood, and disorders the whole Body;
The signs of this Disease are these, Dimness of sight* reeling and staggering
of the Horse, who for very pain will beat his Head against the Walls, and
thrust it into his Litter, forsake his Meat, and have waterish Eyes 235 Swelled
Legs comes to a Horse several ways* sometimes by hard Riding or sore Labor
when he is too fat, and carelessly putting him to Grass, or setting him up in
the Stable too hot, whereby he takes cold which causes the Blood, Grease and
Humors to fall down into his Legs, and so cause them to swell, sometimes it
comes by long standing in the stable, when the Planks where his fore-Feet
stand higher then his hinder-Feet does, which uneasy posture causes the Blood
to settle in the hinder Legs, which causes them to swell. 287 Stifled, this
Malady comes to a Horse Accidentally, viz. Either by some strain in Leaping,
or by a slip in the stable, or on his Travel, or by some stroke or blow with a
horse, which either puts out the bone, or much hurts or strains the Joint, The
sign to know it is, by the dislocated bone, bearing it self out which will make
him grow lame, and unwilling to touch the Ground, but only with his Toe, till
it be put in again. 393 Stone comes many ways, sometimes from the weakness of
the Bladder, occasion* by gross and bad Humors, stoping the Water-Conduit, or
principally by violent Labor, or immoderate Riding, sometimes it comes by
foul Matter descending from the Liver and Spleen, which falling down into the
Kidneys and Bladder, setleth there; whereby there grows in the Mouth of the
Conduit, certain hard inflamed Knobs, which stops his Urine, and causes him
to stale with great pain and trouble, by reason the Sinews and Pozes about the
Neck of the Bladder are benumbed, which takes away the sense and feeling of
the Bladder, sometimes it comes by keeping a Horse in his Travel too long from
staling, for his Water being over-heat by Exercise, does conglutinate and
become so viscous and thick; that Nature cannot discharge it self so freely as
it should do, and being pent up too long in his Kidneys, engendereth Gravel,
sometimes red, and sometimes gray, which falling down into the Conduits, by
mixture of Phlegm and gross Humors, is there brought by Conglutination, to
become a hard stone, which stops the Passage of the Urine, so as he will not
be able to piss or stale, The signs to know this Distemper, needs no more then
this, That he would fain piss, but cannot, and that many times drop by drop.
360 and 363 String-halt is a sudden twitching or snatching up of his hinder-Leg
much higher then the other, and comes most an end to the best Metled Horses.
It comes by taking cold suddenly after hard Riding or sore Labor, especially
if you wash him when he is too hot, which will chill his Blood, and so stupisie
and benumb his Sinews, that it takes away the sense and feeling of that Member.
341 and 394 Strangury or Strangullion is when a Horse is provoked to stale
often, and avoideth nothing but a few drops; It comes to him several ways,
sometimes by hard Riding or sore Labor, which heats and makes sharp the Urine,
sometimes by hot meats and drinks, sometimes by Ulceration of the Bladder, or by
means of some Imposthume in the Liver and Kidneys, which being broken, the
Matter falls down into the Bladder, and with the sharpness thereof, causes a
continual provocation of Pissing, which will be with such pain, that he will
whisk, wry, and beat about his Tail as he pisseth 360 The Strangle is not, as
some suppose, a Quinzey, but an Inflammation of the throat, proceeding from
some choleric or bloody Fluxion, which comes out of the branches of the
Throat-veins into those parts, and there breeds some hot Inflammation,
stirred up by a hard cold Winter, or by cold taken after hard riding or labor.
It Is a great and hard swelling between the Horses nether chaps, upon the roots
of his Tongue, and about his Throat, which swelling, if it be not prevented,
will stop his Windpipe, and so strangle or choke him: The Signs to know this
disease are, His Temples of his Head will be hollow, his Tongue will hang out
of his Mouth, his Head and Eyes will swell, and the passage of his Throat so
stopped that he can neither eat nor drink, and his Breath will be very hot. 349
Swayed in the Back comes several ways, sometimes by some great strain, slip or
heavy burden, sometimes by turning him too hastily round: His Grief commonly
lies upon these kind of strains and wrenches, in the lower part of the back
below his short ribs, and directly between his Fillets. You may perceive it by
the reeling and rolling of his hinder parts in his going, and be ready to fall
to the Ground by his frequent swaying backward and side-long, and when he is
down, it is a great deal of trouble for him to rise again 399 Shoulder-pincht
comes either by laboring or straining him too young, or by putting too great
a burden upon his back. You may know it by the narrowness of the Breast, and by
the Consumption of the flesh of the shoulders, insomuch as the forepart of the
shoulder bone will stick out, and be higher then the flesh. And if it be of a
long standing, he will be very hollow upon the brisket, toward the Arm-holes,
and will go wider beneath at the Feet, then above at the Knees. The Cure I set
down here, because it is not in the place of Cures: It Is this, Give him a Slit
with a sharp Knife an inch long, upon both sides, an inch under the
shoulder bone: then with a large Quill put into the Slit, blow up first one
shoulder, and then the other, as big as you can possibly, even up to the
Withers, and with your hand strike the Wind equally into every place of the
shoulders, and when they be both full, beat all the windy places, with a good
Hazel wand over all the Shoulder, then with a flat Sclice of Iron loosen the
skin within from the flesh: Then rowel the two slits or cuts, with two round
Rowels made of the upper Leather of an old Shoo, with a hole in the midst, that
the corruption may issue forth, and let the Rowels be three inches road, and
put in flat and plain within the Cut; Then make a Charge and lay upon the same:
Look in the Table for a Charge, and there you may take your Choice.
Shoulder-wrench or Strain comes several ways, sometimes by turning or stopping
too suddenly upon some uneven ground, sometimes by running hastily out at some
door, some etimes by slipping or sliding in the Stable or abroad, sometimes by
the stroke of another Horse, and sometimes by falls on the Planks or slippery
Ground. You shall perceive it by his Trailing his Leg upon the Ground close
after him. 351 Shoulder-splaiting or Shoulder-t^rn, comes by some dangerous
sliding, either abroad or at home, whereby the shoulder parts from the
Breast, and so leaves an open Rift, not in the Skin, but in the flesh and film
next under the skin, which makes him so lame that he is not able to go. You
may know it by the trailing of his Leg after him in his going* 417
Shoulder-pight is, when the Shoulder-point or pitch of the Shoulder is
displaced by some great Fall, Rack or Strain. You may know it by this, His
Shoulder-point will stick out further then his fellow, and besides he will Halt
downright. ib. Spaven-blood or bone, vide Blood or Bonespaven. Shrow-running,
vide Planet-struck.
T.
Tongue-hurt comes by accident, or with a Bit, Halter or the like. 374 Tetter,
Flying-worm or Ring-worm, is a very evil sorrance, which runs up and down
the Skin of a Horses Body, from whence it bears its Name; It comes to him
several ways, sometimes by heat in the Blood, which engenders a sharp and hot
humor; sometimes by bad and foul feeding; it is most commonly found in his
Rump, which runs down the Joints till it comes into his Tail, and if it
continue there long it will turn to a Canker; But yet sometimes it will settle
upon some fleshy part of his Body, which will so trouble him with itching and
rubbing against walls and posts, that he will bring away the hair, yea, and the
Skin and Flesh also with his Teeth, if he can come at it, so violent is his
itching. You may know it by the falling away of the hair, by his continual
rubbing, but if it get into the Joint between the top of the Rump and the Tail,
then it is known by a Scab, which you may feel with your Finger, and if you
scrape or pick it away, there will come out of it by little and little a thin
water, which being let long to run, will in time run into his Tail, and become
a Canker, as I said before. 371 Trunchions are worms in shape, short and
thick, and of a pretty bigness, which have black and hard heads, vide more for
Bots; and there you may find all the kinds of them that do engender in a Horses
Body. 303
V.
Aves, Avives or Fives, are all one Disease; They are certain flat Kernels,
much like unto Bunches of Grapes, which grow in a Cluster close knotted
together in the grieved place. They Center from the Ears, and creep downwards
between the Chap and the Neck of the Horse toward the Throat; and when they
come to inflame, they will swell, and not only be painful to the Horse, but
prove mortal by stopping his Wind, unless you take a speedy course for the Cure
of him; It Is commonly rankness of Blood that is the cause of this Infirmity.
When you go about the Cure of them, have a care you touch them not with your
Fingers, for that will venom them. 376
W.
Wind-broken, or broken Wind, comes to a Horse, when you let him stand long in
the stable without exercise, and foul food, whereby gross and thick humors are
drawn into his Body so abundantly, that sticking to the hollow places of the
Lungs stop up his Windpipe, that the Wind cannot get backward nor forward:
sometimes it comes to a Horse when you run him off his Wind, when he is very
fat and foul, you may know it by his heaving and drawing together of his
Flanks, and by blowing wide his Nostrils. 251, 252 Wart or spungy Excression
growing near to the Eye, does come from condensed Phlegm residing there, which
in time causes the Eye, either to consume or to grow little, if it be not
remedied. 279 A Wen is a hard Rising out of the flesh, like a Tumor and
Swelling, and are of several Sizes, sometimes great, sometimes small, some are
painful, and some are not painful; They proceed from gross and vicious humors,
binding together in some sick part of the Body, but most commonly by some
stroke, bruise, blow or a stone thrown at that place, it is outwardly flesh,
but toward the root it is Matterative. 278 Wind-Galls are Bladders full of
corrupt Gelly, which being let forth is thick, and of the color of the Yolk of
an Egg; they are sometimes great, and sometimes small, and grow upon each side
of the Fet-lock Joints upon all four legs, and are so painful to him,
especially in the Summer season, when the Weather is hot, and the ways hard,
that they make him not only halt downright, but sometimes fall; They come for
the most part from extreme labor and heat, whereby the humors being dissolved,
do flow and resort into the hollow places about the nether Joints, and there
settle, which is the occasion of this evil Malady. 377 VVolfes-teeth are two
small teeth growing in the upper Jaws, next unto the great grinding teeth,
which are so painful to him, that he cannot endure to chaw his meat, but is
forced either to let it fall out of his Mouth, or to keep it still half chewed.
384 Worms vide Bots. and there you may find all sorts of them that breed in a
Horses Body, and how you may distinguish them one from another. 303
VVind-cholick, vide Cholick. 363 and 377 Wrench in a Horses back, vide Flanks.
300 The Womb of a Mare is subject to many diseases, viz. Ascent, Descent,
Falling out, Convulsion, Barrenness. Abortion, etc. She may be barren through
the untemperateness of the Womb or Matrix, as for that it is too hot and fiery,
or else too cold and moist, or else too dry, or else too short, or too narrow,
or having the Neck thereof turned awry, or by means of some obstruction or
stopping in the Matrix, and that the Mare is too fat, or too lean, or sometimes
for want of being well horsed; the cure is, Take a good Handful of Leeks well
stamped in a Mortar, with half a Glass full of White Wind, then put to it
twelve Flies called Cantharides, then strain altogether with a sufficient
quantity of water, that may serve her therewith two days together, by pouring
the same into her nature with a Horn or Glister-Pipe made of purpose, and at
the end of three days next following, offer the Horse unto her that should
cover her, and immediately after she is covered, wash her Nature twice together
with cold water. Or take Nitrum, Sparrows dung and Turpentine, of each a like
quantity wrought together, and made like a Suppository, and put into her
Nature, causes her to desire the Horse, and also to conceive.
Y.
Yellows in a horse is the same that the Physicians do call the Jaundice in a
man, and there are two kinds of them, The yellow and the black, the yellow
being moist, and the black dry; the yellow proceeds from the overflowing of the
Gall, occasioned by Choler, and the black comes from the overflowing of the
Spleen, proceeding from Melancholy, which are both dangerous infirmities, but
the black is most deadly and mortal. The yellow is discovered by the changing
his natural color from white to yellow, viz. The Balls of his Eyes, The
Tongue, the inside of his Lips and inward parts of his Nostrils are colored
yellow; The black Jaundice is discovered by the quite contrary symptoms; for
having this disease, the whites of his Eyes, Tongue, Mouth and Lips will be of
a duskish color, and not so clear and sanguine as before. And though this
distinction of the yellow and black Jaundice be strange to some Farrie^s, ye^
it is most certain, that when a Horse dies of the Yellows, he dies of the
black Yellows, for when it comes unto the case of Mortality, then are all the
inward parts converted to blackness, and the yellow substance is clean
mastered. The Origin of this Malady comes principally from unnatural heats
given him by hard riding or labor, which inflames the Liver, Gall, Blood and
Spleen, which causes choler to have the sovereignty and dominion over the
humors, which occasions this disease, which ends in a sudden death, if not
timely prevented. 237 Yard mattering or mattering of the Yard, comes most
commonly in covering time, by his over-freeness in spending upon Mares, when
the Horse and Mare are both too hot, does burn them, giving him the Running of
the Reins, as we truly term it, The Signs to know it are, The falling down of
yellow Matter from the Yard, and a swelling at the end thereof, and when he
staleth, he will do it with a great deal of pain, and cannot well draw up his
Yard again. 331 Yard fallen down, or Falling down of the Yard, comes to him
for want of strength, to draw it up within the Sheath, but let it hang down
between his Legs; It is occasioned either through the weakness of that Member,
or by means of some Resolution in the Muscles and Sinews serving the same,
caused by some violent slip, strain or stroke in the Back, or else by some
great weariness and tyring. 332 and 381
The TABLE of the Diseases and Cures.
THE Nature, Temperature and Virtue of most Simples, set down Alphabetically.
From page 175. to p. 224
A.
Accloyed is Pricked. vide Pricked. An Advertisement, not only about the several
sorts of Aloes, how you may know and distinguish them one from Another, but
also some Directions for the Physicking of Horses, and for Dressing of Wounds.
From p. 226 to 228 An Advertisement touching the Usefulness, not only of the
Table of Simples, but also of the General Simples set down one after another
before every Disease. 229 Antimony crude or raw, the use of it declared. 232
Aches, Numbness, or any swelling or weakness in any Joint or Sinew, General
Simples good for them. ib. Aloes, how to make into Purges and Scourings, See
the manner of it after the best Receipt for the Glanders, at the latter End of
the Book. St. Anthonies Fire, General Things good for the Cure of it. 233
Particular Receipts good for the same. 234 Anticor or Heart-Sickness, General
things good for the Cure of it. ib. Particular Receipts good for the same. ib.
Attaint Upper or Nether, General Things good for the Cure of it. 235 Particular
Receipts good for the same. ib. Aristes, vide Rats-Tails. Apoplexy, vide
Palsy. Adders Tongue Ointment, vide Ointments Anberry cured 279 Aloes, several
excellent Ways how you are to make it up into Purges. 414 and 415
B.
Broken Wind, General Simples good to help it. 251 Particular Receipts good for
the same. ib. Breath short, General Simples good to help it. 252 Particular
Receipts good for the same. 253 Blood-Spaven, General Things good for the Cure
of it. 260 Particular Receipts good for the same. 261 Bone Spaven Cured ib* and
379 Back Galled to Cure. From 283 to 285 Bruises or Swellings, either inward or
outward, General Simples good for the Cure of them. 285 Particular Receipts
good for the same* 286 Bruises and Strains, Observations upon the Cure of them.
293 Back-Wrench't, weak or swayed, General Things good for the Cure of it 330
and 331 Barbes cured 331 Bots or Worms, General Things good for the destroying
of them. 303 Particular Receipts good for the same. 304 Bangle-Eares helped,
vide First Part, 121 Bleeding, General Simples good to stanch it. 306
Particular Receipts good for the same. 307 Binding, Simples in General, which
is good to stop a Looseness, Lask or bloody Flux, ib. Particular Receipts good
for the same. 308 Biting of a mad Dog, to Cure, General things good for it. 312
Particular Receipts good for the same, ib. Blood-letting, swelling after it to
cure, be it never so bad. 379 Burning or Scalding, either by Shot, Gunpowder
or Wild Fire, General Things good for the Cure of them. 380 Particular
Receipts good for the same. ib. A Bath for swelled Cods. 387 Botch in the Groin
to cure. 388 Blisters cured. 389 Bones broken and out of Joint cured. 391 A
Bath very good for the same. 392 Back-swayed to cure. 399
C.
A Caution about Aloes. 226 Comprehensive terms explained. 230 and 231 Cold and
Hot Ointments repeated ^ver again, and the Virtues that belonged unto them made
known. 231 Cramps or Convulsions of the Sinews, General things good to help
them. 239 Particular Receipts good for the same. 240 Colds and Coughs of all
sorts, General Simples good for the Cure of them. 241 Particular Receipts good
for all the sorts of them. 242 to 250 Curb to cure, general Things good for it.
265 Particular Receipts good for the same. ib. Cib'd Heels, vide Scratches, for
what cures them cures these. 266 Crepances, vide Rat-tails. Camery, vide
Frounce Canker cured 302 and 318 Canker, vide Fistula, and all other running
and foul Sores to cure. Colt-Evil, General Things good for the cure of it. 330
Consumption, General Simples good for the cure of it. 333 Particular Receipts
good for the same. 334 Cords, which is stumbling, General Things good for the
Cure of it. 341 Cleansers of the Body from all manner of foul Humors, General
Simples good for it, 344 Cholick or Stone, General Simples good for the Cure of
it 362 Particular Receipts good for the same. ib. Crown-scab, general things
good for the Cure of it 372 Cut-Sinews, general Simples good for to help them
373 and 374 Costiveness to help 378 and 381 Casting forth of his drink, to
Cure. 383 Crick in the Neck, general things good for the Cure of it 384 Crest
Fallen raised up again 385 Cods swelled, to Cure, general things good for them
386 Particular Receipts good for the same. ib. and 387 Chops, Clifts or Rifts,
see for the cure of it in the Letter C. in the Alphabetical Table of the
Diseases of a horse. Cooling Simples 395 Of Clifts and Cracks in the Heels; see
for Scratches, for what cures them cures these Cleansers of all Sores by
washing them, see the First Part. Charges of all sorts, see also in the First
Part for them.
D.
Directions for the Drenching and Physicking of horses 225 and 226 Further
Directions for the same. 228 and 416 Diseases and Infirmities of Mares to Cure
332 Drawers forth of any Stub, Thorn or Nail, either in the Foot, or any other
part of the Body 340 Driers up of all manner of moist humors, General Simples
good for them 341 Dropsey, general things good for the cure of it 363
Particular Receipts good for the same. 364 See for more Simples good for the
Cure of it in the First Part Diseases in a horse to prevent the whole year, a
very good Receipt to preserve him sound 382 Casting forth of his Drink, General
things good for to help it 383
E.
Eaters away of proud Flesh, General things good for it 277 An Ointment for the
same purpose. ib. Enterfering or Shackle-Gall to Cure 284 Eyes watery, Eyes
blood-shotten, Wart in them, Inflammation Pearl, Pin or Web, general things
good for all the Diseases of them 288 Particular Receipts good for all the
diseases of them, from 290 to 293 Ears Imposthumated, general Things good for
the cure of them 348 Particular Receipts good for them. ib.
F.
Falling-Evil or Planet-struck general things good for the cure of it 239
Particular Receipts good for the same. ib. Foundering, General things good for
the cure of it. 271 Particular Receipts good for the same 272 and 399 Feltick
is no other then a Galled Back, vide Back-Galled 283 to 285, Fraying or
Stiffness taken in the Legs vide Imperfections of the Legs. Frounce or Camery
to cure 301 Falling of the Fundament, General things good for it 311 Particular
Receipts good for the same. ib. Fistula, Canker, or any other running sore to
cure, general Things good for it. 319 and 375 Particular Receipts good for the
same. 320 Fevers of all sorts, general Simples good for the Cure of them 321
Particular Receipts good for the same. 322 See more in the First Part for the
several sorts of them 229 to 230 Farcey, general things inwardly Given for the
cure of it 303 General things applied outwardly for the cure of it 224
Particular Receipts inwardly given, and outwardly applied for the cure of this
Disease, from 223 to 328 Frush running, or Rotten, general things good for the
cure of it 328 Falling of the Yard, General Simples good for the cure of it 332
False Quarters cured 335 Frenzy or Madness, General Things good for the cure
of it. 354 Flies to keep from coming to a Horses Head to vex and trouble him
369 Fallen Crest or Crest-Fallen, to raise up again 385 Fig, General things
good for the Cure of it 389 Falling Evil or Falling Sickness. 397 General
Simples given inwardly for it. ib. A Particular Receipt for the same. ib. Flaps
cured 418 Flanks, vide Wrinch in the Back.
G.
Glanders, General things good for the cure of it 254 Particular Receipts good
for the same. ib. and 413. The best Receipt that is for the Cure of this
Disease is in 414 Glanders stopped for present sale 413 Galled or swayed Back to
Cure, General things good for it, 283 Particular Receipts good for the same 284
Guarded or swelled Legs, whether by Grease or any other Accident cured 299 Gall
overflowed, general things good for the cure of it. 329 Gangreen cured, General
things good for it. ib. Griping or Fretting of the Guts, Cholick or Stone,
General Things good for the Cure of it. 362 and 363 Particular Receipts good
for the same. ib. Graveling, General Things good for it. 364 Grease Molten,
General Things good for it. ib. Particular Receipts good for the same. 365
Grease fallen into the Legs to Cure. ib. A very good Purge for it. 318 Gigs,
Bladders or Flaps to cure. 418
H.
Hide-bound, General Things good for the Cure of it. 258 Particular Receipts
good for the same. ib. Hard swellings cured. 278 Head purged, vide perfumes in
the first part good for it. Halting, vide Strains of all sorts Hair made to
grow. 318 and 346 Hoofes, all the Imperfections of them cured. From 335 to 340
Hurts in the Hoof, of what sort soever, General Things good for the Cure of
them. ib. Humors dried up, general Things good for them. 341 and 344 Humors
dissolved. 343 Humors to stop. ib. Humors to drive back. ib. Humors made thin
ib. Humors purged 344 Hair shedding from the Mane or Tail, General things to
prevent it. 345 Hair to take away, General Things good for it. ib. Particular
Receipts for the same ib. Hair made black ib. Hair made yellow ib. Hardness
mollified, General Things good for to do it 367 Hens dung swallowed, or any
other venomous things general Things good for the Cure of it 374 and 383
Hough-bonney cured 389 Hardness or Knots in the flesh 390 Hot Simples 395
Hip-shot 397 Hurle-bone out of Joint cured ib.
I.
Joints and Sinews, that has in them any Ach or Numbness, Weakness or
Swelling, General things good for them 232 and 233 Particular Receipts good for
the same. ib. Joints, Arteries and Sinews, Comforted after Travel, Cold or
pain. 259 Infirmities of Mares to help 332 ^mposthumations and Inflammations,
hot or Cold, general Simples good for them 346 and 390 Particular Receipts good
for them. 34^ Imposthumated Ears, general Things good for them 348 Particular
Receipts good for the same. ib.
K.
Kidneys that has ulcers in them cured. 360 Kidneys bruised. 368 Knots in the
Joints, or for Cramps and Inflammations general and particular, Receipts good
for the same. 390
L.
Legs swelled, general things good for the cure of them. 287 Particular
Receipts good for the same. ib. 288 and 300 Lampass. 301 Lameness of all sorts
to help. 293 and 300 Loosening Simples. 103. See more of this in the First
Part. 154 Lask or Looseness stopped, general things good for it. 307 Particular
Receipts good for the same. 308 Lungs, general things good for them. 333
Particular Receipts good for the same. 334 Liver preserved, general Simples
good for it. 335 Lethargy or sleeping Evil, general things good for it. 354
Particular Receipts good for the same. ib. Lice or Vermin killed, general
things good for it. 369 Particular Receipts good for the same. ib. Leprosy or
Mange, general things good for to kill it. ib. Particular Receipts good for the
same. 370 Lust provoked. See for Simples good for the same in the First Part.
148
M.
Mallender or Sellender, general things good for the cure of the m. 275
Particular Receipts good for the same. 276 Mattering of the Yard, or Running of
the Reins. 331 Mares, their several diseases to cure, 332 Milk in Mares to
increase. See the First Part for it. 148 Mouth-sore, general things good for
it. 368 Mange or Leprosy. 369 Milt cured. 388
N.
Nightmare. 239 Neesing-powder. See the First Part for Perfumes for the Head.
Navel-gall, general things good for it. 353 Particular Receipts good for the
same. ib.
O.
Oil of Camomil, how to make for any grief in the Limbs, proceeding from a cold
Cause. 230 Oil of Spike, how to make for all manner of Sinew-strains and Pains,
and Aches in the Limbs. ib. Oil of Mastick, how to make for any cold Griefs ib.
An Ointment for the Killing and Shealing all manner of Scabs. 270 O^^tments,
general Simples good to put into them for the cure of all manner of Wounds. 279
Particular Receipts good for them. 280 Observations upon dressing of Wounds.
281 Observations upon bruises and strains. 293 Observations on the Liver and
Spleen, and general things good for them. 335 Ointment of Theriacum, which is
good for any Ach in the Joints, Grief in the Hips, stifling Place, Legs,
Pastern or any other Part of the Legs and Back, Sinew-strains only excepted.
394
P.
Physicking of Horses, Observations and Directions for the use of it. 225 and
226 Pursiveness or shortness of Breath, General Simples good for it. 252
Particular Receipts good for the same. 253 Planet-struck or Falling Evil,
General Simples good for it. 239 Particular Receipts good for the same. ib.
Poison of all sorts expelled, General Simples good for it. 313 Particular
Receipts good for the same. 314 Plague or Pestilence, General things good for
it. ib. Particular Receipts good for the same. 315 Pissing of Blood, General
Simples good for it. 314 Particular Receipts good for the same. 315 Pol-Evil,
General things good for it. 317 Particular Receipts good for the same. ib.
Pains; see Scratches, for what cures them cures these A Plaster to dry up any
superfluous moisture, and to bind parts Loosened. 342 Pricked 396 Particular
Receipts good for the same. ib. Purgers of the Head. See the First Part Another
Plaster to dry up any Swelling, Wound, Wind-^all, Splint or Bladder in or
about the Joints. 342 Palsy 354 Pissing or Staling with pain, General things
good for it. 357 Particular Receipts good for the same. 358 A Plaster to lay
upon the Wound to keep in the Tent or Salve. 377 A Purgation for a Horse that
is sick of Grease or Costiveness. 378 Provokers of Lust, General Simples good
for it in the First part. 148 Purges of Aloes, several excellent Ways how to
make them up. 414 and 415 Physical Observations, 225 and 416
Q.
Quarters false, to amend. 335 Quitter-bone, General things good for the cure
of it. 355 Particular Receipts good for the same* ib. Quinsey or sore Throat,
General things good for it. 3^8 Quick-scab. 398
R.
Running foul Sores. See for Fistula Running and rotten Frush, General things
good for the cure of it. 328 Running of the Reins. 331 Ring-bone, general and
particular Receipts good for the same. 356 Red-water, general and particular
Receipts good for the cure of the same. 357 Ring-worm, general and particular
Receipts good for the cure of it. 371 and 372 Rot cured. 398
S.
Sick Horses how ordered, see Directions how to do it in p. 225, 228 and 416
Simples put down in Order one after another before every disease, and also an
Account of the Table of Simples. 229 Stavers, Headache or Farcin, general and
particular Receipts good for them. 235 and 236 Stomach hot, general things good
for to help it. 260 Particular Receipts good for the same. ib. Spaven-blood to
cure. ib. Spaven-bone to cure. 261 Another which will not only take it away,
but also a Curb, Ring-bone or any other Boney Excression. 262 Splint taken
away, general and particular things good for it. 263 Swellings of all sorts to
cure. See the First Part for them. Scratches, general and particular Receipts
good for them. 266 and 267 Sellender or Mallender, general and particular
Receipts good for them. 275 and 276 Salves and Ointments for all manner of
Swellings of Wounds, from 279 to 284 Swellings dissolved without breaking. 283
Shackle-Gall to help. 284 and 288 Swellings and Bruises to cure, either inward
or outward. 285 Swelled Legs of all sorts to cure, General things good for
them. 287, 299 and 300 Swellings by Shackle-gall to cure. 288 Strains,
observations upon them and upon Bruises. 293 Strains of all sorts to cure, from
294 to 300 Swelled or Guarded Legs, whether by Grease, or any other Accident.
299 Staling or Pissing of Blood, General and particular Receipts good for the
same. 315 Spleen, what it is, general and particular Receipts good for the
same. 329 and 330 Shedding of the Seed, General things good for it. 331
Strangles, General and particular Receipts good for the same. 349 and 350
Shoulder-strain or sprain. 351 Sit-fast, General things good for it. 352 Not
staling and pissing of a horse, General and particular Receipts good for the
same. 357 and 358 Stone, General and particular Receipts good for the same. 360
and 361 Stone cholick, General and particular Receipts good for the same. 362
Surfeits, General and particular Receipts good for them. 366 Scab, Te^tar or
Ring-worm, General and particular Receipts good for the same. 371 and 372
Surbated, General things good for it. 373 Sinews, that are cut, pricked, bruised
or shrunk, and for all Griefs belonging to them, General things good for them
ib and 374 See more General Things good for them in the First Part. Swelling by
Blood-letting, though it be never so bad. 379 Scaldings by Shot, Gunpowder or
wilde-Fire; General and Particular Things good for the same. 380 Swelled Cods,
General and Particular Receipts good for the same. 386 and 387 String-halt. 341
and 394 Stumbling, vide Cords Simples that are hot. 395 Simples that are
Cooling. ib. Swayed back. 399 Strengthn^ng Simples. See the Fi st Part for
General Simples good for it 151 Shoulder splaiting, which is a Tor^ Shoulder.
417 Shoulder-pight, General things good for the Cure of it. ib Shoulder-pincht.
See the Alphabetical Table that shows you where the Diseases of a Horse do
grow, and there you may find the Cure. Sores of all sorts to wash. See the
First Part for them. Swellings of what Nature soever, either hard or soft. See
the First Part for them. p. 149 Sweat to cause. See the First Part. 150
Shortness of Breath. See more of it in the First Part. Stinging and biting of
venomous Beasts. See more of this also in the First Part. Sores and Ulcers of
all sorts to Cure; General Simples good for them in the First Part. Suppository
what it is. See the First Part. 146
T.
Tired Horses, General and Particular things good for to help them. 259, 260
Tetter-scab and Ring-bone, General and Particular Receipts good for them. 371
and 372 Tongue of a Horse hurt, General and particular things good for the Cure
of it. 374 Teeth, all the infirmities of them cured, viz pain in the Teeth,
loose Teeth. Wolfes Teeth and Jaw Teeth. 384
V.
Ulcers, Fistulaes and running Sores, general and particular Receipts good for
the Cure of them. 319 and 320 See more Simples good for them in the First Part.
151 Urine caused to a Horse that cannot stale, General and particular Receipts
good for the same. 357 and 358 Ulcers in the Kidneys to Cure. 360 Ulcers in any
Part, General and particular things good for them 375 Venomed things, general
and particular Receipts good for the same. 374 and 383 Vives, Avives or Fives,
General and particular Receipts good for the cure of it. 376
W.
Wind-broken, vide broken wind. Wind preserved 252 A Water to wash and cleanse
a Sore or Wound 377 Another Water to cleanse and heal a Sore. 2^8 A green Wound
or Puncture cured. ib. Wen, or any other Excression taken away in the Flesh.
ib. Wounds, how to order and dress in the cure of them, and what Herbs are good
to put into Wound Salves. 281, 282 and 283 Wrench, or weakness in the Back,
General things good for the cure of it. 300 and 301 Worms of all sorts killed,
General and particular Receipts good for the same. 303 and 304 Wind-cholick,
General things good for it. 377 See for more general Simples good for it in the
First Part, 150 Wind galls General and particular Receipts good for the same.
377 and 378 Wolfes-teeth cured. 384 Withers wrung cured. 385 Wounds by Shot
cured. 391 Womb, see for the several Infirmities of it in the Alphabetical
Table of the Diseases of a Horse. Wart spungy. 279
Y.
Yellow, General and particular Receipts good for it. 237 and 238 Yellows
black, general and particular Receipts good for the same. 239 Yard mattering to
cure. 331 Yard fallen, General things good for it 332, 381 and 382 The Way of
Gathering, Drying and Preserving of Simples and their Juices, viz. Roots,
Barks, Leaves, Herbs, Flowers, Seeds and Juices. 402 The Way of Making and
Keeping all Necessary Compounds, viz. Electuaries, Pills, Waters, Ointments,
Plasters, Charges, Poultisses, Oils, Syrups by Infusion, by Decoction and by
Juices, from 403 to 408 Roots hot in the first degree. 408 Herbs hot in the
second, hot in the third, hot in the fourth, Roots temperate, Roots cold in the
first, cold in the second, cold in the third, cold in the fourth. Roots dry in
the first, dry in the second, dry in the third, and dry in the fourth. Roots
moist, from 408 to 409 Hot Medicaments appropriate to the Parts of the Body,
viz. Heating the Head, Heating the Throat, Heating the Breast and Lungs,
Heating the Heart, Heating the Stomach, Heating the Liver, Heating the Spleen,
Heating the Bowels, Heating the Reins and Bladder, Heating the Womb, Heating
the Joints, etc. from 409 to 410 Cold Medicaments appropriate to the Parts of
the Body, viz. Cooling the Head, Throat, Breast, Lungs, Heart, Stomach, Liver,
Spleen, Reins* Bladder, Bowels and Joints. 410 and 411 The Properties of
purging Medicaments, viz. Choler, Phlegm, watery Humors, by Vomit, by Urine;
Purging the Throat, by Sweat, and by the Nose. 111 and 112 The Properties of
Altering Medicaments, viz. softning Simples, Loosning Simples, Abolishing
Simples, Binding Simples, Drying Simples, striking back Simples, Dissolving
Simples, Cleansing Simples, Painremoving Simples, Simples that are good to
clear the Wind, Humor-dissolving Simples, Simples that are good to expel
poison, and Astonishing Simples.
ERRORS that have Escaped the Press in the Second Part of the Experienced
FARRIER.
PAge 176. line 4. for Jallop read Jallap. ib. p. l. 5. f. Turbich r. Turbith.
l. 10. f. Zedory r. Zedoary. p. 177. l. 9. f. Humors r. Tumors. p. 178. l. 6.
f. omforteth r. comfort. l. 15. f. secure r. scour. p. 182. l. 6. f. Madders
r. mad Dogs. p. 182. make 180. p. 179. m. 181. p. 186. m. 184. p. 183. m. 185.
p. 179. m. 181. l. 16. f. weaknews r. weakness. l. 21. f. Woumbs drinks r.
wound-Drinks. p. 186. m. 184. l. 38. f. droaped r. drooped. p. 183. m. 185. l.
6. f. reserved r. referred. p. 127. l. 29. f. half a dram r. one Ouuce. p. 208.
l. 17. f. Six Drams r. one Ounce. p. 253. l. 3. f. Ashen skies. r. Ashen Keis.
p. 256. l. 27. f. my First Part r. at the latter end of the Book. p. 266. l.
28. After Train Oil put (are good) p. 269. l. 31. r. Cornfield. p. 273. l. 17.
f. Hough r. Hoof. l. 20. f. Houghs r. Hoofs l. 29. f. Hough r. Hoof. p. 274. l.
3. f. Hough r. Hoof. l. 33. f. Hough r. Hoof. l. 37. f. Hough r. Hoof. p. 275.
f. Contrive r. Continue. l. 20. f. Hough r. Hoof. p. 280. l. 9. f. Meal. r.
Meat. p. 282. l. 5. f. free r. freer. 289, l. 36. f Bine-bole, r. fine-Bole. p,
290. l. 21. f. Tulba r. Tutia. l. 4^. f. some years r. some years last. p. 294.
l. 13. f. Sinew-strength r. Sinew-strain. p. 299. l. 8. f. better r. hotter. p.
310. l. 4. f. four or five Ounces of Issing-Glass, make one Ounce or better,
and to dissolve it first in a little fair Water over the Fire, before you put
it to the Milk. p. 327. l. 30. f! Turbich. r. Turbith. p. 352. l. 5. f. add r.
and. p. 358. l. 14. f. the smoother not r. the smoother root of the. p. 362. l.
15. f. two Drams r. one Ounce, p. 363. l. 1. the Receipt for the Cholick and
Stone, put it out, for the Quantities are all false. p. 370. l. 14. f. and tie
him r. Tie him. p. 409. l. 25. f. Calaminth r. Calamint. p. 410. l. 1. f.
Agrimonia r. Agrimony. l. 18. r. Agrimony. p. 411. l. 39: f. Jallup r. Jallap.
p. 413. l. 5. f. in this Part. r. in the F^^st Part. l. 32. f. Calaminth r.
Calamint. p. 417. l. 23 f. it r. its.

FINIS.
BOOKS, Printed for Richard Northcott, at the Mariner and Anchor, on the Lower
End of Fish-street Hill, and at his Shop Adjoining to St. Peter's Alley in
Cornhill.
The Mariners Magazine, or STURMY'S Mathematical and Practical ARTS, containing
the Description, Making and Use for the most useful Instruments for all Artists
and Navigators, the Art of Navigation at large; A New Way of Surveying Land,
Gauging, Gunnery, Astronomy and Dyalling; Performed Geometrically,
Instrumentally, and by Calculation.

The Complete Academy, A Drawing Book

Wright's Errors in Navigation detected and Corrected

Mr. Norwood's Sea-mans Companion

The Country Copy-Book

Dr. Newton's Scale of Interest

Dr. Newton's Art of Practical Gauging

Mr. Cravens Aeternalia, or a Treatise on Eternity.

The English Rogue Complete in four parts

Mr. Philips his Mathematical Manual

Jehosaphat, being the History of the Five wise Philosophers.

Where you may also be Furnished with all other Sea-books.

The Art of Measuring, Containing the Description of the Carpenters New Rule;
Furnished with Variety of Scales, Fitted for the more speedy Mensuration of
Superficies and Solids. Written by Sam*Foster, sometime Professor of Astronomy
in Gresham-Colledge. Also certain Geometrical Problems, a Table of Logarithms
to 30000, and some Uses of the same Exemplified in Arithmetic and Geometry;
but more particularly applied to the Mensuration of Superficies and Solids, as
Board, Glass, Pavement* Wainseet, Plaistering, Fyling, Timber, Stone,
Brick-work and Gauging of Cask. The second Edit on with Additions. By VV.
Leybourn. To which is Added A Supplement, being the Description of the Line of
Numbers, with its Use, in diverse Practical Examples of Mensuration; Of Singular
Use for Workmen, Artificers, and all other Ingenious Persons delighting there
n. By John Wiblin Carpenter.

A Description of the Five Orders of Columns and Terms of Architecture:
According to the Ancient Use and best Rules of the most Eminent Italian
Architects, viz. The Tnscan, D^rick, Ionick, Cor^n^hian and Composite. Drawn
and Described (with great Care and Diligence) after the right Symmetry and
Measure of Free Masons. By HANS BLOOME. For the Use and Benefit of Free Masons,
Carpenters* Joyners, Carvers, Painters, Bricklayers; In General, for all that
are Concerned in the Famous Art of Building.

Advertisement,

THE True* Plain and Golden Spirit of Scurvey-Grass, being highly Approved for
their Admirable CVRES in the Scurvey, Dropsey, and several other General
Distempers; Faithfully Prepared by Robert Bateman, the First Author, at his
House at Paul's Chain, near Doctors Commons, London, and most Eminent Towns in
the Country, with Printed Directions for their Use: The Bottles are Sealed
with his Coat of Arms, the Half Moon and Ermins, to Prevent Counterfeits. Price
1 s. each Bottle. Sold by the said Mr. R^ch. Northcot next St. Peter's Alley,
and at the Mariner and Anchor, upon Fish-street Hill, near London- bridge.


