OF Adoration in General; And in particular of HAT-HONOUR, Their Rise.
THe Original of all true Honor, is that which was from the Beginning. All
Honor is due to God; and all true Honor that Men are honored with, is from
his Image shining in them. So they are honored in the Lord: that is the honor
that is from above, from God, that is Love. So they that write of it confess,
that the ground of Honor is Virtue: From that they do define it. Pecham his
Complete Gentleman.

Raleigh 's History of the Worcester.

Sam's Orig. Romans

Brentius on Joh. 12. Hom. 15

Jerome and Augustine apud Obenheim.

N. T. loc. 147.

Yeking China in Oglby part 2. page 565.




Bowing, or prostrating, or uncovering of Men's heads, seems to have been
exhibited only to God from the Beginning, by the expression of the Angel, Rev.
22.9. And Paul's arguing from the Angel and Nature, 1 Cor. 11.10, 14. The
transferring of it to Men, most likely began where the Dominion began, which
after the Flood, was in Babel; from thence therewith passing to the Persians,
who as they write, Chrysolog. Sermon. 120.
used to set the Sphere under their Feet, and to crown themselves with the Sun
and Stars, etc. and to be Adored, Plutarch in Themistoc.
admitting none into their presence, but adoring and Bowing.

Which Custom, Alexander, they write, Aelian lib. 2. cap. 19.
when he had overcome them, transferred to himself with the Empire, Q. Curtius,
lib. 6. sect. 6.
urging the Greeks to the making him a God; as Nebuchodonosor commanded
Holofernes (as some think) to abolish the Nation's gods, Boskhier Ara Coeli.
praeleg. 3.
that for them he might be accounted God, and commanded his to worship his
Golden Image. And after him the Romans. Domitian, after the manner of Caligula,
Sext. Aurelius in Domitian.
compelled them to call him Lord and God.

About which time Plutarch was famous. Plutarch Romans Quest. page 226. at Paris.
24.
Who amongst his Roman Questions, makes this one, viz. What should be the
reason of uncovering the head before Potentates? And brings several
conjectures: But there he says; That they uncovered to Saturn, far ancienter
than Aeneas, because he was the God of Truth: And that they Sacrifice to Honor
bare-headed, because it is clear, open, and splendid. For which cause they
worship Excellent and Honored Men: And therefore they give this Rite to a
Deity of the same Name. So he.

To whom Polydore Virgil also agrees, Polyd. Virgil, de Inv. rerum. lib. 4.
cap. 10.
saying, We uncover our heads to Magistrates and other Potentates, as if all
ours ought to be open to them.

Aylet Sammes also has the like in the Antiquity of the Romans, Samms Brittan.
page 456.
saying, Crodo the Saxon Idol, Schedius.
his naked head signified, that God ought to be worshipped with a pure mind,
and uncovered.

This Crodo, Vossius thinks, Vossius de orig^ Idololat. lib. 1. cap. 13, 33.
came of Cronos, a name of Saturn, given to Nature and the Sun. Which Verstegan
thinks was Seater, worshipped here by the Saxons: To whom they dedicated the
day they called from him Saturday: Gualter on Amos. Hom. 8.
Whom some think to have been Moloch and Nimrod.

Now from these Learned Men and Historians of the Rites of the Ancients, and
their Interpretations of them, in their times, we may probably gather whence
the rise has been of Hat-Honour among the Latins; and so by their dominion in
this part of the world, so to be accounted Manners: For in some parts, it is
not so used, nor accounted; but on the contrary, ridiculous: So that Travelers
say, they use it proverbially in cursing, to say, God send you as much sorrow
as your Hats; meaning, little rest, through their much tossing off and on.
Besides, this Rite or Ceremony they offered to men, in imitation of the God of
Nature, has very unnaturally sometime, brought some of their own Worshippers
to an untimely end, if their word on their Deathbed may be credited, and may
be instanced.

I have heard of a Treatise, De Pileo, not met with it; they that do, it is
likely, may meet with a more ample Discourse than this brief Essay (that may
give occasion of a further Enquiry) which in the mean time hints, That the
false Heathen Gods have stolen the Rite from the God of Truth; and heathen men
from false Gods; and false Christians from heathen men.

Writ the 25th. of 6th. mo. 1680. By Richard Richardson.


