THE SAINTS DESIRE; OR A Cordial for a fainting soul.

Declaring that in Christ's righteousness only, (and in nothing else) there is
life, happiness, peace, strength, comfort, joy, and all fullness of perfection.

Also, the happy estate of a man in Christ, the life he lives, wherein he is
exercised, his experiences, and his desires to enjoy God, etc.

Surely shall one say, In the Lord have I righteousness and strength, even to
him shall men come, Isa. 45. 24. I will make mention of thy righteousness,
even of thine only, Psalm. 71. 16. And these things write we unto you, that
your joy may be full, 1 John 1. 4. By SAMUEL RICHARDSON.

I heard sweet Jesus Christ unto me say, Rise my love, my fair one, and come
away.

London, Printed by M. Simmons, and are to be sold by Hannah Allen, at the
Crown in Popes-head-Alley. 1647.

To the Right Honorable, Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, Captain general of all the
Parliaments Forces in ENGLAND; and Oliver Cromwell, Esquire, Lieutenant
general to the said Forces, such honor as is promised to all that honor the
Lord Christ.
Right Honorable;
YOu two are so joined, as it were in one, that it may be said of you, which
was said of Jonathan and David, 1 Samuel 18. 1. 3. and 20. 42.
(two mighty warriors) that their hearts were so knit, that they loved each
other as their own souls; they had such sweet experience of each others
faithfulness, that it was not in the power of Saul (though a King) to break
it, Prove. 12. 26.
or cut it asunder; and although many have attempted to do the like to you,
yet their labor has been fruitless; it has bin a joy to many to see the
effects of love so freely flow forth from each to other interchangeably, which
is amiable, sweet, and lovely. Moreover, God has raised you up, and set you in
high places, where opportunities flow of doing good; and which is more, God
has given you hearts to improve these opportunities to his glory, and the good
of his people. You have also had many and great experiences of his protection,
presence, and blessing, even to admiration; it is the Lord alone, who has
wrought all your works for you: surely you may well stand astonished at his
dealings with you; all you can do, is too little for him who has done so much
for you; you know the sorrows, sufferings, and sighings of the people of God in
this Kingdom, have been many and great, by reason of the Prelates Lording it
over them in matters of Religion; and their sorrows and sufferings are like to
be greater, if the plots and snares laid against them take place, therefore now
is the time for the righteous in authority to show themselves for the people
of God; and such as sleep and slumber had need quickly to be awaked, that they
might rowse up themselves, and shake off that fear and faintness which
possesses their hearts, and arm themselves with resolution and courage, to
hazard all, even life it self, upon a possibility of doing the least good,
Prove. 29. 2.
(for to do good we live) we rejoice that God has chosen you, (with many
others) whom God has kept waking for such a time as this. Next under God our
eyes are upon the house of Commons of England, to deliver us from temporal
slavery, to free us from the oppression of men in matters of Religion; we trust
they will effect this work fully, 2 Epis. Joh. 8. Job 29
(and God shall give them a full reward) as good Job, who was a father to the
poor, and the cause he knew not he searched out, and brake the jaws of the
wicked, and plucked the spoil out of his teeth.

It is a great honor unto you, 1 Samuel 16. 18.
that you have done valiantly, and so have been special instruments to save
this Kingdom from destruction, and that God has made you and your Armies so
victorious; but it is a greater honor unto you, that you are of the number of
those that love the truth and people of God, and endeavor to rescue them from
the hands of cruel and unreasonable men: the people of God are in the love of
God, Joh 2
and (which is more) they are one with God, therefore God takes the good done
to them as done to himself, Prove. 10. 30.
abide by them, and you shall be in safety; hold together, for they that seek
their lives, seek yo^^^ also: And as you have pleaded their cause, (with many
other Worthies with you) so still go on and prosper, Judge. 6. 12.
the Lord is with you, you valiant men, the Saints love you, they pray and
praise God for you; England fares the better for you, children unborn shall
praise you, and bless God for you, and the memorial of your names shall be for
ever precious.

Most noble Worthies, Luke 1. 3.
I may seem to pass the bounds of modesty, so to press into your presence,
but such is your humility and love, that you can pass by any defect in that
kind, and accept of that which is presented in love. And seeing God does not
despise the day of small things, Zach. 4. 10.
I trust you will not; the great respect you have showed to the truth, and
people of God, has imboldened me to present you with the best I have, in love,
out of a deep respect unto you; the perusal and acceptance of which, I submit
to your wisdoms, and humbly take my leave, and remain

Your Honors much obliged, SAMUEL RICHARDSON.

To all fainting and discouraged souls, who are lost and fatherless.
BEhold, I bring you tidings of great joy, that Jesus Christ came from Heaven
to seek and save you, Luke 19. 10. You shall enjoy mercy, life, and glory by
him; for in him the fatherless find mercy, Hos. 14. 3. You are they who
hunger and thirst after Christ, and his righteousness; this desire is from the
inbeing of the light and life of Christ in you, therefore thou art for the
present blessed, and shall be satisfied, Mat. 5. 6. Therefore you may be sure,
God is at peace with you, he has loving kindness for you, which is better
then life: yea all is yours, for God is yours, and that for ever: Is not this,
as good news from a far Country, welcome and savoury? Oh what can be more
suitable, pleasant, profitable, or delightful, better or more desirable?
Christ will give you that peace which cannot be taken from you: Oh the
fullness, sweetness, gloriousness, and infiniteness of this peace! it
passes our understandings, we cannot fully impart it, because we do not fully
know it; for we know but in part, yet a part we know through grace, though
many see not this peace, nor know not the way of it, to whom I have endeavored
to declare that mystery of love and grace revealed to me, desiring to obey
Christ's command, When thou art converted, to strengthen thy brethren. And
did thou know the freeness, fullness, sutablenesse, sweetness, and
durablenesse of Gods rich grace to a creature who is nothing in his own eyes,
who has interest in it, and therefore may apply it, thou could not but be
ravished with it. Consider what God has given thee, and sent unto thee, and
put into thy hand, even some of his rarest and choicest dainties, from his
banqueting house, some flagons of his most excellent and richest wine, which
is full of spirit and life, one taste is able to cheer and revive thy heart,
yea raise and ravish thy fainting soul with love into love, yet drink freely,
the more the better, be filled with them, there is enough, Christ's dainties are
durable, his fountain is bottomless and infinite, it can never be exhausted or
drawn dry, therefore eat, O friends, and drink abundantly, and be drunk
with them.

Here are means proposed, with some Scriptures, which tends to settle a
troubled soul in the sweet enjoyment of the love of God: if God please to
bless them, they will be sweet and profitable to thee, in stead of darkness,
light shall shine clearly, sweetly, pleasantly, it is the Lord only that can
cause the soul to see this light, and love, so as to live in it, being
overpowered with it, and to walk suitable unto it; if the Lord shall please to
bless this to thy soul, acknowledge his goodness with thankfulness and joy,
as some have done; the Lord give thee wisdom to know the truth, and to receive
thy own portion, without which nothing can do thee good, 1 Cor. 3. 6, 7. Men
may speak comfort, but they cannot comfort, it is God that creates the fruit of
the lips, peace: if he speak the word, it is done, Genesis 1. 3. The Lord speak
so to thee, that thou may profit by it, and that thy joy may be full.

Also to you belong all the promises of this life, and that to come, Heb. 6.
17. Which rich treasure, God has imparted in several parts, that all the
sons and daughters of truth might be comforted in, and satisfied with the
enjoyment of God in them. To this end here are comprised many principal
promises, that you may with more ease and speed find them, and suck sweetness
from them, our lives cannot be sweet without them, in respect of the many
miseries that attend us within and without: but those that live by faith are
not troubled in a world of troubles, faith supplies all wants, this life of
faith is the highest, therefore the best; such as live it, know it to be a
sweet, precious, and powerful life, as appears, Heb. 11. Faith honors God
most, and God honors them most that live by faith, by it the Saints wrought
righteousness, stopped the mouths of Lions, of weak were made strong: By
faith Jacob had power with God, Hos. 12. 3, 4. By it Job could trust God,
though God should kill him, Job 13. 15. By faith we live to God a life of joy
in God our righteousness, as if we had never sinned: by faith we live above
sin, infirmities, temptations, desertions, sense, reason, fears, doubts, etc.
It sweetens the sweetest mercies, yea the bitterest miseries, faith makes great
afflictions to be as none, it maintains the souls strength and comfort.
Christ lives in our hearts by faith, by it we obey God: faith makes Christ's
yoke easy and sweet; the fruition of God is all the soul can desire; faith
helps the soul to this, it puts the soul into possession of heaven while the
body is on earth; by it we view the glory of heaven, to know its worth, to
enjoy the purchaser and purchase it self, by faith we know our selves to be
happy, even then when to a carnal eye we seem most miserable; by faith we
can part with the sweetest outward comforts, and welcome death, because we
know we leave the worst place and things, and go to better; they that live by
faith, live upon God himself, and are feasted in our Lord Jesus banqueting
house, where there is all the desirable dainties, and enough. Eat then O
friends, drink, yea, drink abundantly O beloved, because it is the pleasure
of our sweet Lord Jesus that his do so, it is their portion, duty, and
privilege, to digest, refresh, and make their souls merry with his dainties,
to enjoy himself in them, that so their joy may be full.

And because it is the will of Christ that those who have found rest and peace
in him should take his yoke upon them, as appears, Mat. 11. 38, 39. Here is
added the Saints duty and service to Christ, and the rather, for now is the
time the love of many waxes cold to God and man, Religion is esteemed of many
to be but a bare notion, or a little speculation, nothing of practice,
iniquity abounds, many depart from the faith to needless disputes and
principles, that destroy the foundation of Religion, no law, no transgression,
no sin, all alike, as appears, Romans 4. 15. So that many run the round, began
at nothing, and end in nothing, so that many in stead of submitting to the yoke
of Christ, cavil against it, so that few will submit unto it, notwithstanding
it is holy, just, light, easy, sweet, and a law of love. Call persons to obey
Christ, and men are apt to think it legal and slavish, but if men were to
work for life, it were so indeed, we cannot do any thing to procure the
pardon of sin, we only desire such as have received mercy and life from
Christ, to act from the same life and power, according to the word of Christ,
to Christ again out of love and thankfulness; surely such as have received
mercy from him, vehemently desire to obey him, esteeming it a great privilege
to be employed in his service; also in keeping his commands, there is great
reward, Psalm. 19. By nature we are prone to desire liberty, and abuse it; we
need to be exhorted that we use not our liberty as an occasion to the flesh,
Gal. 5. to sloth and ease, etc. Liberty to sin is no liberty, but the
greatest bondage that can be to have a free heart to serve God, and the lets
outwardly removed is sweet liberty to enjoy God, is liberty to be set free by
Christ from sin, Satan, hell, is to be freed indeed; and though we have nothing
to do to be saved, we have something to do for his glory, which is to be our
meat and drink, therefore let no difficulty hinder thee in serving thy Lord,
say not it is impossible, consider Luke 1. 6. 1 Pet. 4. 13. 19. Press after
perfection, the nearer the better, watch and pray to prevent sin, to do
good, make it thy business to keep Christ's commands. Indeed all have not the
like time to spend herein, the necessity of outward things, hinders many that
they cannot do what otherwise they might and would, one wants time, another a
heart, another both, we should consider whether we spare that time for these
things we might, we can and will spare time for what we list and love, though
they be things of less moment; consider Song 8. 6, 7. Were we so full of love,
we could not but spare some time, not only from our recreation and idle
visits, but from our sleep and callings, we would redeem time, and cut off
needless expenses too by time; that time is sweet and precious, in which the
soul beholds God, and glory, and has communion with him: when we consider
how far short we come of our duty, we may say with grief and sorrow, Lord,
what is man, a very vanity; And notwithstanding we come far short of what
we ought to do, we are not to sit down discouraged, but to live by faith in
all infirmities above infirmities, beholding and enjoying thy joy and peace
with God: when thou art at the worst, as knowing no infirmity can lessen the
love of God to those who are his, yet are we to take notice wherein we come
short with grief, looking up to him by faith for more strength, to serve him
better, esteeming it a great privilege to be circumspect in all our actions to
God and man.

There be some other sever all things contained in this Treatise, which I trust
will be of use to some: and as for the directions concerning the Scriptures,
they have been observed by many to be necessary to cut off many errors. I have
added some other things: my whole aim and scope in all I have written, is,
first, to sustain, comfort, and encourage the discouraged soul from sinking
in despair, by reason of their many and great sins: secondly, to withdraw
the soul from the life of its own hand, to the life of the Lord Jesus Christ
for salvation. Thirdly, that the soul might know and live in the assurance of
the love of God, which will fill the soul full of life, sweetness, and joy.
Fourthly, that the soul should obey Christ, and live to his glory, and suffer
for him. Fifthly, to prevent errors, and to recall such of the Lords, who have
through mistake fallen into them by the wiles of Satan. You are not to expect
vain Philosophy, nor intising words of the wisdom of man; for here it is not:
I have desired and endeavored to make the truth appear by the evidence and
demonstration of the holy Scriptures, 2 Pet. 1. 19.
as that which is most safe and profitable for our souls to venture themselves
upon; and seeing they are to be our only rule, search the Scriptures to see
whether what I have declared be so or no, and I trust you shall find it true
and sweet, (though others, through mistake, may call it error.) Now the Lord of
heaven and earth, enable thee and all his to look up to him to be taught by
him, to enjoy him, and to walk so before him, that they may honor him, and
that their joy may be full.

Extol him that rides upon the heavens by his name Jah, and rejoice before
him, Psalm. 68. 4. The most mighty whose name is Jah, his servant SAMUEL
RICHARDSON.

Faults escaped in the Printing.
Page. Line. Word. Read. 33. 23. filled. fitted. 55. 3. Ephesians. Colos. 56. 10.
live, leave. 111. 23. Paul's, parts. 185. 26. shau, shall. 219. 3. sure, fa^re.
265. 17. difference, discern. 256. 26. save, serve. 276. 6. means, men's
consequences. 315. title. free grace, free will. 318. 12. of ours, dash out.
325. 12. men. if men. 365. 14. noise, voice,

The other mistakes correct, or pass by in love.

THE MISERABLE ESTATE of a Man by nature.
ISAI. 44. 20. He feeds upon ashes: a deceived heart has turned him aside,
that be cannot deliver his soul, nor say; Is there not a lie in my right hand?
THese words declare the dead and miserable estate of a man by nature.

1. In this he is described to be one that is without knowledge and
understanding; for he has shut their eyes that they cannot see, and their
hearts that they cannot understand, verse. 18, 19. They are in the state of
nature, in the state of death, as appears, verse. 16, 17.

2. The food he eats is described to be ashes.

3. He has an appetite unto them, he lives upon them; he feeds upon ashes.

4. The end of his feeding is, that he might live, and deliver his soul.

5. But he is mistaken, he is deluded, he is turned aside.

6. The cause of this delusion, is from his own heart, which deceives him, and
turns him aside.

7. Here is the strength of his delusion, in that he cannot say, Is there not a
lie in my right hand?

8. The sum of all is, his soul is taken prisoner by Satan, he is a captive to
him, and so kept by him that he cannot deliver his soul.

Ashes.] That is to say; 1. groundless hopes; 2. false conclusions; 3.
Idolatry; 4. duties; 5. ordinances; 6. comforts; 7. joys; 8. ravishment; 9. or
what else soever ye can name, except Jesus Christ, is ashes. Jesus Christ is
the true bread; other things may be taken for bread, and in appearance, have
the same color, and form, like this bread, but let them seem what they can,
they are no bread indeed, but ashes. But Christ is the true bread, his flesh is
meat indeed, and his blood drink indeed; He is the living bread which came
down from Heaven; if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever, Joh.
6. 32. 35. 48. 51. 55. etc.

Feeds upon ashes.] This implies he has an expectation to enjoy satisfaction
from them, his going to them, application of them, contentedness with them,
declares he has satisfaction in them, and lives upon them.

The words opened.
By heart is meant the understanding and will.

Deceived heart, misinformed by Satan, darkened.

Aside, from Christ, in whom is deliverance, rest, and satisfaction.

Turned him, viz. the understanding and will, has a power to turn the soul.

Soul, is meant the whole man, a principal part being put for the whole.

Deliver, escape the danger he is in.

A lie, viz. that is that which will deceive me, in not being unto me that I
take it for, that which will not be that to me I need, that which will not
perform that it promises to be to me.

Hand, that which holds, mystically the understanding, etc.

Right hand, that is most eminent for use, viz. in those things which are most
eminent, that are of greatest concernment, the soul is deceived.

1. A natural man is sensible of the want of something he needs for his soul,
Obser.
therefore he says; Wherewith shall I come before the Lord? shall I come
before him with burnt offerings, with calves of a year old? Will the Lord be
pleased with thousands of Rams, or with ten thousands of Rivers of oil? Shall
I give my firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin
of my soul? Micah 6. 6, 7. All this is ashes.

2. There is not any life or strength to be expected from ashes, they are no
food fit to eat; as ashes naturally corrupts the body, and destroys it, so
here they fill the soul with corruption, and will kill and destroy the soul
at last, as they that have no bread must dye for hunger, Luke 15. 17.

3. The food natural men live upon is ashes, they have no better food to live
upon, bread they have none, they know not where any better is, nor do they
desire and bread, Isa. 55. 2. Ashes is suitable to their natures, judgments,
desires, affections, they know no danger in eating of ashes, they think it is
a happiness to have them, and that they shall have satisfaction from them.

Eaters of ashes are in a dangerous condition, they must dye spiritually and
eternally: there be many that eat ashes, they think and dream they eat bread,
but they are deceived, as Isai. 29. 8. They follow vanity, Hab. 2. 3. The East
wind, Hos. 12. 1. And lay out their money for that which is no bread, Isai.
55. 2.

What do thou eat and live upon bread or ashes, when thou art empty?

1. What do thou eye, whether do thou go? go thou to nothing but to
Christ; only we have hope in Christ, 1 Cor. 15. 19. Is thy hope only in
Christ?

2. In what do thou find peace, comfort, contentment, satisfaction in? is it
in nothing else but Christ? Phil. 3. 8.

3. Where lies thy life and strength? is it in nothing but in Christ? without
me ye can do nothing, Joh. 15. 5. Col. 3. 11.

Will no peace, comfort, praise of men, duties, ordinances, joys, ravishments,
satisfy thee? will nothing but Jesus Christ, but Christ is all in all, Col. 3.
11. If it be so, it is well.

Comfort to all that eat this bread, ye shall be satisfied, ye do live, and
shall live for ever, Joh. 6. Oh you may well be thankful for this so great
mercy, that ye have bread to eat, which others have not, nor know not of, they
famish and dye for want of bread; yet thou have enough, and shall ever have
enough; in my Fathers house there is bread enough, and to spare. Luke 15. 17.

4. There is nothing in him that can help him; if he follow his own heart, he
is misled, his heart is deceived, it turns him aside, and leads him to death;
if he follow his light, his understanding, he follows darkness, his light is
darkness, Mat. 6. 33. (man in himself is irrecoverably lost) he that walks
in darkness, knows not whither he goes, Joh. 12. 35. We were sometimes
darkness, Ephesians. 5. 8.

5. Consider man's heart is not to be hearkened unto, because it turns the
soul aside from Christ; what, do thou hearken unto, and live upon, thy own
heart, etc. or on Christ?

1. Many in stead of living upon God, live upon a deceived heart, as Pro. 3. 5,
6. 7.

2. Others live upon sense.

3. Others live upon corrupt reason.

4. Some build their hope of salvation upon other men's judgments, who if they
be godly, may easily be mistaken in a close hypocrite.

5. Many live upon the report of others, which appears by this, that if men
speak not well of them, they are greatly troubled, and are not able to bear
it, by which it appears their life is in it; it was no wonder Laban made such
ado in searching for his images, because they were his gods.

6. Many live upon their reformations, they thank God they are not so bad as
they have been, therefore they have hope; it is well when men grow better, yet
abstinence from evil, is no evidence of grace; for men may forbear the acts
of sin for fear of hell or men, etc.

7. Others live upon duties, and as they are increased, their hope and
confidence in God is increased, but if their duties fail them, their hope and
comfort is gone; by which it appears, they live upon what they do, and not
upon God; these count their duties, which is their righteousness gain: but if
they belong to God, they must count again, as Paul did, this their gain to be
loss for Christ, Phil. 3. 8.

8. Some live upon their peace, they thank God, they are quiet, there is no
terrors, nor fear of hell in them, therefore think they are in a good estate:
a most subtle delusion.

9. Others live upon groundless hope, because their sins are few or small
(as they think) they have hope.

10. Many live upon their inward comforts and joy, which appears by this, that
whilst they last, they have much assurance of the love of God, and are sure of
salvation; but as soon as their comfort, joy, which was sensibly felt, leaves
them, their confidence went with their comfort, and leaves them in a sad
condition.

11. Others upon ravishments and excasies of glory, etc.

12. Many live upon the ordinances of men, and stand ready resolved to be of
any Religion the Authority will impose upon them; and the more easy it is for
their persons and purses, the more it shall have of their hearts.

13. Yea and many there be that live upon the ordinances of God, without God,
these so they may frequent the ordinances; they are satisfied, though they see
not God in them, and be never the better for them.

14. Others live upon their confidence of salvation.

15. And some live upon creature comforts, and conclude, because they possess
them, God loves them.

16. And many live upon the Devil, and his word, that is, when Satan's
suggestions are hearkened unto, liked, believed, embraced, obeyed, as if he
should say, their sin shall never be pardoned, nor subdued, they believe him,
and are ruled by him; this is to live upon the Devil, as to hearken unto God,
as Isa. 53. 3. To believe in him, 1 John 3. 23. and to submit themselves to
God, Jam. 4. 7. is to live upon God.

A false foundation and a false life go together, therefore whosoever they be
that live upon any thing besides God in Christ, as their foundation is unsound,
so certainly it will deceive them, whatsoever their sparks be, they must and
shall lie down in sorrow, as Isa. 50. 10. they are all lying vanities, and
they that hearken unto them forsake their own mercies, as Jonah 2. 8.

A man is prone to follow the advice of his heart.

The reason is:

1. Because he thinks his heart knows.

2. That his own heart will not deceive himself; but who so trusts in his
own heart is a fool, Prove. 28. 26. Isai. 10. 7. Jer. 23. 26.

3. He is ignorant of the desperate wickedness of his heart; The heart is
deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, who can know it? Jer. 17.
9.

4. He knows no better Counselor; happy is he who is so acquainted with his
hearts deceitfulness, that he will not trust to it, nor hearken unto it.

5. The heart is the ^a^se of all the errors and miscarriages of men; for out
of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, Luke 6. 45. Mat. 15. 19. What
men think, speak, or do, is from the heart.

6. A man by nature desires that his soul may be delivered, because he
apprehends his soul is in danger, and that it is of great concernment unto him
for his soul to be delivered.

7. A natural man does endeavor to save and deliver himself: men seek
deliverance for themselves from themselves.

Reasons.

1. He judges it a reasonable thing that his soul be delivered.

2. He knows no other way of deliverance, save that of his own, either wholly
or in part.

3. He thinks it concerns him most, therefore it is his duty to do it, who
else should?

4. He is persuaded he may deliver his soul, or that without him it cannot be
delivered.

Man can do no better, till God manifest to him the perfection of Christ's
righteousness, then shall he see the insufficiency of his own, Romans 10. 3.

8. He cannot deliver his soul, all that man can do, it is impossible for man
to save himself in whole or in part, it is beyond his power, he cannot do it;
until a soul be convinced he cannot deliver himself, he rests in himself:
God has not left it to the will and power of man to deliver himself.

Reasons.

1. That no man may boast, Ephesians. 2. 9. That the pride in man might be dashed
in pieces.

2. That no man might live in and upon himself, nor joy in himself, but
rejoice in the Lord Jesus Christ, and have no confidence in the flesh, Phil. 3.
1. 3.

3. That Gods power and free love might be manifested; That we might know the
exceeding greatness of his power to usward, who believe his mighty power,
Ephesians. 1. 19.

4. That God might have all the glory, Ephesians. 1. 6. That no flesh should glory,
1 Cor. 1. 29. Gal. 6. 14. In the Lord shall all the seed of Israel be
justified, and shall glory, Isa. 55. 25.

9. All ways besides Christ are bypaths, aside out of the way: I am the way,
Joh. 14. 6.

10. Christ's way and man's way are contrary each to other: Christ's way leads the
soul to Christ; man's way leads to himself, to deliver himself.

11. We should not be led aside from Christ by any thing; hearken then only
to Chr^^^

12. Nor say, is there not a lie? and that is, he cannot ask a question, etc.

13. The means of deliverance is so hid from man, that he has no power to use
them.

14. A lie, all that man does rest upon while he is in the state of nature, is
nothing but a lie; oh, he is miserably deluded.

15. The strength and confidence of a deluded man, may be so great, that it may
seem to him unreasonable once to question it.

16. Men's confidence of salvation, may be greater and stronger then the faith
of some of the Lords; and yet it is false and nothing but the delusion of a
deceived heart, and Satan.

17. The greatness or strength of any man's confidence, cannot assure him that
has it, that it is not a delusion; but it is proved to be true or false by the
ground of it, the cause and foundation of it. If it be built or caused by any
of man's qualifications, either abstinence from sin, doing good, or from his
inward peace, comfort, joy, etc. it is false. But if it be founded upon Christ,
only in his free grace, from the word and promise of God, Romans 15. 4. In his
word do I hope, Psalm. 130. 5. But I hope in thy word, Psalm. 119. 81. it is
true; did God so convince thee, that thou becamest lost and fatherles, Hos. 14.
3. and persuaded thee he had mercy for thee, and caused thee to hope in him for
it, Psalm. 33. 18. 21. 22. it is no delusion.

FINIS.
NEWS FROM HEAVEN, OR A CORDIAL for a fainting Heart.
2 COR. 5. 20, 21. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did
beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God.

For he has made him to be sin for us, that knew no sin, that we might be made
the righteousness of God in him.


BEhold, and hearken, for here are tidings of great joy, that Christ alone does
free the soul from sin, and makes the soul to enjoy the righteousness of God
in him; in which is sure, sweet, clear, full, durable, divine consolation,
sufficient to cheer, revive, raise and ravish the sinking soul, by reason of
sin, in the want of a righteousness of God in him.

These words contain many divine truths, I shall endeavor to declare some
observations from them for our instruction and consolation.

In that he says, Be ye reconciled to God, you may observe,

Obs. 1.
That the best estate of men by nature is an estate of enmity against God, who
is the chiefest good; for if these need any reconciliation, how much more
enemies? Romans 5. 10.

For he has made him to be sin for us.

Obs. 2.
God has in his wisdom and love found out a way to save lost man, and has
sent the Lord Jesus to effect it, Zach. 9. 10, 11. and manifest it, and has
sent Ambassadors, and given us his word to declare his great grace, Joh. 1. 17.
infinite love, Joh. 3. 16. and the unsearchable riches of Christ.

Be ye reconciled to God, for he has made him to be sin for us.

Obs. 3.
That there needs strong reasons and earnest entreaties, yea the arm of the
Lord must be revealed in them, to reconcile a sinful soul to God, Isa. 53. 1.

As though God did beseech you.

Obs. 4.
God is more willing to pardon a sinner, yea the chief of sinners, then any
soul is or can be willing to be pardoned. This appears in that God seeks to
us to be reconciled; man seeks it not: I was found of them that sought me not,
Isa. 65. 1, 2, 3. And in that God beseeches a lost sinner to be reconciled to
God; and when we prodigals turn to God, being turned by God, we do but go,
and that softly; but God who is that Father, runs to receive us, as Luke 15.
18. 20. And as running expresses much more willingness, then an easy going,
so it is here.

God beseeches you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead.

Obs. 5.
It appears that all the doubts and fears the soul or Satan can frame, as if
God were unwilling to pardon a lost sinner, ( Luke 19. 10.) are all groundless
and false; for he prays and beseeches to be reconciled, as if he should say,
go tell such a soul from me, I will have him to be reconciled to me, I am not
angry with him, he need not doubt of my love, which is infinite, without time
or measure, I am all-sufficient, I can and I will pass by all his wickedness
against me.

Be ye reconciled; we pray you.

Obs. 6.
That even such sinners as God sends after, and will save, they have many hard
thoughts of God, they are so foolish and so deceived by sin, that they are
contented to be as they are, and stand in need to be prayed and entreated to be
reconciled to God.

As though God did beseech you by us.

Obs. 7.
That all those into whom God has put this word of reconciliation, when it is
declared unto us by them, or in his Word, we ought to receive it, and believe
it, as if God did immediately speak unto us, for they speak in his stead: So
also it is the duty of the Ambassadors of Christ to declare nothing but the
message they receive from Christ, according to the word of Christ.

We pray you, be ye reconciled to God; for he has made him to be sin for us.

Obs. 8.
The way God takes to reconcile a sinner unto himself, is the discovery of his
free grace and love of God done to man through Christ.

The discovery of this to the soul, expels ignorance, and slays the souls
enmity against God; and by his love he draws the soul to God in love again;
Gods way of saving man is only in a way of love; therefore he says, Behold, I
will allure her, and speak comfortably unto her, Hos. 2. 14. His love is free,
full, and eternal; I will love them freely, Hos. 14. 4. I drew them with cords
of a man, with bands of love, Hos. 11. 4.

Be reconciled; for he has made him to be sin for us.

Obs. 9.
It appears that the sense and guilt of sin, does hinder the soul from being
reconciled; sin causes the soul to desire to be at a further distance from
God, as Luke 5. 8.

Ob. 10
That before a sinner can be reconciled unto God, he must understand and know
the cause, way, and means of his salvation, (I say not before God loves him)
therefore as it is declared; that all have sinned, and come short of the glory
of God, etc. Romans 3. So he declares that Jesus Christ is made sin for us, and
that we are justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in
Jesus, whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood,
to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins, that he might be
just, and the justifier of him that believes in Jesus, Romans 3. 23, 24, 25, 26.
see Romans 5. 10, 11. 13. 19. Romans 6. 23. Titus 3. 5.

He has made him.

Obser. 11.
God the Father has set apart the Lord Jesus to save man, Heb. 9. 14. 22. Rev.
13. 8. There is no other name whereby we may be saved, but by the name of
Jesus, Act. 4. 12.

Which knew no sin.

Obser. 12.
Christ knew no sin in himself personally, Luke 1. 35. nor inherently, Heb. 14.
5. nor experimentally, Joh. 8. 40.

Obser. 13.
And seeing Christ is so holy a person and so qualified as he is, Col. 2. 3.
none ought to doubt of the sufficiency, meritoriousnesse, and effectualnesse of
whatsoever he has undertaken to do: for by once offering the sacrifice of
himself, he has for ever perfected them that are sanctified; that is, set
apart, Heb. 10. 10. 14.

Obser. 14.
So that the sinful soul ought to cast away all discouragements, and to rest
satisfied in this full, perfect, and infinite satisfaction, and not suffer
their foolish hearts to seek after, or desire any other, for as there is none
to be found elsewhere, so there needs none; for be thy sins never so great, or
many, this one satisfaction of the Lord Jesus is sufficient.

Made him to be sin.

Obser. 15.
God has imputed our sins unto Christ, and so laid them upon him, Esa. 53. 5.
that they are not ours no more but Christ's, who has freed us from them, who
will disanull them, and so free himself of them, so that he shall appear
without sin, Heb. 9. 28.

Obser. 16.
The way and means God has chosen to free a sinner from sin, is only by Jesus
Christ, that he might undergo the penalty of sin, or else no man could be
saved, as these Scriptures declare, Joh. 1. 1. 7. Joh. 1. 29. Romans 8. 2. Ephesians.
2. 14, 15. Rev. 1. 5. Heb. 9. 22. Col. 1. 20. Zach. 9. 11. For sin must be
charged upon Christ, or the sinner, and our happiness lies in this, that our
sins are not imputed unto us, Psalm. 32. 1, 2. Romans 4. 8. Our sins cost Christ
dear, that they might cast us nothing, Romans 5. 9. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19.

For us.

Ob. 17
The word, us, and we, in this verse, must be understood for them in the 19.
verse, to whom God does not impute their trespasses: So that they are blessed,
Psalm. 32. 1, 2. Romans 4. 7. for they shall not miss of glory, because they have
redemption by his blood, and remission of sins, as Col. 1. 14. Romans 5. 10.
Therefore by the words, us, and we, cannot truly be understood every son and
daughter of Adam.

For so large as the purpose of God is of saving men, so large is the means of
this salvation, so large is the declaration to be, so large is the particular
application of salvation to be, and so large is the effect of salvation it
self; none of these are any larger then the other.

If any reply that Christ in the declaration is offered to all, therefore the
particular application of salvation is to be to all.

I answer, That Christ is not offered to all, nor to none at all: true, it is
the Gospel is to be preached to every creature, and that all persons whosoever
will are called to come to Christ to drink, etc. But what Scripture says,
Christ is offered to any person, much less to all the world? God so loved the
world, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting
life. This is a declaration of what persons God will save: the word of God is a
declaration of the will of God; now for to declare a thing, and to offer it, is
not one thing; for one may declare to another, the riches that he or another
has, and yet not offer any of them, nor it may be cannot; and so a man may
give that to another, which he never offered him.

It Is safest to keep to the language of the Scriptures (which form of words
are sound) especially in this age, in which men catch up expressions, and by
them abuse God, and his truth, and themselves; for if one affirm, that God
offers Christ to all; men reply, does not God mean as he says? and if God
offers Christ, and man has not a sufficient power to receive him; they are
mocked, and God is unjust, etc. and that men have free will, and such like
stuff, so that ye may see how one error draws many after it, and it is often
grounded upon an unsound expression.

Made sin: made the righteousness of God.

Obser. 18.
After what manner Christ became a sinner, after the same manner we are made
just; but he became a sinner not by any infusion of our corrupt qualities, but
by imputation only: Therefore we are just before God, not by infusion of any
habitual grace into our corrupt natures, but by imputation of his
righteousness; God imputes righteousness without works, Romans 4. 6. If this
were well minded, it might answer and remove some temptations, which are
occasioned by apprehending the contrary.

The righteousness of God.

Obser. 19.
Christ's righteousness is the righteousness of God. That righteousness which
freeth a sinner from the curse of the Law is a perfect righteousness, Heb. 1.
8. Romans 9. 5. Mat. 6. 33. Romans 4. 6. Therefore prize it highly.

Obser. 20.
Man's righteousness is imperfect, and could not justify him before God; Enter
not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man living be
justified, Psalm. 143. 2. Dan. 9. 18. Tit. 3. 5. 7. All our righteousnesses are
as filthy rags, etc. Isai. 64. 4. 6. God reveals to a soul Christ's
righteousness, and the souls interest unto it, Joh. 16. 14. To comfort the
soul, and cause the soul to love God again, he does not comfort us in the
sight of our own righteousness, before he declares and comforts the soul in
the righteousness of Christ.

Righteousness in him.

Obser. 21.
That righteousness which justifies us before God, as it is not ours, so it is
not in us, but as it is Christ's righteousness, so it is in him: In the Lord
have I righteousness and strength: in me you shall have righteousness and
strength, Isa. 45. 23, 24, 25.

Obser. 22.
The cause or form of our justification, is by a reciprocal translation of our
sin unto Christ, and his righteousness unto us: both which is done by God for
us.

That we might be made.

Obser. 23.
Whatsoever Jesus Christ has done and suffered, was for those whose sins were
laid upon him, who are stated in him, Ephesians. 1. 4. and are fully pardoned by
him, Rev. 1. 5. By the obedience of one man (viz. Christ) many are made
righteous, Romans 5. 19. By his stripes we are healed, Isa. 53. 5. The blood of
Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1. 7.

In him.

Obser. 24.
God considers his to be in Christ, before they had a being in themselves,
Ephesians. 1. 4. and he never looks upon his children out of him, for they are
never out of him: They dwell in Christ, Joh. 6. 56. and shall ever live, Joh.
9. 25. and be found in him, Phil. 3. 8.

Obser. 25.
Christ and all true believers are so united together, that they are but one;
one body, one spirit, bone of his bone: oh what union is like to this, that is
so real, full, and entire, wonderful, glorious, spiritual, eternal, and
infinite! 1 Cor. 6. 17. Gal. 5. 30. etc. Joh. 15. 5. Joh. 17. 22, 23. If our
faith in Christ were as strong as our union with Christ, we should ingrosse
and possess all that is in heaven, and nothing in the earth could trouble us.

Obser. 26.
The state of a believer in Christ, as considered in him, is an estate of
perfection; We are complete in him, Col. 2. 9, 10. 13. As Christ is, so am I;
as I am, so is Christ, Joh. 1. 17. What is Christ's is mine; what is mine is
his; Christ's righteousness is mine: I am all righteous, I need no more, nor no
other righteousness; as I am in Christ, I am as righteous and as acceptable as
Christ; God sees no sin in me, because there is none; for, I am all fair,
there is no spot in me, Song 4. 7. Song 2. 10. Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. For as he
is, even so are we in this world, 1 John 4. 17. Thou have cast all my sins
behind thy back, Isa. 38. 17. As far as the East in from the West, so far
has he removed our transgressions from us, Psalm. 103. 12. Seventy weeks are
determined upon the people, and upon the holy City, to finish the
transgressions, and to make an end of sins, and to make reconviliation for
iniquity, and to bring in an everlasting righteousness, to seal up the
vision, and prophecy, and to anoint the most Holy, Dan. 9. 24. I will greatly
rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my God, for he has clothed
me with the garments of salvation, he has covered me with the robe of
righteousness, Isa. 61. 10. All Saints are alike clothed with Christ's
righteousness: the meanest, the weakest, as the best, and is as acceptable by
it as the best: oh they are all alike perfect, righteous, and glorious, as they
are in Christ! oh, here is strong consolation for thy fainting heart, to
refresh it self withal! Drink, O friends, and make ye merry, O welbeloved;
yea drink, drink abundantly in this fountain that is bottomless, and
therefore can never be drawn dry, Song 5. 1.

In the most perfect Saints, as they are in themselves, there is much sin, 1 John 1. 10. and God does see it; yet God cannot condemn them to wrath for it,
no more then God can condemn Christ for it, who shall appear without sin,
Heb. 9. 28. They being in him who has suffered for it; and Justice neither
will nor can exact the payment of a debt twice: now it is justice in God to
justify, Romans 3. 25. yea, God is as just in pardoning a sinner by the blood of
Christ, as he is just in condemning any; and now thou have a full pardon by
justice as well as mercy, therefore drink freely, Song 5. 1.

For us.

Obser. 27.
That which is spoken in general to believers, every believer is to apply it to
himself in particular; so Paul, he loved me, and gave himself for me, Gal. 2.
20.

For us, for me.

Obser. 28.
The word and promise of God, that it is for me, is that which my soul should
fix its eye upon, and by faith for ever rely upon, and be a full satisfaction
to my soul; knowing that the word and promise of God is the only ground of my
faith, and is security sufficient for my salvation.

Obser. 29.
As soon as the soul is convinced, that Jesus Christ is made sin for me, and
that I am made the righteousness of God in him, all the souls doubts, fears,
objections vanish, and Christ is believed in, and lived upon, with
thankfulness and joy.

Obser. 30.
Jesus Christ being made sin for me, is as good for me, yea better for me, then
if I had never sinned; as much better as a spiritual body is better then a
natural, as much better as the image of the heavenly is better then the image
of the earthly; yea, as much better as strength is better then weakness, and
as heaven is better then earth, 1 Cor. 15. 43, 44. to 55.

But, Obj. 1.
says a discouraged soul, I cannot believe the Lord Jesus was made sin for me.

Why not for thee? Ans.


Because my sins are greater then others be; Obj. 2.
for my sins have all the aggravations upon them that can be.

For mine are many. Ag. 1.


So were theirs in the second and third Chapter of Jeremiah, Ans.
yet notwithstanding God pardoned them all, as appears, Jer. 3. 21. to 25.

But my sins are great and heinous. Ag. 2.


So were theirs, Ans.
and so were Manassehs, as appears, 2 King. 21. 4. 9. 11. 16. and so was the
woman's, Luke 7. 47. and so was Paul's, 1 Timothy 1. 15. yet God pardoned them all,
as he has done others.

But my sins are against the Gospel. Ag. 3.


So was Paul's, Ans.
he persecuted them that professed the Gospel, and made havoc of the Church,
entering into every house, haling men and women, and committed them to prison,
Act. 8. 3. And Christ died for them that slew him, Act. 2. 23. 38.

But mine are after many mercies. Ag. 4.


So was Solomon's, Answ.
who sinned against God after the Lord appeared unto him twice, 1 King. 11. 9.

But I have sinned against Gods entreaties to return. Aggr. 5.


So did they; Answ.
I said after she had done all these things; Turn thou unto me, but she
returned not, Jer. 3. 7.

But I have sinned against Gods Reproves. Aggr. 6.


So did they; Answ.
Thou have a whores forehead, that refusest to be ashamed, Jer. 3. 3. 8.

But I have sinned against Gods corrections in not being reformed by them.
Aggr. 7.


So did they; Answ.
In vain have I smitten your children, they have received no correction, Jer.
2. 30.

But I have committed one sin often. Ag. 8.


So did they; Answ.
Thou have played the harlot with many lovers, Jer. 3. 1. 6.

But I have continued sinning for a long continuance of time. Ag. 9.


So did they; Answ.
We have not obeyed the voice of the Lord from our youth unto this day, Jer. 3.
25. and 2. 22.

But my sins are against knowledge and Conscience. Aggr. 10.


So was David's sin concerning Bathshebah, Answ.
and putting to death Vriah. And so did Peter sin when he said and swore he
knew not Christ, and that he was not with him, Mat. 26. 69. to 75.

But I am fallen back from what I have been. Aggr. 11.


So did they; Answ.
Return thou backsliding Israel, Jer. 3. 6. 12.

But I have willingly and resolvedly forsaken God. Aggr. 12.


So did they; Answ.
saying, We are Lords, we will come no more at him, Jer. 3. 31, 32.

But I have willingly chosen sin. Ag. 13.


So did they; saying, Answ.
I have loved strangers, and after them will I go, Jer. 2. 25.

But I have seduced others, Aggr. 14.
and caused them to sin.

So did they; Answ.
Thou have also taught the wicked ones thy ways, Jer. 2. 33. And Manasseh
seduced them to do more evil then did the Nations whom the Lord destroyed;
and made Judah also to sin, 2 King. 21. 9. 11. 16. And Paul compeld men to
blaspheme, Act. 26. 11. 16. Manasseh a great sinner obtained mercy, 2 Chronicles.
33. 18, 19. And a lesser sinner perishes in his sin; that men may know, the
Lord will have mercy on whom he will, Romans 9. 15.

But I have committed as much sin as I could. Aggr. 15.


So did they; Answ.
Behold thou have spoken and done as evil things as thou could, Jer. 3. 5.

But my sins are after vows and Covenants. Aggr. 16.


So were theirs; Answ.
Thou said, I will not transgress, when upon every high hill, and under
every green tree thou wanderest, playing the harlot, Jer. 2. 25.

But I have justified my self in all my sins. Aggr. 17.


So did they; Answ.
Because thou said, I have not sinned, I will plead with thee, Jer. 2. 35.

But I despair, Aggr. 18.
and have no hope of mercy.

This is worst of all; Answ.
yet so did they; Thou said there is no hope, Jer. 2. 25. And when I cry, he
shuts out my prayer, and I said, My strength, and my hope is perished with
the Lord, said Jeremiah, Lam. 3. 8. 18. And Job said, My hope has he removed
like a tree, Job 19. 10. My days are spent without hope, Job 7. 6. 13, 14, 15,
16. David in his have, said, I am out off before thine eyes, Psalm. 31. 22.
Abraham believed against hope, Romans 4. 18. Ye were sometimes afar off, without
God, and without hope, Ephesians. 2. 12. yet at last they were made nigh by the
blood of Christ, Ephesians. 2. 13. Behold, all these were once like unto thee, and
the Lord has had mercy upon them, and so he may have mercy upon thee also,
therefore poor soul, be not out of hope, mind what David said, I was brought
low, and he helped me, Psalm. 116. 6. God is able to save to the uttermost, Heb.
7. 25. Consider what the name of the Lord is, Exodus 34. 5, 6, 7. Oh the
unsearchable riches of his grace! all that know his Name will trust in him,
Psalm. 9. 10.

And because the greatness of sin is one of the greatest discouragements to a
soul under the sense of sin; Consider these things which are encouragements of
hope unto thee.

1. Encouragement to hope. 1. Incoura.


The multitude or greatness of sin, ought not to be a discouragement unto
thee, because the fewness or smalnesse of thy sins are not to be any ground,
or cause of thy confidence in God for pardon; but in the promise of God of
pardon, in which promise the truth and faithfulness is.

2. Encouragement to hope. 2. Incoura.


Because the word of God does no where say, that great sinners shall not be
saved, therefore to conceive so is folly, and no less then a delusion of Satan.

3. Encouragement to hope. 3. In coura.


Because the word of God says the contrary, that Jesus Christ came to save
sinners, yea and the chief sinners, and this is a saying worthy of all
acceptance, 1 Timothy 1. 15, 16. Come now let us reason together, says the Lord,
though your sins were as crimson, they shall be made white as snow, though
they were red like scarlet, they shall be made as wool, Isaiah 1. 18. The word
of God declares many great and sweet promises to great sinners, as Jer. 3. Isa.
55. 7, 8, 9. and 43. 24, 25. There be many examples of great sinners received
to mercy, as Manasseh, 2 Chronicles. 33. 18, 19. Paul, and one who was a sinner with
a witness, Luke 7. 37. 47. And many others, yea the rebellious also, Psalm. 68.
18.

4. Encouragement to hope. 4. Incoura.


Because there is a fountain set open for sin and for uncleanness, Zach. 13.
1. And Christ is mighty to save, Isa. 62. 1. He will abundantly pardon, Isa.
55. 7. And his compassions fail not, Lam. 3. 22.

5. Encouragement to hope. 5. Incoura.


Because great sinners that are heavy laden with sin, are called to come to
Christ, Mat. 11. 28. If any man thirst, let him came to me and drink, Joh. 7.
37. Every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, Isa. 55. 1. Rev. 22. 17.

6. Encouragement to hope. 6. In coura.


The Saints have made their greatness of sin an encouragement to believe;
Lord, pardon my sins, for they are great, Psalm. 25. 11. How great is his
goodness? much greater then thy sins, Zach. 9. 17. Isa. 43. The greater our
sins are, the greater our faith should be. Lo here is great consolation.

7. Encouragement to hope. 7. Incoura.


Because God does not sell Christ or grace, but he gives Christ, and all that
is his freely; Ye that have no silver, come buy and eat, come buy without
money, Isa. 55. 1. And the Spirit, and the Bride say, Come, and let him that
hears say, come, and let him that is athirst, come, and let whosoever will
take of the water of life freely, Rev. 22. 17. Jesus stood, crying, saying, If
any man thirst, let him come to me and drink, Joh. 7. 37.

8. Encouragement. 8. Incoura.


Because such as Jesus Christ saves, are unworthy, ungodly, and without works,
Romans 4. 5, 6. The most perfect Saint that ever has been, did stand in need of
mercy, and was unworthy. Behold, he found no steadfastness in his servants, and
charge his Angels of folly, how much more in them that dwell in houses of
clay? Job 4. 18, 19. And all those whom God has revealed his Son unto, they
see an exceeding transcendent beauty in him; and he is precious unto them, 1
Pet. 2. 7. They loath and abhor themselves, Job 42. 6. Because they see in
themselves nothing else but vileness, filthiness, and unworthiness, Ezekiel.
16. 63. and it sets out the mercy of God the more, that it is freely given unto
the unworthy, Ezekiel. 16.

9. Incoura.
9. Encouragement.

It makes most for the glory of God to give great things, and is it not a
disparagement for a King to do otherwise? The Lord is a great King, a mighty
God, Isa. 9. 6. He does great things past finding out, and wonders without
number, Job 9. 10. Fear not, the Lord will do great things, Joel 2. 21. For
with God nothing shall be impossible, Luke 1. 37. Measure not the Lord by thy
self: For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways,
says the Lord; for as the heavens are higher then the earth, so are my ways
higher then your ways, and my thoughts then your thoughts, Isa. 55. 8, 9. And
those who are made wise by God, look not so much to their baseness as unto
his greatness, Zach. 9. 17.

10. Incoura.
10. Encouragement.

That which moves God to show mercy, is only in himself, nothing in the
creature, Ezekiel. 16. 3. to 9. Nor any thing the creature can do, cannot move
God to show mercy; I will do away thy sins for my Names sake, Isa. 43. 25.
God shows mercy, because he will, Micah 7. 18, 19.

11. Encouragement. 11. Incoura.


The greater our sins are, and our sensiblenesse of unworthiness, the more
we shall love God when we know that our sins are pardoned, Luke 7. 41, 42,
43, 47.

12. Encouragement. 12. Incoura.


The mercy of God is infinite, it has no part or form, therefore it is not
capable of any addition or defect: therefore infinite, should thou need
thousands of Seas of mercy to pardon thy sins. God has not the less,
notwithstanding he has given so much. If I had all the sins upon me, that can
be committed, or but one sinful thought, this consideration makes it all one.
Oh, I, worlds of sin in this Ocean vanish and come to nothing, Romans 11. 33. Oh
the depth of the unsearchable riches of Christ! Ephesians. 3. 8.

13. Encouragement. 13. Incoura.


The Name of God it is infinite also: The Father of mercies, 2 Cor. 1. 3. Yea
it is the nature of God. The Lord is very pitiful, and of tender mercies, Jam.
5. 11. All mercy and pity is from him, and all that is, or has been, is but a
drop to that Ocean of that pity and mercy that is in him. We are ready to sin,
but God is much more ready to forgive; mercy pleases him, it is his delight,
Micah 7. 18. He is plenteous in mercy, Psalm. 86. 5. Thou art a God ready to
forgive.

14. Encouragement. 14. Incoura.


The price that is for the sins of such as believe, is infinite also; count
all thy sins, and still they are the acts of a finite creature; and is not
Christ satisfaction above them? he is God, 1 John 5. 20. His righteousness is
far greater then thy sins: therefore be they great or small, he is able to
disanull them all.

15. Encouragement. 15. Incoura.


The Covenant of grace, is not made with us, nor can it be broken by us, but
with Christ: If they break my statutes, and keep not my Commandments;
nevertheless, my loving kindness will I not take from him, nor suffer my
faithfulness to fail; my Covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that
is gone out of my lips, Psalm. 89. 31. 33, 34. My Covenant shall stand fast with
him, verse. 28. So then the Covenant is made with Christ, and that it was not
made for our good works, nor can we disanull it by our sins; for it is sure,
perpetual, and everlasting, Heb. 13. 20. It Is not founded upon a rotten and
sandy foundation, as thy self and duties are. Oh wonder at Gods wisdom and
love, that it is not made with us, nor is it in our keeping, lo it is founded
upon the word and promise of an eternal God, and what ever is in God is God,
God is unchangeable, Micah 3. 6. therefore the Covenant stands sure for ever,
Heb. 13. 20.

But the discouraged soul still replieth;

I am persuaded I have committed the sin against the holy Spirit, 3. Ob.
and that is unpardonable, Heb. 6. 4.

Those who have committed this sin, Answ.
tread under foot the Son of God, and count the blood of the Covenant an
unholy thing, and do hate God and Christ, Joh. 15. 24. In that thou art afraid
thou have committed this sin, it is certain thou have not committed it, because
such as have so sinned are past fear or feeling, being given up to a reprobate
sense, Ephesians. 4. 19.

I am afraid the day of grace is past to me, 4. Ob.
and so nothing can do me good.

You must not give way to such a thought; Ans. 1.
who knows but the Lord may return? Jonah 3. 19.

Is this the way think thou to enjoy the assurance of his love, 2.
to nourish jealousies against his love? Surely this is not the way. Should
thou not rather say as David did, How precious are thy thoughts to me, O God?
great is the sum of them, if I should count them, they are more then the
sands, Psalm. 139. 17, 18. The number of the sands are many, yet Gods thoughts
of love exceeds them; Be not afraid, only believe, Mark. 5. 36. Christ
received sinners, Luke 15. 1, 2.

If thou think the day of grace is past, 3.
because thy sins are great, etc. this will not prove it: mind what God
says; I have spread out my hand all the day to a rebellious people, that
provoke me to anger continually to my face, Isa. 65. 2, 3.

If thou desire to return to God, 4.
thy day of grace is not past, Rev. 2. 20.

If we confess our sins, 5.
he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, etc. 1 John 4. 9.

I do not believe I am elected, 5. Ob.
etc. so nothing can do me good.

This is a secret, Ans. 1
and you must not meddle with Gods secrets; Secret things belong to God, and
revealed things to us, Deuteronomy. 29. 29.

It Is one of Satan's deceits to tell a soul that God has no mercy for him, 2.
when the soul has obtained mercy, or when it is not far from him.

It is certain, 3.
these thoughts come from Satan, because they are contrary to God in his word,
as Genesis 3. 2, 3, 4.

It Is the nature of unbelief, 4.
to be inquisitive and curious to find out any pretense, that it may seem to
do well in not harkening to what God says in his word, Heb. 10.

We must not hearken unto Satan, 5.
nor yield to him, but resist him; meddle not with election, fix thy eye upon
Christ, as a suitable good for thee, who is able to save thee, and wait upon him
in the use of his means, till he shall give thee faith, that by it thou may
know thy self to be elected, Act. 13. 48.

But I have used the means, 6. Ob.
and yet I am no better, but worser, therefore God will never do me good.

Are you sure you have used all Gods means, Ans. 1.
do thou know the number of them? and have your ends been all good and right
placed, and have you used them in a right manner, measure, time, in sincerity,
humility, which I question; and have you not rested in the use of means? have
you set God above his means, and expected his blessing upon them, without
which they could do no good? If thou have not used them all in faith, say not,
thou have used the means; what are all means without faith? they are as a
shadow without the substance, Heb. 11. 1. The word they heard profited them
not, for want of faith, Heb. 4. 2.

It is no good reason to say, 2.
because God has not answered me, and supplied me, therefore he never will
consider, Isa. 64. 4. Isa. 8. 17. They which had not obtained mercy did, 1 Pet.
2. 10. They shall not be ashamed that wait for me, Isa. 49. 23.

There be many that do satisfy themselves with the means, 3.
and their frequenting them, and in what they do: that it is just with God,
yea a mercy to blast all, to show their emptiness, that we might look and long
for Christ, to bless the means, and be all in all unto us.

Men believe not that faith is the gift of God, 4.
and the Spirits work, Phil. 1. 29. so that they go not to God in his promise
for faith, but endeavor to make a faith of their own to carry to God.

If thou have a will that only Christ should save thee, 5.
God has begun his work in thee, and he will finish it, Heb. 12. 2. and one
day thou shall know thy self to be pardoned, and all thy sins shall be subdued.

Consider God may have mercy for thee, 6.
though thou know it not; for men's sins are first forgiven, before they
are to believe it, or can be assured of it; for if men should believe, that
their sins are forgiven before they be forgiven, they should believe that which
is false; neither can any man's believing make that to be, which had not a being
before: faith declares to us our pardon; but our believing neither pardons nor
procures the pardon of any sin; if it could, what need was there of the death
of Christ?

I have waited a long time, Obj. 7.
and many have received mercy since, but not I.

Even the Lords servants have waited a long time for God, Ans. 1.
or at least they thought the time long; David said, I am weary of my crying,
my throat is dried, mine eyes fail, while I wait for my God, Psalm. 69. 3.

If God have given thee a heart to wait upon him, 2.
thou art blessed; Blessed are all they that wait for him, Isa. 30. 18. Waiting
implies perseverance, patience, longsuffering, in holding out, notwithstanding
the tediousness of the time deferred, courage in breaking through all
difficulties that stand between waiting, and to continue waiting, though all
things seem contrary, till we enjoy what we waited for; I wait for my God,
Psalm. 69. 3.

I am now old in years, Obj. 8.
and if God had intended to have done my soul good, surely he would have done
it before this time, and now death is ready to take me away.

Yea, Ans. 1.
though it be thus with thee, yet mercy may be thy portion at last, if mercy
come at last, it will be sweet, and it may come at last. The thief was saved
upon the Cross, Mat. 20. Luke 23. Oh how near was he unto his end before
mercy came unto him!

You may not set a time to God, 2.
in which he shall show mercy, for he gives what he will, and when he will,
and will not be tied to thy time; it is an exceeding great grace for God to show
mercy, though it be at the last, as he did to the thief upon the Cross.

God has all hours in the day to work, 3.
the last hour God uses to call some, as well as the third; see Mat. 20. 1.
to 10. for there is nothing too hard for God.

If I were filled with qualifications, Obj. 9.
as humbleness, and brokennesse of heart, and took delight to hear and pray,
as others, I could have hope, but now I cannot.

Alas, poor soul, thou art greatly deluded, Ans. 1.
for these things can no way fit the soul for mercy. Why do thou seek the
living among the dead? Luke 24. 5. Why do thou look at, and rest in, such
things as these? for had thou these in the greatest measure, they could not
procure thy happiness, nor stand thee in any stead; oh nothing but Christ can
do thy soul any good, and truly comfort thee.

Consider, 2.
what qualifications had they in Ezekiel 16. 3. to 9. of whom God was found?
Surely they had none, except sinful ones. What, says God; I was found of them
that sought me not, Isa. 65. 1, 2, 3. Tell me, what qualifications had they who
were enemies? yet Christ died for them, Romans 5. 9, 10. All that are saved are
saved by grace, without any cause or condition in man, 2 Timothy 1. 9.

Under color of devotion, 3.
ye overthrow Christ; can your duties, etc. procure Christ, or what use is
there of Christ, if ye can have what ye need without him? ye would have
power, ability, and inlargements before ye dare believe in Christ; Oh the
greatness of thy pride and folly! does not Christ say true, that without me
ye can do nothing? Joh. 15. 5.

As in nature none can work before they have life; 4.
so none can do any thing that is spiritual, before they live spiritually.
Christ must be in thee before thou can believe: the soul must believe before
it can find any sanctification, or works at all in it self, yea without any
regard to works in any measure whatsoever, for there is nothing to be done by
man to be a preparation to his sanctification; see Romans 4. 5. and 5. 8. 10.

Thou hungerest and thirstest after a righteousness of thine own, 5.
and would establish it, but it must be renounced. I confess, this
self-denial is very hard; oh, how hard is it for the soul to be taken off its
own bottom of works, and of self-concurrence! strip them of all that is their
own, and ye take away their lives; they must and will have something, some
humbleness, and brokennesse of heart, some tears, some good works, or
abilities, or a good heart; something they must have, for they think it cannot
be, that they should be accepted, pardoned, and saved, and they to do nothing
at all themselves for it: therefore as soon as they begin to epsy a flaw in
what they do, for who can say his heart is clean? Job 25. 4. they betake
themselves to break their hearts, to make God amends for all, and think if
they can but attain unto such a deep measure of humiliation and sorrow for
sin, then they think they have an evidence for heaven: but alas, this is no
evidence, save only of great ignorance, in that they see not death in their
best duties: the Lord may say to you who work so hard for life, Thou have
found the life of thy hand, therefore thou wast not grieved, Isa. 57. 10. Thou
comfortest thy self in thine own sparks, but (sorrow is all the comfort such
comfort can produce) ye shall lie down in sorrow, Isa. 50. 11. When we say
our good works are not the way to life, men esteem it a grievous error, yet
Christ says, I am the way, Joh. 14. 6. Are thy works Christ or no? if no, then
they are not the way, for Christ says true, and if Jesus Christ is to be unto
us all in all, Col. 3. 11. Our best works are to be unto us nothing at all,
our works make us not the better before God, nor to be more beloved of God,
but declare us to be what we are made by God: the Papists do good works to be
saved, but we abhor it, because it is condemned by God, therefore all those
who expect and hope for mercy, because they leave their sins, as they say,
and do many good works; consider what I say unto thee, Alas, poor soul, thou
art still in the state of nature, in the gall of bitterness, thou art not
quite plucked up off of thine own stock of self-workes, and self-concurrence
with Christ, and therefore art not planted into Christ, thou art ignorant of
the righteousness of God, which is the cause why thou go about to establish
thine own righteousness, and so long as thou do so, thou can not submit
to the righteousness of God, Romans 10. 13. But did thou know what a
righteousness Christ is, thou could not but have preferred it before thine
own righteousness, yea it would be esteemed by thee but dross and dung to
his, as Phil. 3. 8, 9. And unless the Lord Jesus open thine eyes, and reveal
his righteousness unto thee, thy righteousness (which thou joynest with
Christ's for salvation) will of a certain work thy destruction unto all
eternity. Publicans and harlots are nearer salvation then thee, when you who
work for life are Pharisees, and if you dye in this estate, you must perish,
Mat. 21. 31, 32. Luke 7. 29, 30.

I know many will cavil, and say, if Christ must do all, and man nothing,
then men need not care what they do, but live as they list.

Answ. As it is our duty, so it is our desire to do whatsoever the word of
God requires, but we are not commanded to do any thing to procure the pardon
of our sins, but in reference to service and duty, I count my self to be
never the nearer Heaven for my best works, then if I had done nothing else but
blaspheme God. But what says the Scriptures, Now to him that works, is the
reward not reckoned of grace, but of debt, but to him that works not, but
believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for
righteousness, Romans 4. 2, 3, 4, 5. We are saved, not according to our works,
but according to his own purpose and grace, 2. Tim. 1. 9. When we were
enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, Romans 5. 10. I
will do away thy offenses for my Names sake, Isa. 43. 25. A new heart also
will I give thee, Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27. 31. I have seen his ways, and will heal
him, Isa. 57. 17. I have blotted out thy sins, return unto me, etc. Isa. 44.
22. When thou were polluted in thy own blood, I said unto thee, Live. When thou
were in thy blood, thy time was the time of love, and I covered thy nakedness,
etc. Ezekiel. 16. 6. 8. All unto whom the mystery of Gods love and free grace is
revealed, they cry grace, grace, Christ, Christ; Christ is all in all, nothing
but Christ, their prayers, tears, duties, devotions, and all of theirs, is
nothing to them in respect of acceptance, or justification, or salvation, they
are now dead to working, they do no works in the world to attain any of
these, all theirs is vanished, and is quite drowned in the infinite Ocean of
Gods free grace. It is so that God might have all the glory, Ephesians. 1. 6. Jer. 9.
24. and that man might not boast, Romans 3. 9. but obey God freely, Luke 1. 74.

But I have no work of grace wrought in me. Obje. 10.


The Spirit shall convince the world of sin, Answ.
and of righteousness, Joh. 16. 7, 8, 9, 10. God has begun his work in thee,
if he has convinced thee of sin, and of righteousness.

To be convinced of sin implies;

Such a discovery of sin which causes the soul to see her self guilty and
utterly lost and undone, 1.
by reason of sin, they confess themselves are vile, and they abhor
themselves, Job 42. 6. They loath themselves for their deeds, Ezekiel. 20. 43.
Este^ming themselves as beasts, Psalm. 73. 22.

The soul is convinced, 2.
so as to have no hope, Jer. 2. in any thing it can do to help it self out
of that miserable state of sin, he is undone in nature, he cannot do any thing
from whence he may expect salvation, or have any hope of it; for a man cannot
expect life and salvation from Christ alone, until the soul be taken off of
all other things in respect of life. This vision of God causes the soul to
see themselves, and say, There remains no strength in me, my comeliness is
turned in me into corruption, Dan. 10. 8. That is, my best works, my
righteousness is defiled, and is sin; now sinful self, and righteous self
are alike (if there be any difference, the last is the worst, now the creature
has nothing to procure Christ, nor no strength to believe in him) the holy
Spirit discovers to the soul, that there is nothing but darkness and death in
our best duties.

He is so convinced of sin, 3.
that he justifies the justice of God, if he perish in his sin, as Psalm. 51.
4. Genesis 44. 16. See Leviticus 26. 41, 42. Micah 7. 9. 2. Sam. 15. 26. Lam. 3.
28, 29. It is from grace to be taken so off of nature, and he that is so taken
off of nature, has grace, is begotten and borne of God. For when the soul is
taken off his own bottom, it must have another to rest upon, or else it sinkes,
therefore when God takes away the souls false soundation, which was her false
hope, God gives the soul a better in himself.

The teaching and drawing of the Father, Joh. 6. is this, that all men have
sinned, and are in an estate of death, and that in Christ there is a ransom,
in which is life and all happiness, and that this Jesus and all that he has
done is for him. When the soul has heard and learned this, there is a power
goes with this teaching, which carries the soul by faith to Christ believing
in him; for the teaching of the Father and faith goes together; every one that
has heard and learnt of the Father comes unto me, Joh. 6. So that to
convince the soul of righteousness, is to be convinced of Christ, to reveal
Jesus Christ to the soul, that in him only is help, and in his
righteousness is deliverance; I have laid help upon one that is mighty, Psalm.
89. 19. Isa. 63. 1. So fix and settle the eye of the soul upon Christ's
righteousness only, at least putting the soul under the hope of it; for as
soon as God has stripped the soul of all hope in and from it self, he
turns the soul to Christ, and puts it under hope, Ezekiel. 16. 5, 6. when the
soul sees nothing but death, God says, Live, Ezekiel. 16. 6. and when the soul
is a going down into the pit, God says, stay, hearken, I have found a ransom
for thee, Job 34. 23, 24. Christ calls, Come to me, and be saved, and the power
of God goes along with this call, works faith, carries the soul to Christ
as his own, having possession of him. When this is manifested to the soul,
faith acts in the love of God in pardoning his sin, greatly wondering at the
greatness of his goodness, or astonished with the glory of his present
condition, the heart being taken up, as Luke 1. 41. 43. though for the measure
of it, it is not in all alike. For the first, to be convinced of sin then is
more then a bare notion that it has sinned, for this may be in one that rests
in themselves, and in something else besides Christ, and perish in this
condition; for by the letter of the Law, and the light of reason, men may see
and say they have sinned; as Saul and Judas did: but those the Spirit convinces
of sin, they are convinced to purpose, because it is thoroughly; The Spirit
shall convince the world of sin, Joh. 16. 8. The Spirit discovers to the soul
that she has chosen something else besides Christ, upon which the soul
rests, and satisfies her self withal, and expects mercy and comfort from
by reason of them, and that they are her best services, and other lying
vanities, as groundles hopes, peace, joy, comfort etc. telling the soul that
there is nothing but death and darkness in them, and that if the soul rest in
any of them, there is nothing but death and destruction for them; and there is
a secret power of God which goes along with this teaching, which turns the
soul from darkness, viz. self, Satan, and all lying vanities, to light, to
Christ, where life is, the Spirit reveals to the soul a sufficiency of life
in Christ, and it needs seek life in nothing else; also the Spirit of God
persuades a soul that this life is for him, therefore he is to look to Christ
for it, and wait upon him for pardon and life, and that the soul shall not
lose her waiting, and so be deceived, but shall certainly have it at last, Isa.
57. 13. These things must be wrought in truth, and in a measure in every soul
that has grace, though for the measure of this, it is not in all alike; for in
some it is in a small measure, as it was in those who are named to be carnal,
and not spiritual, yet then they were babes in Christ, therefore their state
was happy, and safe, 1 Cor. 3. 1. 3. But when this is wrought in any measure,
in the same time faith is wrought, and as the measure of this work is wrought
in the soul, more or less, in the same measure faith is wrought in the soul,
and as it appears to the soul, so accordingly faith appears to the soul:
and when the soul sees it self to be lost by reason of sin, and sees all to
be in Christ for life, and is taken off from resting upon any thing else
besides Christ, and to expect all from Christ, resting upon Christ, though this
be but in the smallest measure wrought in the soul, now this instant time
faith is wrought, Jesus Christ is formed in the soul, and the soul is
converted; for this teaching of the Father and faith are inseparable, Joh. 6.
45. 47.

I cannot believe. 11 Ob.


It is not in the power of the creature Answ.
to believe in Christ, Phil. 1. 29. therefore look not upon faith as a work of
thine own, nor is faith any condition of the Covenant required on thy part; for
as the Covenant of grace is not made with man, but with Christ, as appears,
Psalm. 89. 27, 28, 29, 30. nor is there any condition in the Covenant of grace
required on man's part, neither is there any thing to be done by man to cause
him to have an interest in the Covenant of grace, or to partake of it, for the
Covenant of grace and life by Christ is every way free and unconditionall on
man's part, else how does it differ from a Covenant of works, if there were any
thing to be done by us to have interest in it? and if faith were a condition
required on our part to partake of the Covenant, or else not, I see not but we
are now in as bad a condition as to be under the Covenant of works, it being as
hard and impossible for man of himself to believe in Christ, as it is to keep
the whole Law, as the Scripture declares. How hard it is to believe, the
experience of many can testify, to believe is a fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5.
22. We must be in Christ, before we can bear fruit, Joh. 15. 4. therefore we
must be in Christ, before we can believe; he that has the Spirit of Christ
has Christ, we have the Spirit of Christ before we believe, therefore we
have Christ before we believe, Romans 8. 9, 10, 11. Men are ordained unto
eternal life before they believe, Acts 13. 48. Faith is a grace of the
Covenant on Gods part to be given to those who are given to Christ; faith is
given to some, that by it they may know their interest in Christ, and by it
live upon him: faith is no condition of the Covenant, therefore they mistake
who conceive faith to be a condition of the Covenant, either required on man's
part to partake of the Covenant of grace, or given to men, and then required of
them as a condition; although the Scripture expresses, that he that believes
shall be saved, yet is not faith any condition of salvation; but such
expressions are to be considered as a declaration to us what persons shall be
saved, viz. such as believe: it is an information to such as know not who shall
be saved, and if any desire to know who shall be saved; the answer is, he that
believes shall be saved, Joh. 3. 16. If faith did give us interest in Christ,
when faith did not appear to act, it would appear to us, that we had no
interest in Christ, and that we were not justified by him.

I know not whether I am bidden to believe or no, 12. Ob.
for some shall not be saved, and if I be one of them, if I should believe I
should be saved by Christ, I should believe a lie*

The Gospel declares that whosoever believes in Christ shall be saved, Answ.
Joh. 3. 16. therefore those who believe, cannot be any of them that shall
perish; and the Word says, be that believes not, is condemned already, Joh.
3. 18. and shall not see life. What God says is truth, and truth ought to be
believed, and whatsoever is contrary to truth, no man is bound to believe,
therefore no unregenerate man is commanded to believe the forgiveness of his
sins in any other way then Gods word holds forth forgiveness of sins,
which is, he that believes shall be saved, and have everlasting life. Men are
commanded to believe they shall have benefit by Christ, life and salvation by
Christ, if they believe, Joh. 3. 16. And no man is commanded to believe he
shall be saved by Christ, whether he believes or no; for this is contrary to
the Word which says, He that believes not, is condemned already, Joh. 3. 18.
No man is to believe that which is not true, yet this hinders not, but all that
see an absolute necessity of Christ, shall enjoy him, and they ought not to
distrust in him, but to cast away all their doubts and fears, and believe in
him, and rest upon him for ever, as Simon Peter said to Christ, Master to whom
shall we go? thou have the words of eternal life, Joh. 6. 67, 68.

But I have no love to Christ, 13. Ob.
I am an enemy to Christ, I am not fit for Christ.

The reason thou do not love Christ, Ans. 1.
is because thou see not thy sins to be pardoned by Christ, did thou know
he loves thee, thou would love him, the love of Christ would constrain thee
to love him, 2 Cor. 5. 14. We love him, because he first loved us, 1 John 4. 19.

Do thou apprehend thy self to be an enemy to God? 2.
so were all those once that ever did believe, Ephesians. 2. 12, 13. While we were
enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, Romans 5. 8. 10.
Enemies cannot discern Christ, yet God gives Christ to such.

Thou can not fit thy self for Christ, 3.
and if thou see such a necessity of Christ, as without him thou art undone;
thou desire Christ, and go to Christ; He that comes to me, I will in no
wise cast out, Joh. 6. 37. hearken what Christ says, you shall speed, you have
the promise of Christ, which is security sufficient to satisfy thy soul; for
Christ is in you, and no man can hunger and thirst after righteousness, viz.
Christ, but such as are blessed, Mat. 5. 6. and the Spirit of God dwells in you,
and Christ is in you, and they that are led by the Spirit of God out of
themselves to Christ, for light, and life, and strength, are the children of
God, Romans 8. 9, 10, 11, 14.

Indeed, 14. Ob.
there are many sweet promises in the Word, but they are all for believers, but
I am none.

I grant none may apply a promise of life, Answ.
but only such as believe, yet the promises are for all the elect, thou
know not but thou art one of them, and when God shall please to give thee
faith, thou shall know thy interest in them, Act. 13. 48. In the mean time,
stay thy self with this, that the Lord Jesus gave himself for enemies, and
justifies the ungodly, Romans 4. 5. Whilst we were yet sinners, Christ dyed
for us: While we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his
Son, Romans 5. 8. 10. Therefore be not discouraged, God may save thee also. The
Lord says, I will have mercy upon her that has not obtained mercy, and I will
say to them which were not my people, Thou art my people, and they shall say,
Thou art my God, Hos. 2. 23. Oh sweet place! therefore by no means yield not
to thy fears, nourish no jealousies against God, but resolve in Christ's
strength to cleave to his Word, as Psalm. 119. 49. And here hold, saying, My
beloved is mine, and I am his, Song 2. 16.

I would gladly believe, 15. Ob.
but I dare not.

Thou should not admit nor give way to any discouragement to hinder thy going
to Christ, Ans. 1.
seeing Christ cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come to me and
drink, Joh. 7. 37. The Spirit and the Bride say, Come, and whosoever will, let
him come, Rev. 22. 17. The Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him, and in
them that hope in his mercy, Psalm. 147. 11. He will not quench the smoking
flax, Mat. 12. 20.

From whence is thy fear, 2.
sure it is occasioned or much increased by them who bid persons believe, and
forbid them again by their saying, Take heed what you do, you may be
deceived? it is not so easy a matter to believe, you must first be so sensible
of sin, and so humbled for it, etc. before you may believe. Now they conceit,
they are not so and so qualified, therefore they dare not believe: also they
are scared with the many things hypocrites may do, how far they may go, and
so set them short of hypocrites; which must needs discourage them, yet the word
of God requires no such teaching, for men to learn before they may believe;
for when the soul sees it self lost by reason of sin, and is at a stand,
not knowing what to do, the first thing they are to do, is to believe in
Jesus Christ, as appears, Acts 16. 31. The word requires nothing of them
before they may believe, therefore we may not, for none may presume above what
is written.

If thou desire to believe, 3.
thy will is in part regenerated, and thou do in some measure believe,
though weakly, as he did that said, Lord, I believe, help my unbelief, Mark.
9. 24. Gods servants are described by a desire to fear his Name, Nehe. 1. 11.
Psalm. 145. 19. Psalm. 147. 11. There can be no desires without faith, 1 Pet. 2.
2, 3. a man cannot desire that which he believes not to be; so Heb. 11. 6. Many
give God their hearts, and do not know it, and so are troubled, because they
do not know what is meant by the heart, nor where it is seated. I speak not of
the heart of flesh, Romans 8. 5, 6, 7. there is a carnal mind and a spiritual
mind in men, I speak of the heart mystically and spiritually, which is
principally seated in the will, so that what it wills or desires, there is the
heart, and to that which the will most wills or desires, to that is the bent of
the heart unto. Now if the soul were to have its choice of every thing, that
one thing that the soul should choose, would any question whether they loved
it, and that their hearts were not unto it? for as no soul can be sensible of
the want of Christ, until the soul be possessed of him, Romans 8. 10, 11. so no
soul can desire Christ above all things in the world, if they might have their
choice, unless Christ have their hearts, and they dearly love him, and believe
in him; for Christ is precious to them that believe, 1 Pet. 2. 7. and to none
else. So the seat of faith is in the heart, which is in the understanding, and
will, but more principally in the will, so that if our wills be renewed, our
hearts are renewed, Romans 8. 5, 6. Paul says, To will is present with me; good
I would do; so then with my mind I serve the Law of God, Romans 7. 18, 19. with
21. 25. it appears that the will is one with the mind, and the heart is one
with them, these three are one, and always go together, and are alike
spiritual. Christ says, Where your treasure is, there will your heart be
also, Mat. 6. 21. that is, the mind and affections: and by affections in Ephesians.
3. 2. is meant the heart, for the heart and affections are one thing. There be
them that believe, and yet they know not whether they believe or no: so that it
is possible for them to call their faith unbelief, as the blind man did, Mark.
9. 24. Lord help my unbelief; which must not be understood of unbelief, for
it is not a lawful request to pray that sin may be increased, for unbelief is
a sin, and the ground or cause of the souls departing from God, as Heb. 3. 12.
Many mistake faith, some have thought, comfort, joy, or ravishments of soul
with God, to be faith, and so have concluded, because they had not them, they
had no faith. It is not men's believing, but the object of faith, that gives
faith its denomination, or name, for there be diverse kinds of faith; there is a
natural faith, as Luke 8. 13. and a divine faith, or the faith of Gods Elect,
Titus 1. 1. Faith and its object is not to be separated, because faith and its
object is one and the same, it is too strict therefore to give a distinction or
definition of faith without its object.

He that believes that Jesus Christ is the Son of God shall be saved. All is
included in this, he that believes this, must

Know Christ to be the anointed, Luke 23. the Savior of his people from their
sins, Mat. 1. 21.

To believe in Christ, to rest upon him, to live or stay upon the Lord, Pro. 3.
5. To believe in him, Romans 10. 9. 11. Psalm. 17. 6. To cleave to God, Deuteronomy. 30.
20. Joh. 23. 6. Acts 11. 23. Psalm. 119. 30, 31. to hope in him, Psalm. 147. 11.

To own and confess Christ; Simon said, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the
living God, Mat. 16. 16. Romans 10. 9.

Any man may say, Obje.
that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, yea the Devils confess this; I know
thee who thou art, Jesus Christ the Son of God, therefore this cannot be the
faith of Gods Elect, and so not the faith of the Gospel.

1. There are three things to be considered in the nature of faith; first,
illumination; secondly, for the soul to trust in Christ for pardon and life;
and the third is the application of him.

The first, is when a man consents to Thou beleevest there is one God, thou
do well, the Devil does so, James 2. Mark. 5. 8. Acts 16. 17.

The second, is to believe that Jesus is Joh. 6. 58. My soul wait thou on God,
for my expectation is from him, Psalm. 62. 5. and this no Devil never did.

The third, is to believe with an application

Secondly, the Scriptures clearly prove that to believe that Jesus Christ is
the Son of God, is the faith of the Gospel, for the Word of God is the ground
of faith, and the souls salvation depends upon the truth of what God says,
and faith looks only to what God says, and rests upon it* and sets to its
seal that God is true. And that so to believe that Jesus Christ is the Son
of God, is the faith of the Gospel, I prove by these Reasons.

1. Because this is the faith which the Apostles preached and witnessed unto,
and the faith which is recorded unto us in the Scriptures, Acts 18. 28. 1 John
2. 22.

2. Because none can say ( knowingly) that Jesus is the Lord, but by the
Spirit, 1 Cor. 12. 3.

3. Because upon the profession of this faith, Christ builds his Church, Mat.
16. 16. 18.

4. Upon the profession of this faith the Baptism of Christ is dispensed, as
Act. 8. 37.

5. They who have this faith dwell in God, and God in them, 1 John 4. 15.

6. This faith flesh and blood cannot reveal, but God reveals it to the
soul, Mat. 16. 16, 17.

7. Such are borne of God; whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is
borne of God, 1 John 5. 1.

8. This is the faith that overcommeth the world, 1 John 5. 4, 5.

9. Because such as have this faith are pronounced blessed, Mat. 16. 17. and
shall never dye, Joh. 11. 25, 26.

10. Because he that has this faith shall be saved; If thou shall confess
with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thy heart, that God has
raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved, Romans 10. 9. Jesus said, I am the
resurrection, and the life, and whosoever believes in me, shall never dye;
beleevest thou this? she said unto him, yea Lord, I believe that thou art the
Christ the Son of God, etc. Joh. 11. 25, 26, 27. To believe this Record,
implies an assent that it is truth, with a resting or hoping to have interest
in it, to be made one with it, is faith, though it be a lesser degree, (then a
full and certain assurance of life by him for himself in particular) see Isa.
45. 21, 22. Those in Mat. 5. 3, 4, 5. who mourn, and hunger, and thirst after
Christ are blessed, and shall be satisfied, though they want the application of
Christ; therefore besides the illumination which wicked men and Devils may have
as well as a believer, there is a twofold act of faith, the first is a direct
act to believe Christ is, in whom is life, etc. this is to believe the Record
God has given concerning his Son, and that he came into the world to save
sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 15. 2. Chron. 20. 12. Look unto me and be saved, Isai. 45.
22. and so trust in Christ for life from a hope of mercy, but this hope is
without a certainty; these are blessed, as appears Mat. 16. 17. Turn ye to
the strong hold ye prisoners of hope, Zach. 9. 12. Secondly, the reflect act of
faith, which is (to believe Christ came to save them from their sins, as Mat.
1. 23.) to know I believe; he that has this measure or degree of faith, trusts
in Christ from a knowledge of an interest in him, we believe and are sure, Joh.
6. 69. He that has this act of faith, has the former, but there be some which
have the first act of faith, but have not attained the second, yet their hearts
are turned unto Christ, and fixed upon him, and they long for him, hope in him,
and rest upon him alone for life and salvation, these have faith, which causes
them to depend on Christ, which none can do but such as are possessed with
Christ, though at present they may not know it, yet are they blessed, Mat. 5.
6. and in his Name they do trust, Mat. 12. 21. The Apostle says, These things
have I written unto you that believe on the Name of the Son of God, that ye
may know that ye have eternal life, and that ye may believe on the Name of
the Son of God, 1 John 5. 13. So that these words declare they did but weakly
believe, and that they did not know that they were possessed with eternal
life, (yet they were) therefore they had not that particular knowledge, or
assurance of the love of God, yet did believe in Christ.

Some conceive they have no grace, 1. Discoura.
because they never had so deep a measure of sorrow for sin as some others
have, etc.

The word of God declares that those that believed had not one and the same
measure of sorrow; Ans. 1.
the Scripture declares no sorrow in Lydia receiving the Word, Act. 16. 14. but
it is said that the Jailer trembled, being in fear, Act. 16. 29. The word of
God is to be our Rule, Isa. 8. 20. and not men's conceits.

The greatest measure of sorrow, grief, 2.
fear, terror for sin, that ever any had, made them not to be loved of God,
nor to obtain mercy from God; nor did sensiblenesse of sin ever drive the soul
to Christ, but ever from Christ: as Peter's sensiblenesse of his sin, caused him
to bid Christ to depart from him, Lord depart from me, for I am a sinful man,
Luke 5. 8. therefore a deep sensiblenesse of sin hinders the soul in believing
of Christ, and drives it further from Christ.

Thou have no cause to complain, 3.
if God deals more gently with thee, then he does with some others; it is a
great mistake to think that God delights in slavish fears or tears.

What is the greatest sensiblenesse of sin worth that proceeds not from faith,
4.
and flows not from the apprehension of pardon and love, in so evil
requiting God, look not to sensiblenesse of sin, but to Christ, thy very
sensiblenesse of sin is not free from sin, and it deserves nothing but death,
but in Christ is life.

If thou were ever fatherless, 5.
which is for the soul to be stripped of all, that none of thy works, nor
means, nor men, nor Angels, nor nothing besides Jesus Christ can stand thee in
any stead, nor satisfy thee, being resolved to wait upon Christ, until he
please to manifest his free love in pardoning thy sins; this is the work of
God in thee, yea this is a great and sweet work of the Gospel, and such a work
as never was in any, but such as shall be saved. If thou renouncest all thy own
sufficiency, so as thy best duties cannot satisfy thee, certain it is there is
a better sufficiency come in place.

I fear my faith is not the faith of Gods Elect, 2. Discoura.
because it is attended with so many doubtings.

Fears and doubtings are no fruits of faith, Answ.
but of unbelief, and as fears and doubts increase, the stronger is unbelief
in the soul; so the soul is ready to judge that where so great unbelief is,
there is no faith: yet the Scriptures declare that in those who had true faith,
the faith of Gods Elect, yet at the same time have had much unbelief also in
them, so as they have been filled with doubts and fears, Joh. 13. 1. And from
hence it was that he in Mark. 9. 24. called his faith unbelief, because he was
sensible of his great unbelief: and was not unbelief strong in Thomas, when
he said, he would not believe? Joh. 20. 24, 25. And seeing that a child of God
may have true faith, notwithstanding they may also have many fears and
doubtings, thou know not but the cause may be so with thee, therefore take
heed that ye deny not your selves to have faith, lest ye call weak faith, no
faith, and light, darkness, and grace, sin; for to do so is very evil; Woe
unto them that call evil good, and good evil, that put darkness for light,
and light for darkness, that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter, Isa.
5. 20. those that put faith for unbelief do so; pray to God to strengthen thy
faith, as he did, Mark. 9. 24. and use means to remove such things as
strengthen unbelief, and hinder the sight of thy faith; as ignorance is one
cause of doubting, also an over-sensiblenesse of infirmities, sleighting Gods
means, neglect of duty, or a formal performance, or nourishing sin more or
less, pronenesse to sin, harkening to Satan, to sense, to carnal reasonings,
nourishing fear and unbelief, etc. Also endeavor to do that which is a
means to strengthen thy faith, know the perfection of the state of a believer
in Christ, in which the weakest and most imperfect believer, is as perfect, as
much justified, accepted, and as happy as the best, live upon Christ alone,
make choice of and mind the sutablest promises for thee to feed and strengthen
thy faith, walk with God, pray in faith, ask his Spirit, and thou shall have
it, Luke 11. 23. this Spirit will revive, and fill thy soul with joy and peace
in believing, and make thee so wise and strong (in his time) that thou shall
not cast away thy confidence any more, Heb. 10. 34. And as Gods love (which is
perfect, full, free,) is discovered to thy soul in the same measure thy doubts
and fears are cast out; for perfect love casts out fear. And although you are
to use means, yet means are but means, not causes of increase of grace, it is
the operation of the Spirit of God in the soul, which is as God pleases,
therefore look up to God for faith.

I fear my faith is but presumption. 3. Discoura.


I fear the ground of this is thy not knowing, Answ.
or not minding what faith is, and what presumption is. What faith is, see
objection 15. and concerning presumption, this word may be understood in a
twofold consideration; first, for such a confidence as is without a ground; or
secondly, against a ground.

For the first, he that presumes he has a confidence of pardon, but it is
without any ground, he has no word of God for his confidence, and it may be he
can give no reason at all for his confidence, much less a good reason: that
this discouragement may be answered, and removed, consider wherein faith and
presumption differs. He that presumes, he has no ground, no word of God for
his confidence, here confidence is fetched from their own conceits, they seek
no life in Christ, his word, and promise.

1. But he that truly believes in Christ, We through the Scriptures have hope,
Romans 15. 4. In his word do I hope, Psalm. 130. 5. But I hope in thy word, Psalm.
119. 81.

2. He that truly believes in Christ, dross and dung, as Phil. 3. 8. So they
depend upon their faith, and not upon Christ by faith: the ground of their
confidence is, because they are so good, or not so bad as others, as the proud
Pharisee, but he was never fatherless, Hos. 14. 3. nor did they ever receive
the sentence of death in themselves, 2 Cor. 1. 9. So they were ever confident,
and it was ever very easy for them to believe.

The eyes of the Lord are upon them that hope in his mercy, Psalm. 33. 18. 21.
22. And this is the work of God to persuade the heart to rest upon the free
mercy of God in Christ, Psalm. 13. 5. Psalm. 33. 18. I trust in the mercy of God
for ever and ever, Psalm. 52. 8. With the Lord there is mercy, Psalm. 130. 7. God
is rich in mercy, Ephesians. 2. 4. Presumption cannot do so, Joh. 12. 37. 1 Pet. 19.
20. Joh. 6. 28, 29.

For the second, so the confidence of the presumer is contrary to the word of
God, the word approves of no such confidence, but protests against them and
their confidence, as appears, Jer. 7. 9. 15. So their presumption hardens
them, and makes them bold to venture upon sinful practices, as lying, stealing,
drunkenness, uncleanness, cheating, and the like, as theirs was, Jer. 7. 9.
etc.

abhorres that which is evil, and cleaves to that which is good, Romans 12. 9.
Every man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself as he is pure, 1 ^oh.
3. 3. Purifying their hearts by faith, Acts 15. 9. The grace of God teaches us
to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and
godly in this present world, Tit. 2. 11, 12. Christ is precious to them that
believe, 1 Pet. 2. 7. They count all things but loss for Christ, and for him
they will suffer the loss of all things, as Phil. 3. 8. Yet many there be who
say they are confident, etc. and yet they dare not speak for Jesus Christ, his
truth, his servants, etc. these are far from suffering the loss of all things
for him: So others can hold Arminianisme, and free will, setting themselves and
their endeavors above God, and his grace, in affirming that notwithstanding
all the grace God affords to any man, yet unless man shall please to will and
improve it well, (for as they say he may choose whether he will or no) it shall
never be effectual to him; if it be so, they may thank God for his grace,
without which they can do nothing, but much more themselves, for saving
themselves; for others had as much grace as they (as they say Judas had) shall
be damned, and they had been damned also, if they had not willed well, etc. and
it was in their power and choice, whether they would will well or no: which is
so contrary to the Scriptures; so then it is not of him that wills, nor of
him that runs, but of God that shows mercy, Romans 9. 16. Not that we are
sufficient of our selves to think any thing of our selves, but our sufficiency
is of God, 2 Cor. 3. 5. Surely all those who have tasted of Gods free grace,
cannot but admire it, and be thankful for it, and loath with the greatest
indignation whatsoever shall entrench upon it, although it were but in the
least degree.

I have no grace, 4. Discoura.
because I grow not in grace, my life is not holy, nor am I like unto others
who are the Lords.

Do thou know thy age or degree in grace? Answ.
what, art thou a child, or a young man, or a father? 1 John 2. 12, 13. there is
a great difference between a child and a man in nature, so great is the
difference between a babe in Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 1. and a man in Christ, 1 John
2. 13. Also confider if thou can, whether if thou be a babe in the womb,
or borne, Heb. 5. 13. He is a babe, as a child is begotten and alive while it
is in the womb, before it be borne; so thou may be begotten from above, and
alive, before thou can be borne. Christ must first be formed in us, before we
can be newborn babes, Gal. 4. 18. 1 Pet. 2. 2. And when thou art delivered
out of the state of bondage, which is a place of darkness, of fears
concerning thy soul, thou art not borne and brought forth; and as the womb is
a place of bondage, so here; and therefore can not do that service others
do: if thou be but newborn, there cannot that be expected from thee, as
there is from a man in Christ; as there is a difference between a child and a
man in nature, so there is here; learn to distinguish between the grace it
self, and the exercise of it; it is not the having of grace, but the exercise
of it, which attaines to a holy conversation, by the operation of the Spirit;
and when a soul is delivered from its enemies, as Satan, terrors, wrath,
curse, it is borne, being delivered we serve, Luke 1. 47. Deliverance is before
working: the time of doubting is a barren time, men cannot fight and work at
the same time. Regeneration consists in being begotten to the Lord, to have
union with him, Joh. 17. 22. 23. 19. And for God to convey his power into the
soul, by which it is made conformable to the will of Christ, and lives by faith
in the Son of God, Gal. 2. 20. is another thing in some of the Lords: the
first is, where the latter is not, at least in the degrees of it; believers are
of several growths and states; as, first, babes, children; secondly, young
men; thirdly, fathers, 1 John 2. 12, 13. Can babes work? and yet if they die in
that estate, they shall not miss of glory. 1 Job. 2. 12. It is one thing to be
justified, and another to be sanctified, so it is one thing to live, another to
be borne, and to work is distinct from both: there is as much difference
between some of the Lords, as there is betwixt willing and doing; some are
termed carnal, 1 Cor. 3. 1. others spiritual. Thou may be begotten, but not
borne, (if in bondage) and then it is not the season of growing, as another
season is. If thou be ignorant, or in temptation, thy understanding is
clouded, and thy heart being distempered with fear, so as Job 23. 8, 9. and
thou art not fit to judge of thy growth; is a newborn babe, 1 Pet. 2. 2. fit
to judge of its growth? Also consider, it may be, thou art in Gods way, and so
thou do not use his means, or not rightly; consider Psalm. 1. 3. with Song
4. 12. there thou shall grow.

I am much tempted by Satan, 5. Discoura.
that I have no grace.

Satan tempts Christ's babes to cast away their confidence, Ans. 1.
which is forbidden, Heb. 10. 35. therefore if Satan tell ye, that ye have no
faith, thou may reply, if I have it not in the act to my knowledge, I may
have it in the grace it self; if he say that he knows, and you know you have
no grace at all. Reply, the Devil knows not, and if I should think so I may
be deceived; as fire raked up in ashes appears not, and gives neither light
nor heat, so corruption does hide and obscure grace, 1 Cor. 3. 1.

And if I have no grace, why let ye me not alone, 2.
as ye do others, and as ye did me when I took my fill of sin? then ye told
me I had faith, when I had none, I have found ye a liar, therefore I will not
hearken unto you, and I am the more confident I have grace, because ye tell me
I have none, He is a liar, and the father of it, Joh. 8. 44.

But suppose I have no grace, 3.
there is no reason why I should despair, because every one of the Lords were
once without grace in the estate of nature; At that time ye were without
Christ, being aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, strangers, etc. having
no hope, and without God in the world, but now in Christ Jesus ye who
sometimes were afar off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ, Ephesians. 2. 12, 13.
which in time past were not a people, but are now the people of God, which had
not obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy, 1 Pet. 2. 10. Many are
ordained unto eternal life, which did not actually believe, nor had any grace
at all; I nor any do not know, but I may be one of them also, therefore I know
no reason to despair, nor will despair do me any good, it is better to use
the means, wait upon God, trust him with my soul, if mercy come I shall be
happy, and shall have cause to praise him.

There is nothing too hard for God, 4.
Lord, if thou will thou can make me clean, Jer. 32. 17. Mat. 8. 2.

I cannot pray, 6. Discoura.
nor do any thing to purpose, therefore I have no grace.

Unbelief deads the heart, Ans. 1.
and hinders thy living upon Christ's strength.

It is so with thee, 2.
that thou might see a need of Christ, Joh. 15. 5. and live upon him, who
has promised to be a full supply to his.

If God has given thee a desire to obey him, 3.
say not it is nothing, because God says it is something, 2 Cor. 8. to 11. he
gives this, and if this be all thou have, it is accepted, verse. 12. and he will
grant thy desire; He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him, he also
will hear their cry, and will save them, Psalm. 119. 19. Christ will not quench
the smoking fl^x, Isai. 42. When we see no fire, we know there is fire by the
smoke; holy desires cannot be in a soul that has no grace, Psalm. 145. 19.
Desire after grace is an act of spiritual life; an act is from a faculty, a
faculty is from life and being, a dead man cannot desire, none can desire that
which they believe not to be, nor that they do not love; desires if spiritual
they flow from faith and love, and are a part of what it desires. A will to
obey, may be all that a believer can find in himself at some time; To will is
present with me, but how to perform that which is good I find not; for the
good I would I do not, but the evil I would not, that I do, Romans 7. 18, 19,
20, 21. Press after obedience to God, yet know our greatest holiness cannot
justify us before God; For by grace are ye saved through faith, and that not
of your selves, etc. Not of works, lest any man should boast, Ephesians. 2. 8, 9.
Even the strongest of the Lords, are but weak creatures, and the highest
perfection they can attain unto in this life, is a fight of our imperfections,
and a desire and endeavor to obey, and to live upon Christ by faith; see Phil.
2. 12, 13. And was not Paul one of the most strongest believers? see Romans 8.
37, 38, 39. yet what says he of himself, and his words are the word of God;
That which I do I allow not, for what I would, that I do not, but what I
have, that do I: To will is present with me, etc. Romans 7. 14. to 25. He had no
power to do what he would, yet he lived by faith in the Son of God, Gal. 2.
20.

I find no willingness to duties, 7. Discoura.
I find no relish in them, so that I often omit them.

Unwillingnesse to duties, Ans. 1.
argues much corruption, from whence omissions often flow.

God may have begun his work in thee, 2.
although it be thus with thee, it may arise from diverse causes, as from
unbelief, doubting of acceptance of person and duty; and it is no wonder, if
such have little list to obey; also eying infirmities, and not Christ also with
them, and not exercising grace, especially faith; little love to Christ, loving
temporal things, deads the heart, and makes it carnal, weakness of grace, or
from Gods not affording present strength, sloth and ease that slays the
soul, undiscreet doing duties out of their season, ignorance of the nature of
duties, and what God requires in some causes, ignorance of the sweetness of
spiritual duties. So the souls sickness, which hinders the souls relish of
spiritual things: also weakness of body is a great enemy to action; My flesh
and my heart fayles, but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for
ever, Psalm. 73. 26. he never fayles.

Surely, 8. Discoura.
I am deceived, I have no grace, because I am not able to subdue my passions.

This declares rather weakness of grace, Answ.
then otherwise, and it is certain, it is not from a want of truth of grace, if
thou do that which thou would not, as Romans 7. 14. to 25. in our selves we
are imperfect at the best, Gal. 6. 1. The strongest is not able to stand alone;
also some of the Lords partake more of natural choler, which increases
naturally, and as that choler is, we are more or less hasty and passionate. A
wicked man may be naturally patient, and a child of God may be sinfully
passionate, Jam. 5. 17. Thou should not measure Gods love to thee, nor the
truth of his grace in thee by thy mortification of sin, consider Romans 7. God
may for ends best known unto himself, suffer corruption to be too strong for
thee, it may be, to abase thee more, as Paul, Romans 7. that thou may see what
need thou have of a Lord Jesus to pardon and heal thee; who knows but God
may leave thy personal sanctification the more imperfect, that we may mind
and behold Jesus Christ, and our righteousness in him, and so live the more in
him, and our joy the more in our justification by him? Romans 4. 6, 7. It Is one
thing to have thy sins forgiven, or not imputed, Psalm. 32. 1, 2. and another
thing to be cleansed from it; live in the apprehension of the love of God, and
down goes sin, and all discouragements, so live in discouragements, and sin
prevails, as Psalm. 77. 2. 7, 8, 9, 10. We ought not to fetch our comfort from
our subduing of sin, but in Christ, in whom we want no righteousness, 1 Cor.
1. 30. Christ is ours, and we are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. When we are at
the best, we may not live in our selves, nor by sight, but by faith, and when
we are at the worst, we are to live upon Christ by says, and comfort our
selves in him, and in him only: many when they want strength or comfort, they
seek what they want from their duties, and comfort themselves in their
abstainings from sin, but for Christ he is not in all their thoughts, Psalm. 10.
4.

What I once felt is now decayed. 9. Discoura.


The ground of our faith is God in his Word, Ans. 1.
and not our sight and feeling, that is sensual, 2 Cor. 5. 7. We live not by
sight (and feeling) but by faith.

Whilst thou maintainest fears and jealousies of Gods love to thee, 2.
it is no wonder it is so with thee: call to mind the days of old; as Psalm.
77.

It Is certain, 3.
if ever God manifested his love unto thee, he is still and ever will be the
same unto thee, having loved his own, he loved them unto the end, Joh. 13. 1.
With him there is no variableness or shadow of turning, Jam. 1. 17.

A child of God may decay in parts, 4.
sight, feelings, and exercise of grace for a time, as Phil. 4. 10. these are
sometimes more and sometimes less, but always as God sees best, that we
might rest and rely upon nothing but Christ. I see and feel nothing in my
self, or all is as nothing to me, save only Jesus Christ, who is all in all
to me.

We ought to believe that we neither see nor feel; faith is the evidence of
things not seen, Heb. 11. 1. To live by faith, is to walk after the Spirit,
and to live by sight and feeling, is to live after the flesh, Romans 8. 1.

I am discouraged, 10. Disco.
because nothing is made good to me, I do not possess it.

If thou be included, Ans. 1
and art under the promise of it, and under the hope of it, thou shall possess
it.

It may be made good unto thee, 2.
without thy possession of it, for we must not ground faith in the possession
of what it believes, possession is suitable to sense, and there is neither faith
nor hope in what we possess. To have right in it, and to possess it, are two
things, they died in faith, and yet they did not possess what they believed,
Heb. 11. 17, 18. The possession of things gives no being unto faith, nor is
essential unto it, no otherwise then as faith gives being unto it. Abraham
believed he should have a son; here was his faith, Romans 4. 3. 17. 18. yet he
did not possess his son, his son had no being but in the promise of God,
therefore to place enjoyment to be essential to faith, is a very great mistake.

As a man must first believe God is, 3.
before he can go to God, Heb. 11. 6. so a man must first believe in Christ,
to have remission of sins by him, and after receive remission of sins, as
appears, Acts 10. 43.

It thou have power to close with God in the truth of his Word, 4.
as Sarah did, that she should have a son, not only before she had him,
but against reason she believed she should have him, thou have faith.

But I am not assured that I shall be saved, 11. Disco.
therefore I have no faith.

Faith and assurance, Ans. 1
is not one thing, but are differing and distinct; assurance cannot be without
faith, but faith may be without assurance; for assurance is not the proper act
of faith; assurance is an effect of faith, and a higher measure then that is,
and the greater our feeling of assurance is, the lesser our faith is.

Faith in the act is an assenting or cleaving to the truth and faithfulness of
God in his promise, 2.
not from any thing she feels in her self* but from something it apprehends
in God, in his word, Romans 4. 20, 21, 22. The act of faith is sometimes attended
with much strife and struggling, for Satan says to the soul, it is in vain for
thee to look to Christ, to believe in Christ, Christ says, Come unto me,
believe I will ease thee. Now for the soul to rest upon the fidelity and
ability of Christ in his promise, is no small measure of faith: assurance is
not from the habit of grace, nor from the direct act of faith, but from the
reflect act of faith, which is for a man to see and know that he believes;
which assurance is from the immediate testimony of the Spirit of God in the
conscience of one who is already a believer, causing the soul to know it
believes. The Spirit it self bears witness with our Spirits, that we are
the children of God, Romans 8. 16.

Now abides faith, 3.
1 Cor. 13. 13. therefore faith does at all times one way or other,
sufficiently evidence the truth of our estates, if we did at all times truly
discern the testimony or true act of faith; and the reason why we discern it
not, is for want of a full measure of faith, to withstand all that is opposite
to faith; for some there be, who have faith, yet by reason of their ignorance,
and unskilfulnesse, as Heb. 5. 14, 15. and 10. 15. forgetfulness: babes are
unskilful, and have not experience of Gods dealings with his, both for order
and manner; so that when faith does not so lively act, and when Christ does not
clearly appear in the soul, he begins to doubt whether he be not deceived;
and when the Lord appears again, the doubt is dissolved, and the soul is
satisfied, and he is armed with experience against such a time appears again,
if he be able to judge, and neglect not to mark well, but where use and
exercise is wanting, there is not so clear a discerning, Heb. 5. 11, 12.

I fear the opposition that is in me, 12. Disco.
is not between Christ and Satan, or the Spirit against the flesh, but from my
corrupt will, and my enlightened conscience.

I grant all the combats in men are not right, Answ.
and many are deceived herein; yet the difference may easily be discerned;
understand it thus;

1. The natural conscience (although it be enlightened) acts only in a
natural way, at the most it is but moral, as not to lie, swear, steal, and
such gross acts.

2. It stirs not, unless it be forced, and only unto that it is forced unto.

3. It sets one faculty against another, as the will and affections against the
understanding, but the Spirit of Christ causes an opposition in the same
faculty, as in the will, etc.

4. Conscience enlightened without grace, it strikes only at the branches of
sin, but not in the root.

1. Whereas the Spirit of God makes a free, full, constant, impartial
resistance against all sin.

2. And discovers unto the soul her secret corruptions in their colors, and
the Spirit over-powers the soul, so as it causes the soul to hate sin, and
leave it.

3. The Spirit causes the soul to be more glad when sin is more discovered.

4. The Spirit of God teaches the soul effectually to oppose all sin (even
the appearance of evil) equally, proportionably and orderly.

I am so troubled with hideous temptations, 13. Disco.
as I believe no child of God is.

Christ was tempted, Answ.
Mat. 4. and I know no kind of temptation that God in his Word has promised
that his child shall not be tempted unto; There has no temptation taken you,
but such as is common to man, therefore believe and take comfort in the wisdom
and faithfulness of God, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye
are able, but will with the temptation also make a way of escape, that ye may
be able to bear it, 1 Cor. 10. 3. If they be burdensome and hateful unto
you, and you cry out to God for help against them, they shall not be laid unto
thy charge; for as it was with the damsel in Deuteronomy. 22. 25, 26. even so is this
matter.

I fear that when persecution comes, 14. Disco.
I shall not suffer, nor hold out unto the end, but dishonor God, betray his
truth, shame and grieve his people.

Cast all these cares and fears upon the Lord, Answ.
as Phil. 4. 10. In nothing be careful, he will care for thee; I will never
leave thee, nor forsake thee, Heb. 15. 5. God will take care for his glory,
truth, and servants, his wisdom and power and faithfulness shall order all.

Others are discouraged, 15. Disco.
because they are not filled with joy and comfort, etc.

Faith may be strong, Answ.
when joy is absent; David had faith when he had no joy; Restore to me the joy
of thy salvation, Psalm. 51. 12. He refused comfort, and he wanted it, Psalm. 77.
2. Such as judge their condition to be good, because they are filled with joy,
they are mistaken, and build upon a wrong foundation, in that they are not
founded upon Jesus Christ alone, so as to look to him, and live upon him only.
If some persons had joy, they would make it a Christ to them, and live upon it,
and so abuse Christ, and themselves, and their joy: and it is a mercy for such
to want joy, till they can better use it.

Others are discouraged, 16. Disco.
because their souls are filled with terrors, says one, Oh, I feel the wrath
of God in my soul, I have a hell in me, and so have been for a long time.

This is a sad condition, Ans. 1
yet thus it may be with one who is the Lords; for thus it was with Heman, who
said, Lord, why castest thou off my soul, why hidest thou thy face from me? I
am ready to dye whilst I suffer thy terrors, I am distracted, thy fierce wrath
goes over me, thy terrors have cut me off, Psalm. 88. 15, 16. And Job cried, He
has kindled his wrath against me, and counts me unto him as one of his
enemies, see Job 19. 10, 11. and 7. 6. 13, 14, 15, 16. And David in temptation
judging himself according unto the Law, to sense, and feeling, said, I am cast
out of his sight, Psalm. 31. 22. Horror has overwhelmed me, Psalm. 55. 5. and
77. 8, 9. And Jeremiah said, He has led me into darkness, but not into light,
he has broken my bones, and compassed me with gall, he has made my chains
heavy, he has filled me with bitterness, thou have removed my soul far off
from peace, and I said my strength and my hope is perished from the Lord, Lam.
3. 2. to 19.

The Lord has his way in the whirlewind, 2.
and in the storm, Nahum 1. 3. Some conceive that if God loved them, there
should be no such tempests in their souls, but should enjoy a sweet calm, in
stead of wrath and terrors, sweet peace and joy: indeed it is so with many, but
it is not so with all that are the Lords, as appears; Job says to God, Why
do thou not pardon my transgressions, etc. Thou have set me as a mark
against thee, so that I am a burden unto my self, see Job 7. 18, 19, 20, 21.
13, 14.

Because it was so with Gideon as it was, 3.
he could not be persuaded that God was with him; the Angel said, God was with
him, Judge. 6. 12, 13. therefore he was mistaken, and so may thou be, if thou
judge thy self not to be the Lords, because thou art filled with terrors,
etc. Comfort depends not upon any freedom from terrors, but upon the Spirits
revelation of truth, and application of it unto the soul.

The greatest peace any Saint does possess, 4.
is not to be either a ground or an encouragement for their believing, so also
there is no terrors any can possess, ought to be any discouragement in
believing, for our happiness is not from any thing we feel or apprehend in
our selves, but in that we are known of God, who loves us and comprehends us
in himself, and his not imputing our trespasses unto us, Psalm. 32. 1, 2.

A soul being in such a sad condition, 5.
should consider what the Lord says in Isa. 8. 20. and to cast all their
fears of hell upon God in a promise, to trust in the Lord; for in Jehovah is
strength for evermore, Isa. 26. 3, 4: When thou art in the flames of this fire,
thou shall not be burnt; With God nothing is impossible, Luke 1. 73. O troubled
soul, the tender mercies of our God has visited us, and so it may visit thee
also, and give light to thee that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of
death, to guide thy feet in the way of peace, Luke 1. 78, 79. Thou will keep
him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee, because he trusts in thee,
Isa. 26. 3, 4.

What was that which brought thee so low, 6.
but poring so much upon thy sins, until thou were filled with despair, and
thy omissions and commissions against conscience increased thy horror? do the
contrary, and first believe, then repent, and see that ye daube not your
selves over with your duties; and know that which is a great cause of mourning,
is no cause of despair, therefore cast not away your confidence, Heb. 10. 35.
for yet a little while, and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry,
Heb. 10. 37, 38. Therefore say as the Prophet said, When I sit in darkness,
the Lord shall be a light unto me, he will bring me forth into the light, and I
shall behold his righteousness, Micah 7. 8, 9.

I am in great misery and want outwardly, 17. Disco.
by reason of poverty, if God did love me, I should not be so much neglected as
I am.

Thou should not reason so; Ans. 1.
what think thou of the condition of those who wandered about in sheepskins,
goatskins, in deserts, mountains, dens and caves of the earth? I fear they
were more destitute of outward comfort then thee, and suffered more hunger,
cold, and nakedness then thee; have thou not a house, not a bed to lie on, the
places where they wandered afforded not these things unto them; art thou
destitute, afflicted, and forsaken? so were they whom God loved, and esteemed
the world not worthy of, Heb. 11. 37, 38.

Poverty and want has attended and 2.
kept company with many a dear child of God; Job was poor -- yea the
Churches of Jesus Christ have been poor; the Church of Corinth was poor, 2
Cor. 8. 14. The Church of Smyrna was poor, Rev. 2. 9. The Church of Macedonia
was in deep poverty, 2 Cor. 8. 1, 2. And our Lord Jesus Christ was poor, 2
Cor. 8. 9. And thou may be very poor, and yet God may love thee, as he loves
Jesus Christ, Joh. 17. 26. The poor receive the Gospel, and the profession of
the Gospel of Christ, have made the rich poor, in that for Christ they have
suffered the loss of all things, Phil. 7. 8. In thy greatest want be content
to be like Christ in poverty, as well as in glory, Joh. 17. 24. for the time
will quickly come, in which you shall feel no want, nor suffer no hunger,
cold, or nakedness.

There is no state and condition under the Sun that is free from Satanst
e^ptations, 3.
those who have more abundance of outward things, he suggests and insinuates
unto them, that these things are all they are like to have, and that seeing
they have a heaven here of outward contents, they must not expect another
hereafter. And to those who have greater gifts and parts, he says, they are
not given to them in love, but only for the benefit of others, and is ready to
discourage them; Satan is ready to get an advantage of us, we are not ignorant
of his devises, 2 Cor. 2. 11. The Lord teach his to know the depths of Satan,
Rev. 2. 24. to know his stratagems and to resist him. And as there is no state
under the Sun free from trouble, so it is a sweet comfort unto all that are
the Lords, that there is no state and condition, but as God can, so he will
support his in, and under it, and make it sweet and comfortable unto them, yea
the best for them; for all things shall work for good to them that love God, 1
Cor. 10. 13. Romans 8. 28. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall
tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril,
or sword? I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height,
nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of
God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans 8. 35. 38, 39.

I cannot see God, 18. Disco.
surely God has forsaken me.

Sometimes God hides himself from his, Ans. 1
as the Scripture declares; Verily thou art a God that hidest thy self, Isa.
45. 15. I opened to my beloved, and he had withdrawn himself, Song 5. 6.
Behold, I go forward, but he is not there, and backward, but I cannot perceive
him; on the left hand where he does work, but I cannot behold him; he hides
himself on the right hand, that I cannot see him, Job 23. 8, 9.

Our carnal reason, 2.
and corrupt heart, and Satan with his suggestions, are so near us, before our
eyes, that we cannot see God, and we hearken so much to what they say, that we
mind not the voice of the Spirit, Romans 8. 16.

It is one thing to know, 3.
and another thing to know that we know: Christ said, they knew; they said,
they knew not; Christ said, Whither I go ye know, and the way ye know;
Thomas said unto him, Lord, we know not whither thou go, how then can we
know the way? Christ spoke true, and they knew not that they knew, Joh. 14. 3,
4, 5. So she saw Jesus standing, and knew not that it was Jesus. When their
eyes were opened, they knew him, Luke 24. 31. Paul prayed that they might know
the hope of their calling, Ephesians. 1. 18, 19.

When God hides his face, 4.
we are to wait upon him, and look for him, Isa. 8. 17. for he will return
again; but Sion said, The Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten
me. Can a woman forget her sucking child, etc? Yea she may, yet will not I
forget thee, Isa. 49. 14. For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with
great mercy will I gather thee, Isa. 45. 7, 8. When God absents himself from
his, his love and care is the same unto them, as it is when he most manifests
himself to them.

Another is discouraged, 19. Disco.
saying, I thought I had true faith, but since I fell into a great sin, I am
persuaded if I had been the Lords, I should not have been so left of God, as I
was to sin so as I did.

Say not so, Ans. 1
but consider that even some of the children of God, he has suffered to fall,
if not into the same sins, yet as great; David sinned in adultery and murder;
how greatly did Solomon sin after he obtained mercy, 1 King. 11. 9. And Peter
denied Christ with an oath, yet his faith was not void or naught, Christ's
prayer was heard; I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not, Luke 22.
32. therefore his faith never failed him. These examples are recorded in
Scripture, to set forth the glory of the riches of Gods free grace, Ephesians. 2. 4.
That men may know what God can do, and that great sinners might not despair
or faint under their sin, therefore Christ says, All sins shall be forgiven
unto the sons of men, and blasphemies, Mark. 3. 28. If any man sin, we have
an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, 1 John 2. 1. The blood
of Jesus Christ makes us clean from all sin, 1 John 1. 7.

To despair of the mercy of God, 2.
because our sins are great, were to limit God in his mercy, which is a
greater sin, and an adding sin to sin, therefore for the greatest sin a
believer can commit, he ought not to moan without hope; for no sin he can
commit, can never put him into a state of condemnation, or under the curse,
Romans 8. 1, 2, 3. And whilst we live in this world, God heals not our sinful
natures wholly, nor takes it away quite; the flesh lusts, Romans 7. yet God
ever esteems his as they are in Christ, (and not simply as they are in
themselves) Ephesians. 1. 4. 1 Cor. 1. 30. Paul says, I my self keep the law of
God, but with my flesh the law of sin. Sin does the evil that believers do
see, Romans 7. 15. 17. 20. 1 John 3. 9. Consider Nehe. 9. 16, 17, etc. He knows
our frame, and remembers that we are but dust, Psalm. 103. 14.

God is never an enemy to his, 3.
though they greatly sin against him, Psalm. 51. We are not beloved for our
own sakes, nor any thing in our selves, but for Christ in whom God is well
pleased, Mat. 3. 17. Therefore nothing in us, or that we do, can make us to be
loved more or less. God may well say of himself; I am the Lord, I change not,
Mal. 3. 6. His love is as himself, ever the same; and Christ in whom we are
beloved ever the same, Heb. 13. 8. therefore a believers hope, joy, and
confidence, is to be ever the same in Christ, Ps. 23. 1. So we are commanded to
Rejoice always, Psalm. 5. 11. and 32. 11. Let them exceedingly rejoice, Psalm.
40. 16. Psalm. 68. 3. and to rejoice evermore; Again I say rejoice, 1 These. 1.
5. 16. Phil. 4. 4. The joy of the Lord is our strength, Neh. 8. 16.

Oh there is enough in the Lord Jesus to satisfy thee at all times, 4.
he is an unchangeable object of true joy, in him only is all our hope and
happiness, whose blood has paid all the debt of all thy sins; It Is Christ
that died, who now shall condemn? surely none, Romans 8. 33. Therefore let not
thy fall cause thee to question the love of God, seeing thy salvation depends
not upon thy repentance or holiness, but from Gods free grace, Romans 9. 15, 16.
Isa. 43. 24, 25. and 57. 17. Ezekiel. 16. 1. to 9. My little children, these
things I write unto you, that ye sin not, 1 John 2. 1. And for any to turn
the grace of God into wantonness, that is, the sweet mercy and consolations of
God, to encourage them in their sinning, they are led by the Spirit of the
Devil, he is their father, and his works they do, Joh. 8. I speak to you that
regard iniquity, Psalm. 66. 18. that love sin, and delight in it, and are bold
and venturous upon it, and can drink down iniquity like water, Job 15. 16.
You at present are in the gall of bitterness, and whiles it is so with them,
here is no consolation for them, th^^e may not be numbered with them who through
weakness and temptation, or want of watchfulness, are overtaken, and fall
into sin, which they hate, by not shunning the occasions of sin, etc.
Surely all the Lords have need to pray, as David did to God, Hold up my goings
in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not, Psalm. 17. 5. Howsoever it be, be not
out of hope, although thou did persecute the truth, as Paul did, and them
that professed it, Act. 9. 1, 2. yet afterward he preached the faith, Gal. 1.
23. thou know not but God may convert thee also. The servant of God having
fallen into sin, is to rise by faith; for, shall a man fall, and not rise?
Jer. 8. 4. When I fall, I shall arise, Micah 7. 7. Who is a God like unto thee,
that pardons the iniquity, and passes by the transgressions of the Remnant
of his people? Micah 7. 18, 19, 20. God subdues the corruption that is in his,
not all at once, but by degrees; therefore he says, I will be merciful to
their unrighteousness, and their sins will I remember no more, Heb. 8. 12.
God has nothing against those who are in Christ, 1 Cor. 1. 30. Ye are in
Christ.

20. Disco.
But alas, I feel my heart is hardened.

Ans. 1
There is much hardness of heart in a child of God, and they feel it, and
complain of it, and mourn under it, which is from the new heart in them.

To feel hardness is from softness, 2.
and the condition of an experienced child of God: O Lord, why have thou made
us to err from thy ways, and hardened our hearts from thy fear? doubtless,
thou art our father: thou, O Lord, art our father, Isa. 63. 16, 17. Their
hearts were hardened, yet they were the children of God.

Motives or encouragements to believe.
NOtwithstanding faith is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2. 8. Phil. 1. 29. it flows
from the Spirits operation in the heart, therefore our believing is said to be
the work of God, Joh. 6. 28. the operation of God, Col. 2. 12. the Spirit of
faith, 2 Cor. 4. 13. The Spirit inlighteneth our understandings, and boweth our
hearts to believe. So that without the Spirit of Christ, we can do nothing,
Joh. 15. 5. Ephesians. 1. 19. It is through grace that men believe, Act. 18. 27.
yet men are to use the means; for when in the preaching of the Word, we bid
persons to do so and so, we expect the holy Spirit of God to put power to the
words spoken, to make them effectual to enable the creature to obey; as, He
said unto me, Son of man, stand up upon thy feet: and the Spirit entered into
me when he had spoken unto me, and set me upon my feet, Ezekiel. 2. 1, 2. And the
dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live,
Joh. 5. 25. Else it were in vain to speak to dead men, 1 Pet. 4. 6. To
believe, etc. is a spiritual work, and all men by nature are spiritually
dead, Ephesians. 2. 1. and 5. 14. only they believe whose hearts God opens, as Acts
16. 14. None can believe but they to whom it is given, Phil. 1. 29. Therefore
such words as these, Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved, Act.
16. 30, 31. in this sense are to be understood; for it is not in him that
wills, and him that runs, etc. Romans 9. 16. it is God that works both to
will and to do.

Encouragements to believe.

1. Because the Gospel is to be preached to every creature; he that believes
shall be saved, Act. 16. 16. There is no precept or command for any to doubt,
none are exempted or forbidden to believe, see Act. 16. 30, 31. 1 John 3. 23.
but men are commanded the contrary, and to follow after faith, and to lay hold
on eternal life, 1 Timothy 6. 11.

2. By believing we come to know our interest in Christ, and of our salvation
by him; Whosoever believes in him shall not perish but have everlasting life,
Joh. 3. 15, 16. He that believes in the Son, has everlasting life, verse. 36.
see Joh. 6. 40.

3. By believing, we honor God, He that receives his testimony, has set to
his seal, that God is true, Joh. 3. 33. and Joh. 5. 10. therefore none can
believe too soon, or too confidently, or too constantly.

4. If ye believe not, surely ye shall not be established, Isa. 7. 9. There
is no true quietness and settlement of soul, without believing; also thou
standst by faith; thou fallest into sin by unbelief, Romans 11. 20. Heb. 9.
12. The word preached ( is precious and powerful, yet it) profited them not,
because it was not mixed with faith, Heb. 4. 2.

5. It Is faith that rids the soul of all its distempers, doubts, fears,
discouragements, Romans 5. 1. (we may not separate the Spirit from faith, nor
faith from the Spirit.)

6. By faith in Christ, thou shall be kept in perfect peace, it will sweetly,
transcendently refresh thy soul, Thou will keep him in perfect peace, because
he trusts in thee, Isa. 26. 3, 4. Being justified by faith, we have peace with
God, Romans 5. 1. By faith we apprehend Christ our justification, the fruit of
which is joy and peace.

7. By unbelief, we add sin to sin in the highest nature, if we believe not
what God says, our act of unbelief accuses God to speak falsely, He that
believes not has made God a liar, 1 John 5. 10. It is impossible for God to
lie. The strength of Israel cannot lie, 1 Samuel 15. 29. Nor can it be any
dishonor to God, nor hurt to thy self, to hope in his mercy, and to believe
in him; therefore when thou art tempted to unbelief, set before thee the evil
of unbelief.

8. As bad as thou can be, have been received to mercy; Jesus Christ came to
save sinners; This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, 1 Timothy
1. 15, 16. When thou layst in thy blood, behold it was a time of love, Ezekiel.
16. 8. He justifies the ungodly, Romans 4. 5. While we were yet sinners, Christ
dyed for us, Romans 5. 8. 10. therefore have hope. Fear not, but believe, Luke
8. 50. The Lord will command his loving kindness in the day time, and in the
night, Psalm. 42. 8. Hope thou in God, verse. 5. Be not afraid, only believe,
Mark. 5. 36.

9. Unbelief straitens thy heart, and stops thy mouth, hinders thy
thankfulness* and praising of God; thou shall be dumb, because thou beleevest
not, Luke 1. 20.

10. Unless we believe, we can never glorify God; He staggered not at the
promise of God through unbelief, but was strong in faith, giving God the
glory, Romans 4. 20.

Quest. From whence is it that many of the Lords children have so many doubts
and fears.

Answ. It arises from many several causes; as, 1. From ignorance of the
fullness and freeness of the promise, Isa. 55. 2. or mindlesnesse and
heedlesnesse of the promise, Heb. 2. 1. 3. And from corruption in the heart,
opposing grace, Romans 7. 4. And from the bodies distemper with melancholy, 5. or
from the conscience (being enlightened) which sides with the Law against it
self, Romans 7. 24. 6. or from unskilfulnesse in the Word of righteousness,
Heb. 5. 13. 7. And from unbelief, which takes the Law and applies it to it
self, which occasioneth fears, and fears doubts. 8. And from loose walking
with God. 9. Or from the Spirits not operating in the soul; the Spirit when it
acts, speaks peace, and causes faith to act more strongly, Romans 8. 16.

Means to quiet and settle a troubled soul in assurance of the love of God;
God gives peace to his by means, as appears 2 These. 3. 16.

Commune with thy heart, and make diligent search to find out what it is that
troubles thee, Psalm. 77. 6. Ask a reason of thy soul, why it is disquieted,
why it is cast down, Psalm. 42. 11. Why art thou cast down, O my soul? why
art thou disquieted? Psalm. 42. 5, 6.

comfort unto his people, he has declared himself to be merciful, and
gracious, and slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy; He has not dealt with us
after our sins, nor rewarded us according unto our iniquities, Psa. 103. 3,
4. 8. 10. etc. His voice is comfort, Comfort ye my people, speak ye
comfortably to Jerusalem, cry unto her, that her warfare is accomplished, that
her iniquity is pardoned, Isa. 4. 1, 2. I know the thoughts that I think
toward you, says the Lord, thoughts of peace, and not of evil, Jer. 29. 11.
Nor come they from Christ, he does not trouble nor discourage any; He binds up
the brokenhearted; he proclaims peace, liberty, he comforts all that mourn,
he gives beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, and garments of
praise, for the Spirit of heaviness, etc. Isa. 61. 1, 2, 3. Luke 4. 18. He is
gracious and piti^ull, He will not quench the smoking flax, nor break the
bruised reed, Isai. 42. 3. His voice is full of love and tenderness, all his
words are sweet words; as, Let not your hearts be troubled, Joh. 13. 1. Fear
not, it is your Fathers pleasure, to give you a kingdom, Luke 12. 32. Cast
you^ care upon me, I will care for you, Phil. 4. 6. Christ's voice is open to
me; My sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled, Song 5. 2. On sweet words of
Christ to his! Nor come they from the holy Spirit of God, he is the greatest
and most sweetest comforter, he causes no discouragements, but removes them
all, by revealing and applying to the soul the love of God, and carries the
soul by faith from all discouragements to God, who is love and peace, where
the soul is to rest, Psalm. 116. 7. and to be filled with his sweet peace.
Therefore all our discouragements do proceed,

1. From the Devil, who is an enemy to faith; He takes the word out of men's
hearts, lest they should believe, Luke 8. 12. 1 These. 3. 5.

2. Our own hearts; Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil
heart, in departing from the living God, Heb. 3. 12.

3. Or the lying vanities we have chosen: but they that harken unto lying
vanities, forsake their own mercy, Jonah 2. 8.

David's sin to admit of a parley with that which might tend to discourage him;
saying, Will the Lord cast off for ever? does his promise fail for evermore? I
said this is my infirmity, Psalm. 77. 7, 8, 9, 10. As soon as he saw his
infirmity, he had other thoughts of God, saying, Who is so great a God as our
God? thou art a God that do wonders; and his footsteps are not known, verse.
14. 19. If God in his greatness were known, and the wonders he does known,
and his footsteps, the way he goes known, men would admire him, and rejoice
at that for which they now mourn. When thou art tempted to unbelief, set
before thee the evil of this sin in it self, and the effects of it.

voices, that thou may say, It is the voice of my beloved that knocks, and
hearken unto it, Song 5. 2. Christ's voice is peace to his, Luke 24. 26. Thy
sins are forgiven, Luke 7. 48. I will remember them no more, Heb. 10. 17.
Therefore that voice that tends to hinder the peace of the Saints, suits with
Satan, and is not the voice of Christ: I will hear what the Lord will speak;
for he will speak peace to his people, Psalm. 85. 8. Satan also speaks in the
soul, saying, Is not this a delusion? is it likely to be from God? have thou a
heart fit for Christ? and because this last voice is more suitable to reason,
the soul is ready to close with it, and to conclude against God, and his own
soul, that the voice was not from God, but a delusion of Satan, mistaking
Christ's voice to be the voice of Satan, and Satan's voice to be the voice of
Christ, which is a miserable mistake. Therefore learn to know the several
colors, sounds, and voices, which are for God, and which are for Satan, 1 Cor.
14. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Or else you will mistake and come unprepared to the
battle, 2 Cor. 7. 5.

Law says, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are
written in the Law to do them, Gal. 3. 10, 11. When there is any work
required to be done upon pain of punishment, or upon promise of eternal life,
it is the voice of the Law; the Law requires a doing of something for life.
M^ses describes the righteousness of the Law, that the man that does these
things, shall live by them, Romans 10. 5. But the voice of the Gospel is
otherwise, that Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a
curse for us, Gal. 3. 13. And to him that works not, but believes on him
that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness, Romans 10.
5. see 9. verse to 13. and that his mercy is above what we can ask or think,
Ephesians. 3. 20. So the promises of li^e, they are free without condition, and the
Gospel declares what God works in us, and freely gives unto us, I will love
them freely, Hos. 14. 4. If some persons did listen more to the promise, which
is the voice of the Gospel, and not unto the voice of the Law, or the voice of
corruption, they should enjoy more peace, and less trouble.

Meddle not with the threatenings in but we are not under the Law, but under
grace, Romans 6. 14. A believer having sinned, through weakness, applies the
threatenings against that sin to himself, not considering that Christ has
satisfied for the sins they commit; Christ being made a curse for us, Gal. 3.
13.

Be sure ye judge not your state by false P^^ls sensiblenesse of sin, etc. Nor
judge thy state bad for the having of that which if thou were freed from, would
not prove thy estate good, as passion, temptations, discontentednesse, etc. If
this Rule were observed, some should not be so troubled as now they are.

David's experience might teach him this; I complained, and my spirit was
overwhelmed; I am so troubled that I cannot speak, Psalm. 77. 3, 4. 8.
Therefore hearken not to thy faylings, corruptions, doubts, fears, for as they
are all against God, so they are all against thy soul. There is no grace, no
mercy from them, therefore what thou see and feel, see not, consi^er not,
forget, and what thy sense sees not, see. Faith is the evidence of things not
seen, Heb. 11. 1. Walk by faith, not by sight, 2 Cor. 5. 7.

who is made to thee, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption,
1 Cor. 1. 30. If thou attendest only to God in his promise, thou shall find
Rest, Psalm. 116. 7. O believer, eye not so much thy self, or thy sins, as
Christ's full and perfect satisfaction, which was offered and accepted for all
thy sins, Heb. 10. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Oh therefore live, and rest thy soul
upon thy sweet Lord Jesus Christ alone, and place all thy confidence in him.
Do thou not hear God say to thee, Cast away all thy fears, and come to me,
I will settle thee, comfort, quicken, uphold thee, and be better to thee then
thy self can be; I will be all in all unto thee?

Know the happiness and perfection clean from all sin by the blood of Christ,
1 John 1. 7. They are removed from us, Psalm. 103. 12. A believer in Christ is
accepted of God in him, as perfect, righteous, and comely, as Christ is; for
Christ says to his; Thou art all fair my love, there is no spot in thee.
There is not any sin a believer can commit, can be a ground sufficient to
question the love of God, nor ought they to cast away their confidence in God,
for any thing they do, or can befall them, nor ought they to cause any
unquietness of spirit in them, Heb. 10. 19, 20. 22. 25. For now there is none
that can lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect, as Romans 8. 1. Oh meditate
on this truth, until thy heart be over powered with it, and thou enjoy the
sweetness of it, and ever mind it seriously, thy full freedom and sweet
liberty thou have in Christ, Gal. 5. 13.

Romans 7. Let us look off our sins, and look upon Gods sweet promise, who
says, Their sins and iniquities will I remember no more, Heb. 10. 17. So
that now we may draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, for
he is faithful that promised, verse. 22, 23.

in Christ, is a cause of much trouble in many a weak believer; for
Sanctification has nothing to do with Justification, nor salvation, as any
cause of it. Also Sanctification admits of degrees, but Justification admits of
neither rules nor degrees, and is more glorious then Sanctification: our
Justification depends not upon our apprehending of it, nor in our receiving of
it, but upon the effectualnesse and merit of what our sweet Lord Jesus has
done for us, Heb. 10. 14. 18, 19. So that now we may well have boldness to
enter into the Holiest by the blood of Jesus, verse. 20. Justification is
apprehended by faith, Heb. 11. 1. Joh. 8. 56. Faith does evidence to us our
justification; for the Scripture says, all that believe are justified, Act.
13. 39. It is possible to have a full assurance of faith, Heb. 10. 22.
therefore faith is an unquestionable evidence: and when faith is hidden and
doubtful, Justification is not apprehended; and when faith is hidden and
doubtful, Sanctification is not evident but doubtful, and so cannot evidence
to us our Justification: the effects of Sanctification cause men to question
their Justification, therefore no effect of Sanctification can evidence to the
soul its Justification; and that soul that by Faith apprehends his
Justification by Christ, not only knows it, but may live upon it, enjoying
the sweet fruit of it, peace, joy, strength, without any considering the
effects of Sanctification in himself. And seeing Christ is made Sanctification
to a believer, 1 Cor. 1. 30. why may not a believer live upon his own, and say,
I have Sanctification in Christ, which is perfect, my actual righteousness
does often fail me, but Christ's righteousness indures for ever, Psalm. 111. 3.
therefore I will fetch all my comfort from Christ, and my Justification by him;
and as we are not to conclude our Justification from any effect of
Sanctification, so we are not to conclude that apprehension of Justification
to be from God, as shall take men off the means and rules of Sanctification,
because it is to the dishonor of God for men not to walk holily, according to
the word of God, Tit. 2. 14. Prize and preserve the peace of thy conscience.

Be sure ye allow your selves in no Heb. 10. 17. Their sins and iniquities
will I remember no more. This alone is able to settle a soul, it being full of
sweetness and life.

Do not trouble thy self with any trouble, with a present strength; if many
and great troubles come, God is alsufficient, and will remove them, or give
strength to bear them when they come, 1 Cor. 10. 13.

Prove. 18. 2. hide them in thy heart, as Mat. 13. 44. There is strength and
sweetness in the promise, thou may venture thy soul upon God in his
promise, and live upon it, thou know not but God may reveal his promise to
thee, and settle it sweetly and fully upon thy soul by his almighty power, as
Ephesians. 1. 19, 20. Therefore let not Gods promises be strange to thee, but feed
upon them, eat them; Eat O friends, drink abundantly O beloved, Song 5. 1.
Leave not the promise, until thou be refreshed, revived, raised, ravished
with Gods rich grace and infinite free love, and thy heart enlarged with
thankfulness and obedience unto God again for the exceeding riches of his
mercy, Ephesians. 2. 9. His plenteous Redemption, Psalm. 130. 7.

Treasure up experiences of Gods goodness unto thy soul, but who among you
will give ear to this? who will hearken and hear for the time to come? Isa.
42. 23. Remember the days of old, I have considered the days of old, and the
years of ancient time, Psalm. 77. 5. Thou have been my help, Psalm. 63. 7. I
was brought low, and he helped me, see 2 Timothy 4. 17, 18. Psalm. 89. 49.

Keep thy heart calm and quiet from the Angel of the Lord came upon them, and
the glory of the Lord shone round about them, and they were sore afraid; and
the Angel said unto them, Fear not, for behold, I bring you tidings of great
joy, Luke 2. 9, 10. When the soul is troubled with any passion, it is not at
the command of faith, Luke 24. 41. the violence of their joy hindered their
faith, Let not your hearts be troubled, Joh. 13. 1. Quietness is the stay of
the soul to do or receive.

Heb. 13. 5. Take heed of the cares of this life, Luke 21. 34. 15. Trouble not
thy self with needless supposed fears, if thou do, thou drawest upon thy
self real sorrow, and unnecessary discontent; there be many that are
possessed with bitter sorrows from supposed sufferings.

To him that orders his conversation aright, will I show the salvation of
God, Psalm. 50. 23. Want of wisdom to dispose of, of diligence to dispatch,
what necessity requires to be done in the right time and place, has produced
such inconveniences, as has unavoydably caused trouble, a disquieted and an
unsettled spirit.

worship the beast, Rev. 14. 10, 11. Use Gods means, but live not upon
ordinances, but upon God in them, for means alone are not sufficient to do us
any good, 1 Cor. 1. 21.

Do not slight nor refuse Gods consolations, are the consolations of God
small with thee, Job 15. 11. O soul own that comfort God gives thee, if it
seem small to thee, its thy own, own it, lest ye live to complain, saying,
as David did; My soul refused to be comforted, Psalm. 77. 2. and to wish ye
had that ye despised; be thankful to God for what thou have received, and
hold that fast, and let nothing go that may tend to thy peace; rest satisfied
in Christ's righteousness, and add nothing unto it; I will make mention of thy
righteousness, even of thine only, Psalm. 71. 15, 16. 19. 24. Thy
righteousness is an everlasting righteousness, Psalm. 119. 142. see Psalm. 22.
31. and 35. 28. and 50. 6. and 51. 14. Jer. 33. 16. The perfection of Christ's
righteousness is held forth unto us, and does always lie before us for us,
that we might ever be comforted with it, and rejoice in it, with thankfulness
for it, seeing it so perfect, and full of divine consolation. Oh here is enough
to refresh and satisfy all the Lords to all eternity, so that we have enough,
we need no other, nor no more righteousness.

We have thought of thy loving kindness, O God, Psalm. 48. 9.

Ye believe in God, believe also in me; and let not your hearts be troubled,
Joh. 13. 1. Faith in Christ quiets and settles a troubled soul. Thou can not
be too confident in resting upon Christ in his free grace, Psalm. 30. 5.
therefore come boldly to the throne of grace, Heb. 4. 16. Those who know God,
will trust him with their bodies and souls, and that upon his word; All that
know thy Name, will trust in thee, Psalm. 9. 9, 10. but a fool neither will,
nor can do so; O fool, and slow of heart to believe, Luke 24. 25. But those
who are made wise by God, will trust in the word of the Lord, Isa. 26. 3, 4.
and say, in his word do I hope, Psalm. 130. 5. When the Lord pleases to settle
a soul in the assurance of his love, he causes the soul to trust in his
word; Remember thy word unto thy servant, upon which thou have caused me to
hope, Psalm. 119. 49. God by his word conveys that to the soul, which is
suitable to its wants, and by his power and authority settles it upon the
soul. Above all, take the shield of faith, Ephesians. 6. 16. Fear not, believe,
Luke 8. 50. Yea, cleave to God in his promise, even then when thou art in thy
greatest fears, and most sensible of thy unworthiness; trust in him at all
times, God is a refuge for us, Selah, Psalm. 62. 8. If at all times, then at the
worst times also; yea even then believe, and hear nothing against thy
believing God in his promise. Abraham believed against hope, Romans 4. 18. So
should we do; oh believe God intends thy good; Christ came to seek and to
save the lost, Luke 19. 10. Lost, viz. in the sight and sense of thy own sin
and misery, and in thy own sufficiency.

Improve thy doubts, fears, temptations hearken unto any of them? Consider
often and well these places, Romans 16. 20. Heb. 10. 35, 36, 37. Rev. 3. 11. 1
Pet. 4. 19. and 5. 7. And search the Scriptures. Reading helps men's
judgments, memories, affections, confirms our faith, and fits us to answer
the temptations of Satan.



First, hearken not to the voice of thy heart, it is a lying vanity, it will
deceive thee, Pro. 3. 5, 6, 7. Isa. 44. 20.

Secondly, hearken not to Satan.

Thirdly, hearken not to sense; Thomas said, he would not believe, unless he
might see and thrust his hand into his side, Joh. 20. 24, 25. But this sensual
practice is to be abhorred by us; for this is to consult with flesh and blood,
which cannot discern spiritual things, 1 Cor. 2. 14. and is condemned by God,
Gal. 1. 16. So some persons will see such a holy frame of spirit in themselves,
and feel such a sin subdued, etc. before they will believe, yet faith looks
not to such things as these, but only to God in his word; therefore we must
not live by sight, but by faith, 2 Cor. 5. 7. and blessed are they that have
not seen, yet have believed, Joh. 20. 29.

Fourthly, hearken not to carnal reason, if it be hearkened unto, thou can
not believe, nor submit to God, nor be settled; for does not reason say, that a
Virgin cannot bring forth a child, and a woman of ninety years is past
conceiving a child, therefore reason says it cannot be, and so contradicts
God himself? Genesis 17. 16, 17. Mat. 1. Also can reason believe, that by faith
the walls of Jericho fell down, and that the Saints stopped the mouths of
Lions, and quenched the violence of fire by faith, yet faith did it, Heb. 11.
30. 33, 34. Or is it likely or possible to reason for a man to walk upon the
Sea as Pe^er did? Mat. 14. 29. And did not Christ's command seem vain to
Peter's reason, that he should cast in his net into the Sea, seeing he had cast
it in so often, and fished all night, and catched nothing? Luke 5. 8. Can
reason conceive how the dead, who are eaten with beasts, or fishes, or turned
into dust, can be raised to life? or that the Sea can be divided, the Sun go
backward, or the Rocks yield water in abundance; surely there cannot be any
reason given for them. And seeing sense and corrupt reason is so contrary to
God in his word, why should we hearken unto them, when they say the soul has
no grace, because sense sees none, and that God will not pardon their sins,
because there is no reason to reason why he should, nor no way to reason which
way it can be, yet it may be, for with God all things are possible, Mat. 19.
26. They that hearken unto lying vanities, forsake their own mercies, Jonah 2.
8.

5. Live not upon duties; 6. nor upon good report; 7. nor upon groundless
hopes; 8. nor upon peace; 9. comfort; 10. joy; 11. raptures; 12. ravishments:
though they all be true or false, live upon God alone, and upon nothing else
besides God in Christ; if thou do live upon any thing else, as thy
foundation is unsound, so it will deceive thee; and whatsoever their sparks
may be, they must and shall lie down in sorrow, Isa. 50. 10.

or outward man, if thou do, thou can not be settled, for they are often
changeable and contrary one to another; one day thou may have peace, joy,
strength, another none of these; to day God may show himself to thee, and in a
moment of time he may hide himself; to day rich and enjoy many friends with
health, to morrow sick, and poor, and friends all gone, etc. Gods acting in
us, and upon us, is not always as he is unto his: as God is in himself
unchangeable, ever the same, so he is to his ever the same, however he may
seem to be, Heb. 13. 8. Isa. 45. 7, 8. 15. with Song 5. 6. Isa. 8. 17.
Therefore make a good construction of all that God does do to thee, his actings
in us, or upon us, is the accomplishing of his will, for his glory, and the
good of his; that which I think worst for me, may be best for me, however it
be, God is good, and good to me, Psalm. 73. 1. This I see and say, and enjoy in
both.

Pray to God, that he may give unto the Spirit of wisdom and revelation in the
knowledge of him, that ye may know what is the hope of your calling, Ephesians. 1.
17, 18, 19. Say unto my soul, I am thy salvation, Psalm. 35. 3. I beseech thee
show me thy glory, Exodus 33. 18. Cause thy face to shine upon me, Psalm. 80. 3.
Establish, O God, that which thou have wrought in us, Psalm. 68. 22.

rejoice evermore, 1 These. 5. 16. Sadness of spirit hinders us in
thankfulness to God, also it breeds uncomfortablenesse and unsetlednesse in
us, an unchearfull spirit is unfit for duty, for what we go about
unchearfully, we are soon weary in it, if not of it. When our spirits are
calm, united, and cheerful, then we act more comfortably; and such a frame of
spirit is fittest to praise God, sadness of spirit fitteth us to yield to
discouragements, if we be sad, we enjoy not the comfort of any thing;
cheerfulness is as it were the life of our spirits, cheerfulness inlargeth
our spirits, and fits us to receive happiness, and to express it.

Job. 1. 4.

Mind and remember that which makes forget your resting place, as Jer. 50. 6.
it is no wonder if ye be troubled; Ye have forgotten the exhortation that
speaks unto you as unto children, Heb. 12. 5. We have no present actual
comfort further then we have remembrance. Know, no means of themselves are
sufficient to quiet and settle thy soul, it is the work of the Spirit to answer
all discouragements, it is God alone that creates the fruit of the lips peace;
peace to him that is afar off, and to him that is near, says the Lord, and I
will heal him, Isa. 57. 19. It Is God which stablisheth us, 1 Cor. 1. 21. These
things I write unto you, that your faith and hope may be in God, 1 Pet. 1. 21.
Now the God of peace, give you peace always by all means, 2 These. 3. 16.

Use of Exhortation to all that believe.
1. To admire the greatness and sweetness of Gods love in his free grace to
thee, it is a mercy to hear of it, how much more to have interest in it, and
to enjoy it, being possessed of it, Isa. 61.

2. Take thy own portion and treasures provided for thee, Col. 2. 3. and ever
live in the eternal love of God in Christ to thee, this object is sweet, s^ll,
durable, sufficient to satisfy thee at all times, rest satisfied in Christ.

3. Dedicate thy self, and all thou have freely to him, who gave himself
fully and freely for thee, who suffered, yea dyed so freely for thee. Oh how
should this love engage our hearts to walk with God, to be holy as he is holy,
etc. yea do all, and suffer for him! for the ways of the Lord are right, and
the just shall walk in them, Hosea 14. 9.

4. Declare to others Gods goodness unto thy soul, use means that others may
enjoy the same mercy with thee; Be ye merciful, as he is merciful, forgive
and give unto others souls or bodies freely: for so thou have received.

5. Be content with thy estate, inward or outward, though many crosses and
miseries attend thee; for if God be enough (as he is) thou have enough; oh let
not many nor great troubles, inward or outward, dismay thee, 1 Cor. 10. 13. for
though they may seem long, yet they cannot last long: The God of peace shall
bruise Satan under your feet shortly, Romans 16. 20. Lo I come quickly, Rev. 22.
20.

6. As Christ is all thy happiness, so let him be all thy comfort, and the
supply of all thy wants, expect all you need and can desire, yea that God can
give, that is for thy good, it is certain thou shall have all thou need,
Psalm. 34. 10. Seeing he has freely given us his Son, how shall he not with
him give us all things freely? Romans 8. 32.

7. Watch and pray, lest ye (fall into temptation, and) abuse this favor, and
turn this grace into wantonness.

8. Stand fast in this liberty of Christ, in which he has made you free, as
Gal. 5. 1.

9. Rejoice always, evermore, and let thy joy be full in God thy portion; They
shall rejoice in their portion, Isa. 61. 7.

10. Be wonderfully thankful to God for all his exceeding grace and mercy unto
thee, in that he has given thee beauty for ashes, and everlasting joy shall
be to thee, Isa. 61. 3. 7.

2. Use of Comfort and Consolation to all that believe. 2. Use.

Oh dear, yea most dear and precious souls, who can express your happiness
and glory? for the Lord has done great things for us, whereof we are glad,
Psalm. 126. 3. Oh now the great work of your Redemption is finished to your
hands by him whose works are all perfect, Heb. 10. 14. So that there is nothing
of this work left for thee to do. Now thou may come unto the throne of grace
boldly, now all is paid, it is God that justifies, who shall condemn? surely
none, Romans 8. 38, 39. It Is not sin, nor Satan, nor any thing else shall hinder
thy interest in Christ, or enjoyment of him, for thy union with the Lord Jesus
shall never be dissolved, Christ lives for ever, Heb. 7. 25. and seeing Christ
lives ye shall live also, Joh. 14. 19. Therefore thou art not only happy now,
but thou shall be so for ever, thou shall receive the end of thy faith, the
salvation of thy soul, 1 Pet. 1. 9. Joh. 5. 24. Christ is enough to comfort us
in the sight of all our sins, and to make us happy in all our miseries. There
is a day a coming, which will make amends for all; in the mean time, make
mention of the loving kindness of the Lord, and the praises of the Lord,
according to all the Lord has bestowed on us, etc. according to the multitude
of his loving kindnesses, Psa. 63. 7. Who is wise, and be shall understand
these things, prudent, and be shall know them, Hosea 14. 9.

THE Perfection and happiness of a Believer in Christ.
Some brief Observations or Meditations on some part of the 16. Psalm. which
Psalm is a Prophecy of Christ, as appears Acts 2. 25. to 35. verse.
Psalm 16.

IN this Psalm appears the wonderful goodness of God in Christ, to all the
sons and daughters of Christ, and the exceeding great and happy estate of all
that are in him.

Preserve me, ver. 1.
O God] There is no preservation in any thing, but God.

Preserve me] Christ in the days of his flesh put up strong cries and
supplications to his Father.

For in thee do I put my trust] there is no trust to be put in any thing but
in God.

I put my trust] Christ as he was man had faith, and it was in God.

Thou art my Lord] Christ honors the Father in acknowledging him only; yet
Christ and he are one.

My goodness extends not to thee, ver. 2.
but to the Saints that are in the earth.

My goodnesse] Christ's goodness was from himself, therefore his own.

Goodnesse] Jesus Christ is full of goodness, Col. 2. 3. Therefore all that
Christ has done is wonderful, excellent, and meritorious, in this is our
happiness and comfort.

Extends not to thee] Viz. God. God is perfect and infinite, therefore he is
not capable of any addition of goodness. Oh admire his perfection.

But to the Saints, Ver. 3.
etc. Those who are Saints, had no goodness of their own, Their righteousness
is of me, says the Lord, Isa. 54. 17. Christ's goodness was for the Saints,
they stood in need of it.

Extendeth] It reaches the Saints, they shall enjoy the fruit of it; there is
no place of the earth that is out of the reach of Christ. This goodness of
Christ was not for every person in the world, but to the Saints that are in the
earth.

Saints] Christ's goodness made them Saints; Christ found them no Saints, but
wicked sinners; Oh Saint admire the riches of Christ, and his love to thee; the
Saints goodness is in Christ. O soul rest satisfied in Christ's goodness,
which is thine, rejoice in it, and admire at it, be thankful for it, walk
sutably unto it, and improve this goodness against all thy doubts and fears,
etc.

To the excellent] The Saints are excellent to Christ, yea, all of them are
alike excellent, beautiful, glorious, unspeakeable, infinite, excellent, with
the excellent beauty of Christ, Ezekiel. 16. 14. They are more excellent then the
whole creation of heaven and earth. Christ calls them excellent, and he
esteems them so, Ephesians. 5. 27. Oh Saint esteem thy self as Christ does to be
excellent in his excellency; for thy beauty it is perfect through my
comeliness I have put upon thee, says the Lord God, Ezekiel. 16. 14. I will
greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my God; for he has
clothed me with the garments of salvation, he has covered me with the robe of
righteousness, Isa. 61. 10. O glorious Saint, the world knows not thy worth,
therefore it esteems thee not, yet slight not thy self, because Christ has
made thee excellent.

In whom is all my delight] Jesus Christ is fully pleased and contented with
his.

All my delight] an infinite delight Christ takes in his.

All] One Saint is esteemed by Christ to be of more worth, then the whole
creation of heaven and earth, those things have none of his delight, the Saints
have it all, the quintessence of all fullness.

All] Infinite is the love and contentment that Christ takes and gives to them.
O precious Saint, delight thy self in God, rest satisfied with him, in his
love, and the delight he takes in thee.

Their sorrows shall be multiplied that hasten after another God: ver. 4.
their drink offerings of blood will I not offer, nor take up their names into
my lips] As for the wicked, it is not so with them, they are not in so happy a
condition, they shall find the contrary from Christ, he will not once name
their names to God, nor offer their offerings to his Father.

Their offerings of bloud] Their costly services shall be rejected, they shall
find no entertainment, no accepta^ce from Christ, they shall have no peace,
nor comfort, no cessation of sorrow, their sorrows shall never have an end;
their sorrows shall increase and be multiplied, therefore they are in a
miserable condition.

Mine inheritance and lot] Christ's lot and inheritance is his people; Ver. 5.
The Lords portion is his people, Deuteronomy. 32. 9.

Mine] Christ lays claim to his people, to have an interest in them, Christ
is not ashamed to own them to be his, Heb. 2. 11. The Saints are not their own
but Christ's, 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. 1 Cor. 3. 23. Seeing the Saints are Christ's,
they are to do all for him, to serve him, to be at his disposing only, and
not at their own.

Inheritance of my cup] Christ's people are his by purchase; let this cup pass
from me; they cost a great price, even the precious blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.
19. He that paid so much for his, will not lose them, nor leave them, Heb. 13.
5, 6.

The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance] The Saints have God for their
portion; The Lord is my portion, says my soul, Lam. 3. 24. Thou art my
portion, O Lord, Ps. 119. 57. The portion of a child of God is infinite,
because God is infinite: God esteems nothing too much for his, in that he
declares himself, and all that is his to be theirs. The Saints are infinitely
happy in having such a portion, Jer. 10. 16. Happy is that people that is in
such a ease, yea happy is that people whose God is the Lord, Psalm. 144. 15. A
Saints portion can never be spent, nor lost* God is my portion for ever, Psalm.
73. 26. None are so rich as a Saint; the poorest Saint shall never want; The
Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want, Psalm. 23. 1. There is no want to them
that fear him, they shall not want any good thing, Psalm. 34. 9, 10. Oh rich
and happy Saint, admire free grace, which does abound to thee; be content with
thy portion, and well thou may, for more thou can not have; rejoice in thy
portion, for it will be a full supply to thee; They shall rejoice in their
portion, Isa. 61. 7. Be thankful for thy portion, for it was freely given
thee, Hos. 14. 4. Esteem not any thing too much for him, who esteems nothing
too much for thee. Be content if outwardly poor, because richer thou can not
be, in that thou art an heir of glory: improve thy portion, and live upon it
richly.

Thou maintainest my lot] God has undertaken to preserve the Saints, and he
does it; Christ's inheritance can never be lost, because it is maintained by
God: The Saints safety and perseverance depends not upon themselves, nor
anything below God, but upon God, who maintains and upholds them.

The Saints are sure to persevere, it is impossible they should fall finally,
or miss of glory, because they are maintained by God.

1. They shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand;
and none are able to pluck them out of my Fathers hand, Joh. 10. 28, 29.

2. For they are in the love of God, Ephesians. 2. 5. Joh. 17. 26. 1 John 3. 1. 16.
and 4. 16. They shall (unavoydably) come unto me, Joh. 6. 36, 37.

3. God has promised to preserve them, Heb. 13. 5. For he has said, I will
never leave thee, nor forsake thee.

4. God is faithful, 1 Cor. 1. 9. 1 These. 5. 23, 24. Jer. 31. 40. And
immutable, I am the Lord, I change not, Mal. 3. 6.

5. And only wise, he knows how to preserve them, Romans 16. 27.

6. He has power enough to preserve them, 1 Pet. 1. 5.

7. Because they are in Christ, Ephe. 1. 4. who shall ever live; Because I
live, ye shall live also, Joh. 14. 19.

8. Because they are so united to God, that God and they are but one, Jo. 17.
23. I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one, Joh. 17.
23. Oh sweet and happy union that is so entire, real, full, and eternal!

9. Because God dwells in them, and they in him, 1 John 4. 13. Joh. 17. 23.
Therefore they are secure and safe enough, being out of the reach of all the
Devils in earth or hell.

The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant ver. 6.
places, yea I have a goodly heritage] Christ's lot and inheritance is his
Saints, who are delightful and precious unto him, Deuteronomy. 32. 9.

I have a goodly heritage] Christ is wonderfully taken with the Saints
comelines, it is a maine part of the excellency of Christ's inheritance, that it
cannot be taken from him, nor spent, nor lost.

Goodly heritage] Christ has a high esteem of his; Thou art all fair, my
love, there is no spot in thee, Song 4. 7. They are without spot or wrinkle,
Ephesians. 5. 25. to 28. 1 John 1. 7. Psalm. 51. 5. Rev. 19. 8. My beloved spoke and
said unto me, Rise up my love and fair one, and come away, Song 2. 10. Oh
happy Saint, have thee a high esteem of Christ, he is satisfied in thee, and be
thou satisfied in him, rejoice in nothing else but him, Psalm. 33. 21. and sing
praises to him.

THE SAINTS COMMUNION with God by Faith.
The life of Faith in effectual calling, Justification, Sanctification,
infirmities, in graces, in means, in time past, in prosperity and adversity, in
glorification, and to dye by Faith.
Wherein the life of Faith consists.

IT is in the communion the soul has with God in Christ, and the souls
enjoying of Christ in his promises, both spiritual and temporal.

1. Faith in effectual calling.
It is the souls cleaving and depending upon Christ in his promise for pardon
and life, 1 John 12. 1. Joh. 3. 23. Upon such places as these, 2 Cor. 5. 20.
Mat. 11. 28. Mat. 5.

2. The life of faith in Justification.
The Lord having spoken peace to the soul, that Jesus Christ has fully
satisfied for all his sins, so as they are all done away, and shall be
remembered no more, Isa. 53. 5, 6. Jer. 31. 34. etc. And that as the soul is
happy, so it injoyes the comfort of it, and is filled with joy and peace in
believing, and now the soul lives a life of comfort, cheerfulness and
holiness, 1 Pet. 2. 24. Romans 5. 1. So that no sin nor Satan (and if
corruption increase, and God hides himself, or seems an enemy) not any thing
can cause this soul to let go the Lord, and cast away its confidence; Though
he slay me, says Job, yet will I trust in him, Job 13. 15. Romans 8. 38, 39.
Isa. 54. 7, 8. and 63. 16, 17.

Some hold the act of faith is that which God accepts to Justification, but
this is a mistake, because it makes Christ inferior to faith, and in ascribing
such an honor to faith, they dishonor Christ, for although they do not
exclude Christ wholly, yet in the act of Justification, it gives all to faith.
They say, as the act of Adams sin condemned him, so our act of faith justifies
us. Answer; Adams sin was enough to condemn him and us, but our faith cannot
save others, nor our selves.

They reply, We are justified by faith.

Answ. Christ is called faith, Gal. 3. 23. Before faith came: which must be
understood of Christ. We are justified before God in his sight only by
Christ, Romans 3. 20. 24. My righteous servant (Christ) shall justify many,
Isai. 53. 11. We are not justified before God by faith which is in us, but by
Christ, by his blood; justified by his blood, Romans 5. 9. That which saves us is
the blood of Christ; Jesus Christ has loved us, and washed us from our sins
in his blood, Rev. 1. 5.

Also we are said to be justified by faith, because it is the instrument
whereby we apprehend and apply Christ our Righteousness: by faith we know our
selves to be justified, Romans 5. 1. Though faith be a grace of God, yet as it is
an act, it is a work, and to be justified by it, is to be justified by a work
of our own; for with the heart (man) believes, Romans 10. 9, 10. That which
justifies us, must be perfect, and so it is no act of ours; for all our
Righteousnesses are as filthy rags, etc. Isai. 64. 6. Not of works, least any
man should boast, Ephesians. 2. 9. Before we had faith, it seems, we were not in
Christ, or in him and not justified; for we were in him before the world was,
Ephesians. 1. 4. And that at one time God should be angry with us (as he is with
all unjustified persons who are out of Christ, Heb. 12. 29. He hates all the
workers of iniquity, Psalm. 5.) and that our believing should make him to be at
peace with us: this is to make God changeable like man, which is contrary to
the Word; for with him is no variableness, Jam. 1. 17. I am the Lord, I change
not, Mal. 3. 6. Nothing can be charged upon Gods elect, Romans 8. 1. therefore
they are justified, 2 Cor. 5. 19. Those who have no sin upon them are
justified, but Christ has taken away all the sins of the Elect, Job. 1. 29.
with Isai. 35. 8. 1 Pet. 2. 24. Romans 6. 6. And to say, we are not justified
before God until we believe, is to say Jesus Christ has not justified us,
which is contrary to the Scriptures, which says, We are accepted in the
beloved, in whom we have redemption by his blood, Ep. 1. 6, 7. We are justified
by his blood, Romans 5. 9. Jesus Christ has loved us, and washed us from our
sins in his own blood, Rev. 1. 5. We were reconciled by the death of his
Son, Romans 5. 9, 10. A full satisfaction, Heb. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. And in this
God is well pleased before we believe, Mat. 3. 17. Isai. 53. 11.

Also to say, we are not justified before God, or in his sight, until we
believe, is to say, we must add our work to Christ, to make up our
justification before God, and if it be so, then we in part save our selves;
and if we do join with Christ in this work, why may we not join with him
in the glory of it? for that may be esteemed one of the greatest parts of our
justification, without which we cannot be justified. But this derogates from
Christ, and all such tenets we are to hate with execration. For, says Christ,
I have trodden the wine press alone, and of the people there was none with me,
Isai. 63. 3. We rather say, if we believe not, yet he abides faithful, he
cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy 2. 13.

What the Lord Jesus Christ has done for us, is perfect, and is by God imputed
to us, so as it is really ours, though it be inherent in another, and by
believing it, we know it to be ours, Romans 4. 24.

First, Not any shall be saved by Christ, but those who were predestined in
him, according to his eternal purpose, Ephesians. 1. 4, 5. and 3. 11. And that there
was not any foreseen faith or works in any kind why he chose these rather
then others, the will of God was the cause one was chosen and not another; all
was according to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise and glory of his
grace, Ephesians. 1. 5, 6. Are we better then they? no, in no wise, etc. Romans 3. 9.
It was from his great love, wherewith he loved us, Ephesians. 2. 4. This love of
God was the cause of Gods sending Christ, Joh. 3. 16. and the chief cause of
man's election and salvation, 1 John 4. 10. Ephesians. 1. 4. Joh. 17. 23. And that it
is impossible for this great love to decrease or increase, because it is
infinite, as appears by Psalm. 139. 17, 18. Jam. 1. 17. God is perfect and
infinite, he knows and understands all things that ever were, are, or shall be
at once: So he is one pure act, therefore when we were chosen in Christ, we
were justified and complete in him, God looked upon the Elect to be in Christ
before the world was, Ephesians. 1. 4. and so he ever looks upon the Elect: So
that they ever appear to him perfect and righteous as Christ; for they are
one, and are in him, 1 Cor. 1. 30. Ye are in Christ Jesus, and ever shall be
in him, being justified freely by his grace in his sight, Romans 3. 20. 24. God
properly was never wroth with Christ, nor the Elect, and therefore Christ could
not suffer Gods wrath; see Heb. 2. 9. So that in respect of their
justification, God sees no sin in any of the Elect, even before their
calling and after. And as it is Gods will, so it should be ours, to set his
glory above our salvation, that in the ages to come, he might show the
exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness toward us, to the praise of the
glory of his grace, Ephesians. 1. 5, 6. Ephesians. 2. 7.

Secondly, In time the Elect did break a holy and just Law, and so lay under
the curse and wrath of it, which was death, Romans 3. 21. 23. Christ in our
nature for our persons suffered death, Heb. 2. 9. (the penalty) to free all the
Elect, so that they are now actually justified by Justice; That he might be
just (Romans 6. 15.) and 3. 25, 26. If God should have justified us, without this
propitiation, after he had made this Law, and we breaking it, he could not have
been just, but having received this propitiation, he could not be just, if he
did not justify the Elect, That he might be just, and the justifier, etc. Romans
3. 26.

Thirdly, The soul by faith does apprehend and apply Christ, and what he has
done, to be for him, by which it knows it self to be justified in the sight
of God, and in the Word, and in his own conscience. Whence flows joy and peace
in believing, Romans 5. 1. because all that believe are justified; And as many as
were ordained to eternal life believed, Act. 13. 39. 48. So that by believing,
I know I am ordained to eternal life, because Gods word says so, and that we
are justified in his sight without the deeds of the Law, Romans 3. 20. 28. viz.
by faith we apprehend our selves to be freely and fully justified by Christ,
without any works of our own, Gal. 2. 16. without any addition of inherent
goodness in us, etc.

Fourthly, by our works in our outward subjection to Christ, to his word, we
declare to men (as far as they can judge) that we have the faith of Gods
Elect, 2 Pet. 1. 1. Thou, O Lord, know the hearts of all men; but faith
without works is dead to men, and buried also, James 2. 18. 20. If there be no
works, they can see nothing of it; show me thy faith by thy works; Ye see
then how by works a man is justified, 21. 24.

In the 1. we are justified in respect of the in his sight, Romans 3. 20.

In the 2. we are actually and vertually

In the 3. we are justified in our Consciences,



Object. If it be so, that men are loved of God, etc. before they repent and
believe, then men may live as they list, etc.

Answ. We are to own and confess the truth, and not what men of corrupt minds,
and base spirits, will say, and will do: the Apostle says, If any man sin, we
have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, 1 John 2. 1. But
what if one say, it seems the Apostle incourages men to sin, to tell them
there is an Advocate, who is always heard. And the Apostle says, Where sin
has abounded, grace did abound much more, Romans 5. 20. By the Apostles answer
(it appears some did say, they might continue in sin that grace might abound)
what shall we say then, shall we continue in sin, that grace may abound? God
forbid: how shall we that are dead in sin live any longer therein, etc. Romans 6.
1, 2. But this is an old cavil and slander cast upon those that teach the
truth, as the Apostle says it was then in his days; We be slanderously
reported, and as some affirm, that we say, let us do evil that good may
come, whose damnation is just, Romans 3. 8. Their exception is against the truth
of God, and therefore we leave them to God to answer and satisfy them. And
though all the Elect are freed from the curse of the Law, yet we establish the
Law, Romans 3. 31. We receive the Law from the hand of Jesus Christ to be a rule
for us to walk by; and herein is my Father glorified, that ye bring forth
much fruit, Joh. 15. 8. And the Saints enjoy sweet privileges by walking close
with God; see 1 Pet. 4. 14. To him that orders his conversation aright, will I
show the salvation of God, Psalm. 50. 23. God sheddeth his love into the hearts
of his (in his time and measure) which love so constraines them, that they
cannot choose but love God again for his great love, Romans 5. 5. Ephesians. 4. 6. 2
Cor. 5. 14. Which love as it is apprehended by them, so it constraines them to
obey him; and there is no faith true, but that which works by love, Gal. 5. 6.
and to all that love God, his commandments are not grievous, Joh. 14. 15. 1 John 5. 1. 3. And God has chosen us that we should be holy and without blame
before him in love, Ephesians. 1. 4. and 2. 10. and 4. 1.

But this doctrine has ever been slandred and opposed by Papists, Arminians,
and such as they are; but let those that can see, judge whose lives are most
according to the Word, they that hold with it or against it.

3. The life of faith in Sanctification.
This consists in two branches.

The first, is the souls cleaving to God in Christ our Sanctification, which
is for my pardon, and peace, and assurance of glory, 1 Cor. 1. 30. Who is made
unto us sanctification.

The second, is the souls cleaving to Christ in his promises, to change my
nature, cleanse and renew my heart and life, and to work all our works for us,
and be a quickening Spirit in us, 1 Cor. 15. 45. I will heal their
backslidings, Hos. 14. 5. He will subdue our iniquities, Micah 7. 19. Sin
shall not have dominion over you, etc. Isa. 57. 18, 19. I have seen his ways
and will heal him; and heal all thy diseases, Psalm. 103. 8. This was Christ's
prayer, Sanctify them with thy truth, thy Word is truth; for their sakes
sanctify I my self, that they also might be sanctified through the truth,
Joh. 17. 17. 19.

There is much unevenness in us, it should be a great grief unto us, that we
cannot honor God no more in our conversation, and that our spirits are so much
estranged from him as they are, and unto holy and divine things, which should
be familiar, and more delightful unto us. All that are the Lords have received
great love from him, which should greatly engage their hearts, to walk as
becomes Saints, in a holy course and conversation, according to the Word of
God, every day, and all the day long to enjoy God, and obey him according to
his word.

Of infirmities.
An infirmity is such a weakness, as when the heart is upright, yet by reason
of some impediment it cannot do the good it would, and does the evil it would
not. Infirmities are the imperfections of good actions. There is an infirmity
which arises from some impediment which a man would feign remove but cannot.
There is an infirmity that arises for want of growth in grace. A sin of
infirmity is always with grief and sorrow, and where there is no grief for
it, it is no infirmity. It is a sin of infirmity in him who desires to be
informed of it, and to be reproved for it, and to know how to leave it, when he
is ashamed of it, and will not plead for it, but complain to God against it,
and is grieved and humbled for it, and uses means against it. There is no
child of God that is wholly free from infirmities, therefore every believer is
to live by faith in all their infirmities.

4. The life of faith in infirmities.
Which consists in two things.

First, It is the soul cleaving to God in Christ, that he will be to us
according unto his promise, a God of love and mercy unto us for ever,
notwithstanding all our omissions and commissions, excesses and defects.

Secondly, and that he will supply all our wants for soul or body, as if we
had never sinned, according to his Covenant with Jesus Christ, and us in him,
that it shall stand fast for ever with him, Psalm. 89. 27, 28, 29.

For the first, If any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, 1 John 2.
1. Who forgiveth all thy iniquities, Psalm. 103. 3. Whom he loves once, he loves
to the end, Joh. 13. 1. I am the Lord, I change not, Mal. 3. 6. Jesus Christ
the same, yesterday, and to day, and for ever, Heb. 13. 8. I will make an
everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David, Isai. 53. 3.
Which is confirmed by two immutable things, Oath and Covenant, etc. That we
might have strong Consolation, Heb. 6. 17, 18. Through the blood of the
everlasting Covenant, Heb. 13. 20. If his children forsake my Law, and walk
not in my Judgments, if they break my Statutes, and keep not my
Commandments; then will I visit their transgressions with a rod, and their
iniquity with stripes: Nevertheless, my loving kindness I will not take from
him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail; my Covenant will I not break, my
mercy will I keep for him, and my Covenant shall stand fast with him, Psalm. 89.
30, 31, 32, 33, 34. They and our fathers dealt proudly, and hardened their
necks, and hearkened not to thy Commandments, and refused to obey, etc. But
thou art a God ready to pardon, gracious and merciful, and slow to anger, and
of great kindness, and forsakest them not, Nehe. 9. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. In our
greatest falls, when the soul is subject to doubt of pardon, consider our God
will abundantly pardon, etc. Isa. 55. 7, 8, 9. I am he that blotteth out thy
transgressions for my Names sake, Isa. 43. 25. And am mighty to save, Isa. 63.
1. With the Lord is plenteous redemption, Psalm. 130. 7, 8, 9. I have blotted
out thy sins, return unto me; for I have redeemed thee, Isa. 44. 22. He
knows our frame, and remembers that we are but dust, Psalm. 103. 14. If thou
should mark iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand? But there is forgiveness
with thee, that thou may be feared, Psalm. 130. 3, 4. But the mercy of the
Lord is from everlasting to everlasting, upon them that fear him. As a father
pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him, Psalm. 103. 13.
17, 18. Thou art a God ready to forgive, and plenteous in mercy unto all them
that call upon thee, Psalm. 86. 5. But thou art a God ready to pardon, gracious,
and merciful, and slow to anger, and of great kindness, and forsakest them
not, though they dealt proudly, and hardened their necks, and hearkened not to
thy Commandments, and refused to obey, Neh. 9. 16, 17. He has not dealt with
us after our sins, nor rewarded us according to our iniquities, Ps. 103. 10. He
was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, the
chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed,
Isa. 53. 6. God has in wisdom and love left sin in his, to keep them humble
in the sense of sin, and that we may know what we are, and our strength,
that we might exercise the graces of the Spirit, faith for pardon, wisdom,
watchfulness, self-denial, etc. which we could not do, if we had no sin,
and that we might long to be in heaven, where we shall enjoy a full freedom
from all sin: and that we might love and prise Christ more, seeing we stand
in such need of him to pardon and heal us, and that we might daily depend
upon Christ against it, and live upon the fullness of Christ, which we should
have no need in this kind, if we could not sin, and that we might not scorn
nor insult over any, and that Gods power may appear in preserving a little
grace in a soul so full of sin: and also the power of his grace in subduing
so many and so strong sins, and that we might admire that rich grace, that
can love such as we are, and pardon our so many and great sins.



sin that grace may abound, God forbid, Romans 6. 1, 2, 3, 8. but in obedience
to God, and love to him, use all means against it, all thy days strive
against it in the strength of Christ, the love of Christ will teach thee, and
cause thee to do so.

Paul, I glory in my infirmities, not as they are sins, but because by them
Gods power and goodness is the more seen, both in pardoning, and healing, see
Romans 5. 20. and 6. 1, 2. 2 Cor. 12. 9. Romans 3. 7, 8. etc. What if I should say,
all the Lords are the more happy they were sinners, else how could they have
been capable of mercy, and heaven, and union with God, etc. If there were not
evil, it would not be known what is good; justice and mercy had not been
known, therefore how could* God be known? his wisdom in drawing good out of
evil, nor his infinite love in sending Christ to dye, could not have been
known, and man could not come to that full happiness in Christ, if there had
not been sin. Sin should not hinder our faith, it is hard to believe the pardon
of seventy seven sins in a day, yet faith is able to believe it, and also to
keep a sinner from being perplexed in his spirits with any sin or trouble, so
as to hinder the soul from rejoicing in God all the day long: faith looks to
Jesus Christ, his blood, intercession, and obedience, who has paid all our
debts, 1 John 2. 1. and now we are not under the Law, but under grace, Romans 6.
15. So that the weakest believer may say in the midst of all, my
imperfections have as much of the love or God, and union with him, acceptance,
reconciliation, full and perfect righteousness in Christ, to cover all my
defects, as the best Saint ever had, and my state shall be as happy as any of
theirs, and were it not for Christ, all their holiness could not help them,
and they might cry they are unprofitable in all, and had also perished in their
sins. Can a man be profitable to God, Job 35. 7? Surely no; and what shall
hinder me of having as much happiness and glory in heaven, as the best Saint?
Oh who can express the sweetness that is in this doctrine of free grace to an
humble soul! and it is wonderful sweet, and it is a strong tie to God in all
holiness. I know men of base spirits, unbeleevers will catch at what I say,
but if they do, who can help it? the children must have bread, and if such
dogs will snatch it, to their peril be it; as for you who love sin, so as you
are not willing to part with your sins, that you desire to make Leagues and
Covenants with sinners, hell, and death, and the devil, you take encouragement
to sin, because God is rich in grace, etc. Oh consider, if ye have hearts, ye
are those who turn the grace of God into wantonness, ye are still in your
sins, ye are the dogs, touch it not, it is not for you; Christ says, It is
not meet to cast the childrens bread to dogs, Man. 7. 6. A child of God is
described by a desire to fear the Name of God, Nehe. 1. 11.

1. Those that live the life of faith in infirmity, they eye Christ's
sanctification, and enjoy comfort in it.

2. There is a harmony between that soul, and Gods command, Speak Lord, for
thy servant hears, 1 Samuel 3. 10.

3. He is not offended at Christ, at any thing he requires; Blessed is he that
is not offended in me, Mat. 11. 6. For this is the love of God, that we keep
his Commandments, and his commandments are not grievous, 1 John 5. 3.

4. He looks at the word of God for his rule, and his desire is wholly to be
ruled by it, he will trust God, and rely upon his word.

5. He eyeth Christ's strength in his promise for help, and by faith makes it
his own, Psalm. 46. 6. Surely in the Lord have I righteousness and strength,
Isa. 45. 24.

6. He will with courage encounter against what ever opposes God, and contend
earnestly for the faith once given to the Saints, Jude verse. 3.

7. He is sensible of good and evil, and lays to heart his own and others
sins, Acts 20. 31.

8. No sin he commits does so discourage him, and sink him, but he can joy
and rejoice in Christ, his joy and sorrow is not legal, but evangelicall, or
spiritual, and therefore may be in one Saint both at one and the same time, 1
These. 5.

The second branch of this life of faith in infirmities, it is to live upon
Christ in his promise, to help us against all our infirmities, upon such
places as these.

If thou be in deadness of heart, consider, Behold my servant shall sing
for joy of heart, Isai. 65. 14. In thy Name shall they rejoice all the day,
Psalm. 89. 16.

In dumbness, consider, The tongue of the dumb shall sing, etc. Isa. 35. 36.
The mouth of the righteous shall speak wisdom, and his tongue talks of
judgment, Psalm. 37. 30.

In forgetfulness; The Spirit shall bring all things into your remembrance,
Joh. 14. 26.

When thou art in fear of want, consider, There is no want to them that fear
him, Psalm. 34. 9. Trust in the Lord, and do good, and verily thou shall be
fed, Psalm. 37. 3. Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness,
and all things else shall be added unto you, Mat. 6. 34. Take no thought, for
to morrow shall take thought for it self, sufficient to the day is the evil
thereof. Take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall
drink, nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on: is not the life more then
meat, and the body then raiment? Behold the fowls of the air, they neither
sow nor reap, nor gather into barnes, yet God feeds them, are ye not much
better then they, O ye of little faith? Which of you by taking thought can
add one oubit unto his stature? Take no thought (for after these things seek
the Gentiles) you heavenly Father knows that ye have need of these things,
Mat. 6. 25. to the end; see Romans 8. 32. Luke 12. 15. Cast all your care upon
him, for he cares for you, be careful for nothing; but in every thing, let
your requests he made known to God with thankesgiving, Phil. 4. 6. 1 Pet. 5. 7.
Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be content with such things
as ye have; for he has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee, Heb.
13. 5.

In thy ignorance, consider, We have such an high Priest as can have
compassion on the ignorant, Heb. 5. 2. If any want wisdom, let him ask it of
God, who gives liberally, and it shall be given him, but let him ask in faith,
without wavering, Jam. 1. 5.

Having fallen into passion, to keep thee from sinking under it, consider what
the Apostles said, We are also men of like passions with you, Acts 14. 15.
Elias was a man subject to the like passions as we are, etc. Jam. 5. 17. And so
of all other infirmities; He will heal all thy diseases, etc. Psalm. 103. 8. If
we did live in Christ by faith more, our infirmities would be less.

For a supply of all wants; My God shall supply all you need, according to his
riches by Christ Jesus, Phil. 4. 6. 19. Christ is able, and will supply all our
wants.

5. The life of faith for graces, and in the exercise of them.
To believe; They shall trust in the Name of the Lord, Zeph. 3. 12. This is his
Commandment, that ye should believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 3. 23.

To increase in faith; They shall grow from faith to faith, Romans 1. 17.

To live by faith; The just shall live by faith, Romans 1. 17.

To continue in the faith; He that believes in me, though he were dead, yet
shall be live, etc. Luke 22. 32. 1 Pet. 1. 5.

In exercise of faith; Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is
stayed on thee, because he trusts in thee, Isa. 26. 3. Joh. 11. 25. and 7. 38,
39. He is a buckler to all them that trust in him, Psalm. 18. 30. He that puts
his trust in the Lord, mercy shall compass him about, Psalm. 32. 10.

To know God; Thou shall know the Lord, Pro. 1. 23. They shall all know me,
Jer. 31. 33, 34.

To love God; Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, Mat. 22. 17.
The Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart, that thou may love him with all
thy heart and soul, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. I have declared thy Name, that thy love
wherewith thou have loved me, may be in them, Joh. 17. 26.

In loving God; He that loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love
him, and manifest my self unto him, and dwell with him, Joh. 14. 21. 23.

To seek God; That they should seek the Lord, Act. 17. 27. Seek ye the Lord.

In seeking God; Blessed are all they that seek him with their whole heart,
Psalm. 119. 2. The Lord has not forsaken them that seek him, Psalm. 9. 10. Your
hearts shall live that seek him, Psalm. 69. 32. They shall praise the Lord that
seek him, Psalm. 22. 26. They that seek the Lord, shall not want any good
thing.

To fear God; I will put my fear in their hearts, and they shall not depart
from me, Jer. 32. 39, 40. They shall fear the Lord and his goodness in the
latter days, Hosea 3. 5.

In fearing God; The Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him, Psalm. 147. 11.
He that fears the Lord, him shall he teach the way that he shall choose, Psalm.
25. 12. There is no want to them that fear him, (viz. fear lest they sin
against him) Psalm. 34. 9. He will bless them that fear the Lord, both small
and great, Psalm. 115. 13.

To hope in God.

In hoping in God; The Lord takes pleasure in those that hope in his mercy, Ps.
147. 11. We are saved by hope, Romans 8. 24. Happy is he whose hope is in the
Lord, Ps. 146. 5. Be of good courage, he shall strengthen your hearts, all ye
that hope in the Lord, Ps. 31. 24.

To wait on God; Wait, I say, on the Lord, and he shall strengthen thy heart,
Psalm. 27. 14.

In waiting on God; They shall not be ashamed that wait for me: Blessed are
they that wait for him. Since the beginning of the world, men have not heard,
nor perceived by the ear, neither has the eye seen, O God, besides thee,
what he has prepared for them that wait for him, Isa. 49. 23. Isa. 30. 18. 1
Cor. 2. 9.

To delight and rejoice in God; Thou shall have thy delight in the Almighty:
thou shall rejoice in God; in thy Name shall they rejoice all the day: our
hearts shall rejoice in him, Isa. 41. 16. Psalm. 89. 16. Psalm. 33. 21.

To praise God; The living, he shall praise thee; daily shall he be praised;
they shall praise the Lord: who so offers me praise, glorifieth me, Isa. 38.
19. Psalm. 72. 15. Psalm. 63. 3. Psalm. 22. 26. Psalm. 50. 23.

To enjoy peace with God; Let him take hold on my strength, that he may make
peace with me, and he shall make peace with me, Isa. 27. 5.

To love the Saints; This is his Commandment, that we should love one another,
1 John 3. 23. Little children, love one another; see that ye love one another
with a pure heart fervently, 1 John 4. 7. 1 Pet. 2. 22. By this shall all men
know, that ye be my Disciples, if ye love one another, Joh. 13. 35. 1 John 3.
14.

To love enemies; Love your enemies, do good, lend, hoping for nothing again,
and your reward shall be great, etc. Mat. 5. 43, 44. Luke 6. 35.

To judge our selves; They shall judge themselves worthy to be destroyed: Judge
your selves, and ye shall not be judged, Ezekiel. 36. 31. 2 Cor. 11. 31.

To mourn for sinning against God; I will power upon them the Spirit of grace,
and they shall mourn: Your sorrow shall be turned into joy; Blessed are they
that mourn, ( in faith) for they shall be comforted, Zech. 12. 10. Joh. 16. 20.
Mat. 5. 4.

In poverty of spirit; To him will I look, says God, that is poor, and of a
contrite spirit, etc. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the
kingdom of heaven, Isa. 66. 2. Mat. 5. 3.

In desires after Christ, etc. Hoe every one that thirsts, come ye to the
waters and drink, if any man thirst, let him come to me and drink, I will
give to him that is athirst of the fountain of water of life freely. Blessed
are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be
filled. A bruised Reed shall be not break, and the smoking flax shall be not
quench. And if there be a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man
has. By faith Abraham offered Isaac. Of a truth, this poor widow has cast in
more then they all. The desires of the righteous shall be granted, Isa. 55. 1.
Joh. 7. 37. Rev. 21. 6. Joh. 7. 33. Mat. 5. 6. Isa. 42. 3. 2 Cor. 8. 10, 11,
12. Genesis 16, 17. with Heb. 11. 27. Luke 21. 3. Prove. 10. 24. Psalm. 37. 4.

To be meek; Seek meekness: The meek will he teach his way; and will save
all the meek of the earth; he will beautify the meek with salvation, Psalm.
25. 9. Psalm. 76. 9. Psalm. 149. 4.

To be sincere; Thou Lord, requirest truth in the inward parts: Blessed are the
pure in heart, for they shall see God, Psalm. 51. 6. Mat. 5. 8.

To confess our sins; Confess thy sin. If we confess our sins, he is
faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
iniquity: If any man say, I have sinned and perverted that which is right, and
it profits me not, he will deliver his soul from going down into the pit,
and his life shall see the light, 1 John 1. 9. Job 23. 27, 28.

To forgive others; Forgive, unto seventy seven times in a day thou shall
forgive: Forgive, and ye shall be forgiven: If ye forgive men their
trespasses, your heavenly Father will forgive your trespasses against him, Luke
17. 4. Mark. 11. 25, 26. and 6. 37. Mat. 6. 14. Ephesians. 4. 23.

To be a peacemaker; Blessed are the peacemakers; for they shall be called
the children of God, Mat. 5. 9.

To devise good; Mercy and truth shall be to them that devise good* the
liberal devises liberal things, Pro. 14. 22. Isa. 32. 8.

To self-denial; If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, Man.
16. 15.

To watch; But let us watch and be sober: blessed are those servants, whom the
Lord when he comes, shall find watching: blessed is he that watches, Man. 13.
37. 1 These. 5. 6. Rev. 16. 15. Luke 22. 37. Mat. 24* 47.

To be patient: Be ye also patient: in your patience possess your s^ules,
James 5. 8. Luke 21. 9. After he had patiently endured, he obtained the
promises, Heb. 6. 15.

To be contented; Be content with those things ye have, Heb. 13. 5.

To resist the Devil; Resist the devil, and he will fly from you, Jam. 5. 4.

To resist sin; Sin shall not have dominion over you, Romans 6. 14.

Not to be afraid of the world; Ye are of God, little children, and have
overcome them; and greater is he that is in you, then he that is in the world,
Joh. 16. 33. see 1 John 4. 4.

To subdue the flesh; If ye mortify the deeds of the flesh by the Spirit, ye
shall live, Romans 8. 13. Live to the glory of God, and your own, and the Saints
comfort.

To be merciful; Be ye merciful as your heavenly Father is merciful:
Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy, Mat. 5. 7. Jam. 2. 13.

To give to the poor; See that ye abound in this grace also. Cast thy bread
upon the waters, and after many days thou shall find it. He that gives to the
poor shall not lack: Blessed is he that considers the poor, the Lord will
deliver him in the time of trouble; the Lord will preserve and keep him alive,
and he shall be blessed upon the earth; thou will not deliver him unto the will
of his enemies; the Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing; thou will make all his bed in his sickness, Eccl. 11. 1. Pro. 28. 17. Psalm. 41. 1,
2, 3.

To give cheerfully; God loves a ohearfull giver, 2 Cor. 9. 7.

To give bountifully; He that sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully; The
liberal soul shall be made fat, and he that waters, shall be watered
himself: If thou draw out thy soul to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted
soul, then shall thy light rise, etc. 2 Cor. 9. 6. Prove. 11. 25. Isa. 48. 10,
11. Who so shall give a cup of cold water in the Name of a Disciple ( because
he belongs to Christ) verily, I say unto you, he shall not lose his reward ( in
heaven) Mat. 10. 42. Mark. 9. 41.

6. The life of faith in the use of means.
It is the souls cleaving to God in Christ for a blessing upon his Ordinances,
or the means he has appointed, that we may receive strength from them, and
profit by them. The way of the Lord is strength to the upright, Pro. 9. 29. I
am the Lord that teaches thee to profit, Isa. 48. 17.

Faith believes God will bless his own means, seeing he has appointed them
all to this end, therefore all must needs be effectual. So it is the duty of a
believer to use all constantly, closely, wisely; despise not them, because they
seem weak and silly to flesh and blood; know by their use (under God) a holy
life is preserved, and observe how thou thrivest by them: use all, if by any
means thy wants may be supplied, Phil. 3. 11. And honor not any of them, as
to exclude or slight another. Some there be that are guilty herein, men only
prise that themselves like. But oh ye sons and daughters of God, love ye
and use ye all Gods means, they are all for his glory, and thy good; let not
any of them be a stranger to thee, the neglect of one may hinder the fruit of
another: the command is to all the Lords to use all, and if we be weak in the
use of means, what should we be if we used them not? let not the difficulty
of any dismay thee, consider seriously the soveraigntie of God in all his
commands, and what obedience to God means, and what God requires, for matter,
manner, measure, time, and end.

To pray; consider such places as these. Pray continually. I will power upon
them the Spirit of grace and supplication: Ask and ye shall have: If ye which
are evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall
your heavenly Father, give the holy Spirit to those that ask him? And all
things whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer believing ye shall receive. What
things soever ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye
shall receive them. Verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall ask the Father
in my Name, he will give it you: And it shall come to pass before they call I
will answer, and while they yet speak, I will hear, 1 These. 5. Zech. 12. 10.
Mat. 7. 7, 8, 9, 11. Luke 11. 13. Mat. 21. 22. Mark. 11. 24. Mat. 16. 23. Isa.
65. 24.

To read the word; Give attendance to reading: Behold, I will power out my
Spirit upon you, and make known my words unto you, 1 Timothy 4. 13. Rev. 1. 3.
Pro. 1. 23.

To meditate; Thou shall meditate therein day and night. Blessed is the man
that meditateth on thy Law day and night: My meditation of him shall be sweet:
the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding, Josh. 1. 8. 1 Timothy 4. 15.
Psalm. 1. 1, 2. Psalm. 104. 34. Psalm. 49. 3.

To holy conference; The mouth of the righteous speaks wisdom: the lips of
the wise disperse knowledge: my words shall not depart out of thy mouth: they
that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another, etc. They that love it shall
eat the fruit thereof, Prove. 15. 17. Pro. 18. 21. Ma^a. 3. 16. Psalm. 37. 30.
Psalm. 71. 24. Isa. 59. 21.

To hear Christ and his Ministers; Blessed is the man that hears me, watching
daily at my gates: Hear and your souls shall live, Pro. 8. 34. Isai. 55. 3.

To be baptized; See here is water, what does hinder me to be baptized? and
Philip said, If thou beleevest with all thy heart, thou may; and they went
both down into the water* and he baptized him, Acts 8. 36, 37, 38. He that
believes and is baptized, shall be saved, Mark. 16. 16.

For Saints to receive the Lords Supper; Do this in remembrance of me; it was
given for you; Take, eat, this is my body* Luke 22. 19. Joh. 6. 58.

To be prepared for duties; Thou will prepare their hearts: If thou prepare thy
heart, etc. Psalm. 10. 17. Job 11. 13, 14, 15.

To obey God; As soon as they hear of me, they shall obey me, Ezekiel. 36. 27.

To be fruitful in season; His leaf shall be green, and he shall not cease
from yielding fruit; he shall bring forth his fruit in season, his leaf shall
not wither, Jer. 17. 8. Psalm. 1. 2, 3.

For ability to obey God; The righteous also shall hold on his way, and he
shall be stronger and stronger: they go from strength to strength every one of
them; Surely shall one say, In the Lord have I righteousness and strength, my
God shall be my strength: I will go in the strength of the Lord: he gives
power to the faint, and to them that have no might be increases strength: They
that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their strength, they shall mount up with
wings, as Eagles, they shall run, and not be weary, and shall walk, and not be
faint. I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me. God gives
strength and power to his people, blessed be God, Job 17. 9. Psalm. 84. 7. Isa.
45. 24. Isa. 49. 5. Isa. 40. 29, 30, 31. Phil. 4. 13. Psalm. 68. 35.

In all temptations; That it shall not be above that we are able to bear, and
for a good issue out of all temptations. There has no temptation taken you,
but such as is common to man, but God is faithful, who will not suffer you to
be tempted above that ye are able, but will with the temptation also make a
way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it, 1 Cor. 10. 13. Jam. 1. 12.
Romans 6. 20.

To know the truth; He that will do his will, he shall know whether the
doctrine be of God, or no: The Spirit of truth will guide you into all truth:
The meek will he teach his way: He that fears the Lord, will he teach in the
way he shall choose, Joh. 7. 17. Joh. 16. 13. Psalm. 25. 9. 12.

For direction in all our ways; I will direct all his ways; I will instruct
thee, and teach thee in the way that thou shall go. I will guide thee with my
eye: For this God is our God for ever and ever, and he will be our guide, even
until death, Isa. 45. 13. Ps. 32. 8. Psalm 48. 14.

To reprove others; Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart; thou shall in
any wise rebuke him, and not suffer sin upon him He that rebukes a man,
afterward shall find more favor then he that flattereth with his tongue: The
fear of man brings a snare, but to them that rebuke him shall be delight,
and a good blessing shall come upon them, Levit. 19. 17. Pro. 28. 23. Pro. 29.
25. Pro. 24. 25.

To correct children, etc. The rod and reproof give wisdom, but a child left
to himself brings his mother to shame; but if thou beatest him with the rod,
he shall not dye; thou shall beat him with the rod, Pro. 25. 15. Pro. 29. 15.
Pro. 23. 13, 14.

For husbands to love their wives; Husbands love your wives, Ephesians. 5. 25. 28.
33.

For wives to obey their husbands; Wives obey your husbands in every thing
(lawful) Ephesians. 5. 24.

For children to obey their parents; Children obey your parents in the Lord,
Ephesians. 6. 1, 2.

For servants to obey their Masters; Servants be obedient to those that are
your Masters, Ephesians. 6. 5, 6, 7.

To obey Gods commands; In keeping them there is great reward, Psalm. 19. 11.
Blessed are they that do his commandments, Psalm. 19. 11. Prove. 37. 27. Rev.
20. 6. Rev. 22. 14.

To leave false worship; See 2 Cor. 6. 16, 17, 18.

To dwell in Sion, and to enjoy the privileges thereof; The ransomed of the
Lord shall come to Sion with joy: I will take one of a City, and two of a
family, and bring them to Sion; They that love his Name shall dwell therein,
Isa. 35. 10. Jer. 3. 14. Psalm. 69. 36.

To be fruitful there; Those that are planted in the house of God, shall
flourish in the Courts of our God, and bring forth fruit in old age, and be fat
and flourishing: All that see them shall acknowledge them, that they are the
seed of them which the Lord has blessed: They go from strength to strength
every one of them in Sion, etc. Ps. 92. 13, 14. Isa. 61. 9. and 62. 12. Psalm.
84. 7.

That God is present there; He dwells in his Church; He walks in the midst of
the seven golden Candlestickes: Thou that dwell in the gardens, Rev. 2. 1.
with Rev. 1. 10. Song 5. 1. and 6. 2. and 8. 13.

For the acceptance of their services there; see Song 5. 1. with Deuteronomy. 12. 5,
6, 7.

For his blessing there; The Lord shall bless thee out of Sion; I will
abundantly bless her provision; they shall be abundantly satisfied with the
fatness of thy house: blessed are they that dwell in thy house, for they shall
he still praising thee, Psalm. 132. 15. Psalm. 36. 8. Psalm. 84. 4.

For protection there; Thou shall hide me in the time of trouble, in the
secrets of thy Tabernacle, Psalm. 27. 4, 5.

For Saints to agree in the truth; I will give them one heart, and one way,
Jer. 32. 39.

To have joy and gladness there; The Lord shall comfort Sion, and joy and
gladness shall be found therein, thankesgiving and the noise of melody, Isai.
51. 3.

In reproaches for Christ; Blessed are ye when men revile you for my sake
falsely, rejoice and be glad, and leap for joy; for behold, great is your
reward in heaven: in like manner did they revile the Prophets, etc. Luke 6. 22,
23. 1 Pet. 1. 14.

In persecution for Christ; All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall
suffer persecution: Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness
sake, for theirs is the kingdom of Heaven: If we suffer with him, we shall
also reign with him, 2 Timothy 3. 12. Mat. 5. 10. 2 Timothy 2. 12. Romans 8. 18.

In losses for Christ; He that forsakes house, or brethren, or father, or
mother, or house or lands, he shall receive a hundred^old here, and in the
world to come eternal life, Mark. 10. 29. 30. Mat. 19. 28, 29.

In imprisonment for Christ; The Devil shall cast some of you into prison,
that ye may be tried, etc. Rev. 2. 10.

In death for Christ; He that loses his life for my sake, shall find it: Be
thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life, Mat. 10. 39.
Rev. 21. 7. Rev. 2. 10.

For the calling of the Jews; See Isa. 60. 2, 3, 4, 5, etc.

For the destruction of Antichrist, and all the enemies of the sons of Sion;
See Rev. 17. 16. and 18. 8. 21. etc.

7. The life of faith concerning protection from dangers, and for a supply of
all wants.
For protection; He shall give his Angels charge over thee: The Lord is thy
keeper: I will preserve thee, and keep thee: He withdraws not his eyes from
the righteous: There shall not a hair of your heads perish, Psalm 91. 11. Psalm.
121. 8. Isa. 49* 8. Job 36. 7. Luke 21. 18. Christ prayed, holy Father, I pray
thee keep them from ^^ill, Joh. 17. 15.

To be delivered from the wicked; The Lord shall help them, and deliver them
from the wicked, and save them, because they trust in him, 2 These. 3. 2, 3.
Psalm. 34. 40.

To be delivered from the harlot; Who so pleases God, shall escape from her,
Eccle. 7. 26.

To be delivered from unreasonable creatures; The beast of the field shall be
at peace with thee: Thou shall be at league with the stones of the field, Pro.
5. 23.

If in war; He shall redeem thee from the power of the sword, Job 5. 20.

If in famine; In famine he shall redeem thee from dearth, Job 5. 20.

To find pity in captivity; He made them also to be pitied of those that
carried them captives, Psalm. 106. 46.

If in water; When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee, and
through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee, etc. Isa. 43. 2.

If in fire; When thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt, nor
shall the flame kindle upon thee, Isa. 43. 2.

If in sickness; The Lord will strengthen thee upon the bed of languishing;
Thou will make all his bed in his sickness; and heal all thy diseases, Psalm.
41. 3. Psalm. 103. 3. Exodus 23. 25.

To be preserved from all evil; He shall deliver thee in six troubles, yea, in
seven there shall no evil touch thee: He shall preserve thee from all evil,
Job 5. 19. 2 These. 3. 3. Psalm. 121. 7.

For clothing; Take no thought for your body, what ye shall put on, Is not the
body more then raiment? For your heavenly Father knows ye have need of these
things: Why take ye thought for raiment? Consider the Lilies, etc. Shall be
not much more cloth you, O ye of little faith, Mat. 6. 25. See Psalm. 37. 16.
Mat. 6. 28. 30. 3^.

For food in famine; Trust in the Lord, and verily thou shall be fed: Bread
shall be given him, his waters shall be sure, Psa. 37. 3. Isa. 33. 16. In the
days of famine they shall be satisfied, Isa. 37. 19.

For dwelling; He shall dwell on high, Isa. 33. 17.

To be hid in a time of danger; Set a mark upon their foreheads, etc. In that
day it shall be said to Jerusalem, Fear thou not, and to Sion, etc. The Lord
thy God in the midst of thee is mighty, he will save, etc. Zeph. 3. 16, 17.

God will remember his; Thou shall not be forgotten by me, Isa. 44. 21.

For success of our labor; Whatsoever he does shall prosper: Thou shall eat
of the labor of thy hands: They shall not build, and another inhabit, they
shall not plant, and not eat; They shall not labor in vain, etc. For they
are the seed of the blessed of the Lord, etc. Psalm. 1. 3. Psalm. 128. 2. Pro.
12. 11. 14. Isa. 65. 22.

If thou be falsely accused; consider, He shall bring forth thy righteousness as
the light, etc. Psalm. 37. 6.

For a good name; consider, Pro. 10. 7. Zeph. 3. 20. Isa. 56. 5. Psalm. 111. 6.

For children; Thy wife shall be a fruitful vine; Thou shall see thy childrens
children, Psalm. 121. 3. 6.

For sleep; So he gives his beloved sleep: Thy sleep shall be sweet, Psalm.
127. 2. Pro. 3. 24. Job 11. 19. Zeph. 3. 13.

For a supply of all we need; My God shall supply all your needs, Phil. 4. 9. 6.

If in prospericie; consider Jer. 29. 5, 6. These things ye may have, and use
them while they last, and while God sees good we shall not meet with any
change, but change or no change, God will never change, but be to us ever the
same, Heb. 13. 5, 6.

8. The life of faith in adversity.
Which is for the soul to submit to God, and to be contented to be in a hard
or low condition, if God so order it, and to be fitted to say, as Jesus Christ
did; The cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink it? Joh. 18. 11.
see Phil. 4. 11, 12. And as Jesus Christ had not any trouble, nor not an hour
sooner then God predestined, Job. 8. 20. so ought we to believe, that all
trouble of what kind soever, shall not, nor cannot come unto us, until the
Lord see fit to send it, and that as Christ did pass through all, so certainly
we shall, and that quickly, Joh. 7. 30. Joh. 16. 33.

In every affliction and cross that comes upon thee, believe and say, it may
be the Lord will do me good by this cross, Romans 8. 28. it is appointed of my
Father for my good, I stand in need of it; if need be ye are in heaviness for
a season, 1 Pet. 1. 6. And while it continues with me, the Lord will be both
light, peace, and strength unto me, until the time come (which cannot be long)
that afflictions, crosses, and troubles, shall be no more, when I shall rest
from all ^abour, pain and sorrow.

That God will be with his in trouble; I will be with him in trouble: The Lord
will be a refuge to his in time of trouble, Psalm. 91. 15. Psalm. 9. 9. Psalm. 37.
39.

That the trouble shall not be above our strength; I will correct thee in
measure, Jer. 30. 11. see 1 Cor. 10. 13.

To gain by afflictions; God afflicts us for our profit, that we might be
partakers of his holiness, Heb. 12. 11. etc. see Job 13. 23.

For deliverance out of trouble, etc. Many are the troubles of the righteous,
but the Lord delivers them out of them all, Joh. 5. 19. Psalm. 19. 17 Psalm. 50.
15.

For speedy deliverance; My salvation shall not tarry, Isa. 46. 13.

9. Every day to live the life of faith concerning the time past.
Which is to consider and call to remembrance, and to see God in his dealings
to us, ours, and others, both for soul and body; I have considered the days
of old, and the years of ancient time, Psalm. 77. 5. This is to enjoy time
past, as present. David made this a part of his meditation; oh how sweet is it
to muse of Gods mercies unto us from our birth; that I should be borne of such
as feared God, and so enjoy better education then others, or else that I should
be borne of haters of God, and instead of good education had bad, and was
brought up in ignorance and profaneness, and how I have been tempted to
desperate sins, or healed those breaches, and how strangely God brought us to
better places unexpected or undeserved, and how near (and often) we have been
to be cut off by death, by sickness, casualties, desperate practices by
others, and by our selves, and how great bondage we have been in by sin,
being filled with despair, terror, and wrath, without hope of ever being
pardoned, Ephesians. 2. 12, 13. and yet for God to fill my soul with joy and peace
in believing, Romans 5. 1. and in how great bondage I was unto sin, not able to
restrain my self, and out of hope of ever having strength against such strong
lusts, and yet God has subdued them. Oh great change! and also how we were
convinced of our state of death we are in by nature, and by what means. But*
if we had been borne in India, or Turkey, or Rome, we should either have never
heard of a Jesus, or seen no light, or to no purpose. Also how God has
preserved us in Babylon, and brought us out of it (if thou be so) and
preserved us from the errors of the wicked rotten tenets, as Pelagianisme his
free will and power by nature, Arminianisme with his free will so by grace, as
he may choose whether he will be saved or no, and so under pretense of
enlarging Gods grace, robs him of all, to grace himself in his endeavors, and
sets the crown upon his own head. So some deny the Moral Law and word of God
to be a Rule to them to walk by, and so are lawless; (and where there is no
Law, there can be no transgression) and now are the last times, in which
iniquity and abominable errors do abound (and shall more abound; that which
God has said shall be, must be, no man nor men can hinder it) some denies
Election and original sin, etc. the Lord in mercy open their eyes, I was
once wrapped up and sunk in Arminianisme, and had so continued, but the Lord
in mercy pulled me out. Oh how sweet should that love be to us, which keeps us
from these errors, or brings us out of them! and the Lord will in his time be
full Redemption to all his.

Also consider how we have been freed from many sorrows and sicknesses, which
others endure, having little or no rest day or night: and what means we enjoy
for our souls, which others want, (and it may be never heard of) and blesses
them unto us.

Also in what straits we have been in, and how the Lord has helped us in
them, and delivered us from them: and how God has provided, and does provide
for us, means of living, friends and comforts, strangely and unexpected, and
how strangely God has given us good wives or husbands, or so orders it that
bad ones sends us to God, or weanes us from the world; etc. These mercies with
a thousand more to us and ours, requires our meditation, to strengthen our
faith, and to endeare our hearts to God exceedingly, and to be more enlarged in
thankfulness, and to suck sweetness in the remembrance of such experiences.
Mercies forgot, are as nothing to us, and we cannot be thankful to God for
them, though they were never so many or great; Who so is wise, and will observe
these things, shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord, Psalm. 107. 43.

10. Every day to live the life of faith in Glorification.
Which is to behold the rest, peace, glory and happiness, etc. in heaven which
is provided for us, and also to believe that God will give us after this life
all these things with himself, which he has promised us in his word; see Acts
20. 23. Acts 26. 18. 1 Pet. 1. 4.

For the resurrection of my body; He that believes in me, I will raise him up
at the last day, Joh. 6. 40.

To have a spiritual body; It is sown a natural body, it is raised a
spiritual body, 1 Cor. 15. 44. Our bodies shall be more glorious then the Sun
in the firmament, because that is but a natural body.

To have a powerful body; It is raised in power, 1 Cor. 15. 43.

To have a glorified body, and like Christ's; It is raised in glory, 1 Cor. 15*
43, 44. Who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his
glorious body, Phil. 3. 21.

To have fullness of knowledge; And to know the love of Christ, which passes
knowledge, and be filled with the fullness of God, Ephesians. 3. 19. And know even
as I am known, 1 Cor. 13. 12.

To have fullness of joy and pleasures; In thy presence is fullness of joy, and
at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore, Ps. 16. 11. Joy inward, pure,
spiritual, full in heaven, we shall have no misery, no hunger, cold,
nakedness, pain, grief, weariness, but rest, 2 These. 1. 7.

To have Rest; I shall have rest (2 These. 1. 7.) without labor: In this Rest,
tranquillity; in this tranquillity, contentment; in this contentment, joy; in
this joy, variety; in this variety, security; in this security, eternity.

To have life; We shall also live with him, 2 Timothy 2. 11. Your life is hid with
Christ in God, Col. 3. 3. When Christ who is our life shall appear, Col. 3. 4.

To have everlasting life; Who shall receive life everlasting in the world to
come, Luke 18. 30. Mat. 19. 29. Joh. 4. 40. Then shall I never die, nor end,
being for continuance eternal.

To enjoy the presence of God with Saints and Angels; When Christ our life
shall appear, then shall we appear with him in glory, Col. 3. 4. Father, I
will that they which thou have given me, be with me where I am, Joh. 17. 24.

To see the Lord as he is; Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it does
not appear what we shall be, but we know when we shall appear, we shall be
like him, for we shall see him as he is, 1 John 3. 2. Then shall we see him
face to face, 1 Cor. 13. 12.

To behold his glory; That they may behold my glory, Joh. 17. 24. Sight is
higher then presence.

To be transformed into glory; We are changed into the same image from glory to
glory, 2 Cor. 3. 18. This shall be more full in glory; Then shall we appear
with him in glory, Col. 3. 4.

To have full communion with God; We shall be filled with the fullness of God,
Ephesians. 3. 19. Union is higher then sight, communion is higher then union, as it
flows from it, full communion is more; we shall have as much as we shall
desire, we shall be filled with it, we shall enjoy the quintessence of all
sweetness, fullness, goodness in God, and shall be raised, inflamed, and
ravished with him, and be wholly taken up with admiring and praising him,
without any intermission or weariness; this is our greatest good and
blessedness, and the end of our being.

To be for ever with the Lord; So shall we be ever with the Lord, 1 These. 4.
17. Eternal communion with God. As it is written; Eye has not seen, nor ear
heard, neither has entered into the heart of man, the things which God has
prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2. 9. It transcends the utmost
expectation of the most enlarged heart; Wherefore comfort one another with
these words, verse. 18. Faith believes the promises of glory, and so lives
comfortably in expectation of fruition, when faith shall end in vision, our
eternal joys draws on apace; in the mean time, lay hold on eternal life,
let faith believe it, and hope expect it, and patience wait for it, to make
this life tolerable, bepatient, endure all, it will not be long ere glory come
and continue for ever; for this cause we faint not, 2 Cor. 4. He that lives by
faith in glorification, lives a sweet comfortable life in Christ his
righteousness, and is fruitful, sincere, and content.

Lastly, To dye by faith.
Which is to resign up our souls to God, believing death shall be a passage
to glory; When Christ who is my life shall appear, then shall I appear with
him in glory, Col. 3. 4. These all dyed in faith, Heb. 11. 13. The righteous
has hope in his death, Pro. 14. 32. Blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord;
for they rest from their labors, and their works follow them, Rev. 14. 13.
When I awake I shall be satisfied in thy likeness, Psalm. 17. 15. Why should I
fear that I would not escape? what hurt will it be to me to enter into glory?
I cannot have my happiness, unless I go unto it.

THE SAINTS DAILY DUTY AND DESIRE.
The several Branches of the Saints daily duty and desire to walk with God
every day.
1. WHen I awake, to think on GOD, and to be thankful to him for rest, and
sleep, and preservation, from sin, Satan, and dangers, satisfying my soul
with the Lord, craving his strength to walk with him all the day long,
reverently and seriously to mind him and obey him.

When I awake I am still with thee, Ps. 139. 18.

I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy likeness, Psalm. 17. 15. see Act.
11. 23.

Commune with your heart upon your bed, and be still, Psalm. 4. 4.

It is good to season, strengthen, and perfume our spirits (if time will
permit) with some sweet thoughts of God, as that Jesus Christ is the same
yesterday, and to day, and for ever, Heb. 13. 8. He is not changed. Here is
strong consolation in this sweet meditation, My meditation of him shall be
sweet, Psalm. 104. 34. It is good for me to draw near to God, Psalm. 73. 28. To
make him the object and end of all my actions. O that my understanding had a
more full, clear, and glorious sight of him, and a more perfect, inward,
eternal, and full communion with him, then should my will and affections be
more satisfied and more inflamed with unwearied desires, high and restless
aspirations after fresh additions of intercourses and communion with him. The
sight of God to a Saint is glorious, and the knowledge and often meditation of
him will raise and enlarge the soul: Every child of God has in him an
earnest desire to have communion with him, to enjoy his blessed presence, and
to see his glory. As the Heart pants after the water-brookes, so pants my
soul after thee, O God. My soul thirsts for God, when shall I come and
appear before him? Psalm. 42. 1, 2. Nor will a seldom communion satisfy them,
it must be frequent and full: it is a contempt of God to be willing to live
without him, and so much he injoys God as he seriously minds him, and so much
as we desire God, we follow after God, for desire is the souls following of
God; and as God draws we follow, Song. 1. 4. Unless the Lord fix and fasten
the heart upon himself, it will be fixed on things below, and wander after
vanities, and fill both head and heart with them: he that knows what it is to
enjoy God, is sensible of the want of him, and thinks he can never have enough
of him, his soul will faint for him, because nothing less then God can
content him, Psalm. 119. 81, 82. Jer. 14. 8. Psalm. 13. 1. Exodus 33. 13, 14, 15.
18. So the soul lives where it loves, and where it loves it lives, and there
is nothing more active and stronger then love; for love is as strong as death,
the coals thereof are coals of fire, which has a most vehement flame, Song
8. 6, 7.

2. Live by faith. Every day to live by faith, (in all estates and conditions)
the communion the soul has with God is by faith, in justification, in
sanctification, in infirmities, in graces, in means using, in duties, and for
a supply of all wants, every day to live the life of faith in glorification.

3. Watch heart. That every day I watch my heart, to keep it continually
still, clean, spiritual, content, and that I observe warily the first and
secret motions of my heart, least I be unawares catched and ensnared in sin,
and that I do not receive any thing without it be warranted in the word of God.

Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues of life, Pro.
23. 17. Thy heart is deceitful, take heed of it, consider Jer. 17. 9. Heb. 3.
12. Luke 6. 45. If we cease to watch our hearts, they quickly become vain.
Consider how it was with David, 2 Samuel 12. 9. and Peter, Mat. 26. 72. our
experience might teach us, that our hearts are worse then we took them to be,
when we are crossed or tempted, we show what metal we are made of: the best
have cause enough to look to themselves; if one sinful thought be admitted
concerning the sweetness and pleasure of sin, the will is ready enough to
accept the motion, consent, forecast the accomplishment, the affections add
heat and strength, the heart travels with iniquity, and in time by
opportunity sin is brought forth: and delight and custom wraps a man up in
sin, that he cannot get out; such carelessness may cost dear, though the
Elect shall miss hell; Lord, bold up my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps
slip not, Psalm. 17. 5. Hold thou me up, and I shall be safe; and I will have
respect unto thy Statutes continually, Psalm. 119. 117.

4. Watch thoughts. Every day to watch that my thoughts be holy or lawful, and
seasonable, to rank, order, and confine them within an holy compass, that I
may gaze and meditate on God, his unmeasurable goodness, greatness, beauty,
glory, and to bring under and destroy every wicked and vain thought and
desire, etc.

It is no burden to fix our minds and thoughts on things above, where our life,
and joy, and treasure is; Where your treasure is, there will your hearts be
also. The more wisdom leads us on high, the more is our joy, and the more we
avoid the snares below, and the more we enjoy God in the invisible workings,
intentions, desires, elevations of heart, with thoughts of sweetest raptures,
in which is peace, joy, triumph, searching into the mysteries of grace, in
which is light, is truth in its clearness, pureness, fullness, in gazing upon
the most glorious object, admiring God in his infinite attributes, to
contemplate on Gods boundless mercy in Christ; Such as are exercised herein,
enjoy great sweetness and delight, they see and say, as David, How precious
are thy thoughts to me, O God, etc. Psalm. 139. 17. Such thoughts raise the
heart, and make it spiritual, joyful, and thankful, willing and serious in
all duties, and holy services.

5. Hearken unto conscience. Every day to watch and hearken to the noise of
conscience, that I may prise the peace of it, endeavor to inform it, and to
do nothing that shall offend it: And herein do I exercise my self, to have
always a conscience void of offense toward God, and toward man, Acts 24.
16. Holding the mystery of faith in a pure conscience, 1 Timothy 3. 9.

6. Watch affections. Every day to watch that my affections be set right, and
that they move not without or contrary to my judgment, and that they be set
upon right objects, and that they soar not too high, nor descend too low, but
according as the object deserves; meanly affecting mean things, and not
affecting corrupt reason, as passion, etc. That my delight be not set
immoderately upon any earthly things, though never so excellent, desirable, or
amiable, and so to enjoy them, as expecting every day or hour to lose them.

Set your affections on things above, Col. 3. 1. 5. Affections are the pulses
of the soul, and show the state of it; the affections are the motions of the
will, and the will is the principal seat of grace; grace has its birth in
the understanding, but her seat is more principally in the will actually and
formally, therefore the will is much to be observed in its tempers,
inclinations, motions, which are the affections of the soul: all affections
may be comprehended in love and hatred; the first comprehends desire, delight,
joy, hope, these are the acts of love, and these are chiefly to be given to
God, we must make him our trust, love, joy, delight, and our all in all,
esteem and affect all things else under him and for him; he is all-sufficient,
therefore we may well content our selves with him, and to love him dearly, then
are the affections set right, when with God we are sick of love, Song 2. 5.
Forsake not God, who is a living fountain, for broken Cisternes, Jer. 2. Love
is the sweetest affection, it is pity it should be spent and lost upon vanities.
And when we set our affections strongly on things below, it is a mercy for God
to take them from us, to teach us and cause us to take more delight in God
himself, and those true, unspeakeable, and everlasting delights, prepared for
the Saints with himself. Surely we have cause to lament, that we are so ready
to set our affections on things below, that they are so strong and unruly, and
so hardly subdued, that it is not an easy thing to master our wills and
appetites, they so rage and dote so vehemently after vanities: vanity of
vanities, all is vanity, Eccl. 1. 2.

7. Watch time. That every day I watch and endeavor to redeem time, because
it is precious, to improve it, to know truth, to enjoy and obey God, and to
serve others in love, redeeming the time because the days are evil, Ephesians. 5.
16.

Also our time is short, it is but as a thought, a shadow, a dream, a span
long, it is our duty and wisdom to preserve and redeem time for every purpose
and action. Paul improves his time, by the space of three years I ceased not
to warn every one night and day with tears, etc. Act. 20. 31. Yet we lose
many hours needlessly, in sleeping, in trifling, in idle visits, etc. In which
time good might have been done to many.

8. Watch senses. Every day to watch the windows of my soul, my senses, as
ears, eyes, from unlawful objects, and lawful, when I perceive they would
suck evil from them, and shutting my eyes and ears, if need be.

He shall dwell on high, etc. that stops his ears from hearing of blood,
that shuts his eyes from seeing of evil, Isa. 33. 15, 16.

Thus we are commanded, to take heed, watch, and pray, Mark. 13. 35. so take
heed what ye hear. It was David's desire to God, Turn away mine eyes from
beholding vanity, Psalm. 119. 37. Job saw a necessity to make a Covenant with
his eyes, Job 31. 1. For Satan is ready to convey much evil insensibly through
these floud-gates of sin; bad discourse inflames lust; David's roving eye caused
him to fall foully, and procured him much vexation and grief; who could have
thought an idle glance could occasion so much mischief? Expect no better fruit
in suffering your hearts to run after your eyes; fancy will take fire before we
be aware; but a fool will take no warning, he will have his eyes in every
corner of the earth, Prove. 17. 24. he must and will hearken unto a talebearer,
Prove. 25. 23. And so he has his heart filled with anger and revenge, but when
he is wiser, he will cry out with shame and grief, that all is vanity and
vexation of spirit, as Eccles. 1. 2.

9. In outward things. Every day to watch to make some good use, and draw
instruction from the creatures and passages of Gods providence, so to mind
heavenly things by natural.

So did Christ upon mentioning of bread, Mat. 16.

These things below make themselves wings, and fly away; but fly thee, by them,
from them, before them.

10. Watch in lawful things. Every day to watch narrowly with care and
heedfulnesse in the use and enjoyment of things lawful, viz. meat, drink,
sleep, apparel, marriage, visitations, and recreations, etc.

Our nature is prone to excess herein, and we often sin more, and are in
greater danger, by lawful things, then by unlawful, because we fear grosser
evils more then we do the secret insnarements that attend lawful things, so
that many are deceived, and ensnared, and insensibly drawn into many excesses,
before we be aware, to the dishonor of God, and grief of our selves, and
others; the fools mind was all for his ease and his belly, meat and drink,
Luke 12. 19.

11. Watch in things indifferent. Every day to watch that I use not indifferent
things securely and carelessly, but to have regard to others weaknesses,
indevouring that my actions be such as I may defend with a good conscience.

All things are pure, but it is not lawful to do things with offense, it is
good neither to eat flesh, nor drink wine, nor do any thing whereby thy
brother stumbleth, or is offended, or made weak, Romans 14. 21, 22. These words
do prove that we ought to forbear the doing of that which is in it self
lawful (if it can be omitted without sin) in case another is not persuaded of
the lawfulness of it, and so is offended at it: I grant he takes offense when
none is given, for if I do that which is lawful, I give no offense; therefore
in being offended it is his fault and weakness, yet if I know he is offended
with it, and yet shall do it, and he therewith is grieved, etc. I in so doing
sin against God and him; though otherwise I might do it, yet in this case it
is condemned in the Word, and it cannot defend it with a good conscience.

12. Watch against sin. Every day to take heed and watch against every sin,
and that I defend no sin in my self, nor lessen it under no pretense of
corruption, temptation, or for the sweetness or smalnesse of it; nor inwardly
favor it, but to resolve against all sin, with the occasions of it, and the
appearance of it, to be jealous against it, and fearful of falling by it, and
ever to show some dislike of it, Levit. 19. 17.

Look we to sin at the first motion of it, consider we the root of it, and
the end of it, and presently look up to God for strength against it, believe
and pray against it, and avoid all the occasions of it: Come not near the
door of her house, Pro. 5. 8. First, we should be afraid to sin, because we
are commanded to do otherwise by God; secondly, lest by it we dishonor God,
his truth, and servants; thirdly, lest by it we encourage others to sin;
fourthly, and fill our souls with sorrow, because we have sinned against so
great, and gracious, and loving Father. A sensiblenesse of sin, and a heart
easily touched with remorse for it, may stand with the assurance of pardon of
it, and when any has by reason of frailty sinned, though it seem to be in
the least measure, abhor it with the greatest detestation, and cover it not
with any excuses or pretenses whatsoever; see Ezra 9. 2, 3. Rev. 2. 2.

13. Every day watch the tongue. To watch that my speech be not vain, and
idle, and frothy, but powdered with salt, to take heed of speaking against
others, especially such as are the Lords, that I disgrace none, nor insult over
any, remembering my own weaknesses, and that I wrest not men's actions and words,
but take them in the best sense, so far as I can, with a good conscience, and
without prejudice of the truth.

Idle words are forbidden; Let your speech be always with grace, seasoned with
salt, etc. Col. 4. 6. Neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor jesting,
which are not convenient, but rather giving of thanks, Ephesians. 5. 4. My tongue
shall talk of thy righteousness all the day long, Psalm. 71. 24.

If you love to find fault, lay on there where you see most, which will be
your self, if you can see. Consider, have thou no unbelief, Psalm. 31. 22. and
116. 11. Privy pride, 2 Cor. 12. 7. Secret hypocrisy, Psalm. 51. 10. Atheism
and thoughts of blasphemy, self-love, self-seeking, self-confidence, Psalm. 30.
6. Unprofitablenesse, Psalm. 106. 6, 7. Nehe. 9. 35. Hardness of heart, Isa.
63. 17. Blindness of mind, ignorance, Pro. 30. 2, 3. Unruly passion, Psalm. 73.
3. 22. Security, lukewarmnesse, Song. 1. 6. Abusing lawful things, Deuteronomy. 32.
15. Nehe. 9. 38. Unthankfulness for mercies, Hos. 8. 12. And want of mourning
for the sins of others, Ezekiel. 9. 4. Isa. 42. 19, 20. Want of courage for the
truth, Jer. 9. 3. Deadness, dullness, heaviness, weariness, indevotion,
distractions, and indisposednesse of heart in holy duties, Mat. 26. 40, 43.
Have thou no forgetfulness, Mat. 8. 18. Inconstancy, Hos. 6. 4. Do thou
walk comfortably in thy Christian course? Art thou never cast down, Psalm. 43.
5? The secret evils in us, might put us in remembrance of our selves, and
silence us from insulting and disgracing others for their weaknesses.

14. Observe the frame of my spirit. Every day to observe the passages of my
spirit before God in my actions and duties, and expect strength from Christ in
the use of means to act, and whether I be sutably and inwardly affected with a
sensiblenesse of what I want of God, or from God, or thankful and humble,
eying my defects, and with what faith and fervency I seek God, and observing
how God answers my prayers, and wait upon him for an answer of them.

15. Watch to do others good. Every day to desire and endeavor to do my
duty, according to my relation and station, to give a good example, religious
instruction, loving admonition, seasonable reproves, etc. using means to do
all the good I can to others souls and bodies, with an earnest intention, with
all care and dear affection.

See Acts 10. 24. Joh. 1. 40, 41. If a husband, if thou art a father, or a
master, or a wife, or a child, or a servant, be a friend to friends, and to
enemies do good; Be thou an example, in word, in conversation, in charity, in
spirit, in faith, in purity, 1 Timothy 4. 12.

16. Watch to prevent evil. Every day that I stand upon my watch, every moment
to prevent evil, and to prepare and receive good, having an eye to observe,
and a heart bent to resist all Satan's assaults, either from the world or flesh,
alone or with others, knowing Satan watches to do me a mischief; and to
consider that my fathers eye is upon me, who has commanded us to keep his
precepts diligently, Psalm. 119. 4. Oh that my ways were so directed to keep
thy Statutes, Psalm. 119. 5. I said I will look to my ways, Psalm. 39. 1. Watch
and pray, lest ye enter into temptation, Mat. 26. 41. Watching keeps the soul
awake, ir is to have grace in a readiness for action.

17. Watch against occasions of sin. Every day that I decline watchfully all
occasions of falling from my first love, fervency, heavenly mindedness, as
dead company, formalnesse in religious duties, coldness, or neglecting, the
means, praise of men, profit, outward pomp, mirth, pleasure, ease, outward
contentments, that I exceed not, nor sink not under any of them, but set light
by others favors and frowns.

Seek not your self out of your self, in the conceits of other men, he that
is little in his own eyes, will not be troubled if he seem so to others, he
that is troubled because others words answer not his desires, he shall never
live quietly, and he that priseth others praises, he injoyeth neither God nor
himself.

18. To sympathize with others. Every day to take notice and sympathize with
the sorrows and sufferings of those that are the Lords, and to be content to
stand or fall into any sorrow or sufferings with the Church of Christ, to part
with estate, friends, liberty, life.

If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth,
Psalm. 137. 6. Lam. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Chapters.

19. To meditate. Every day to meditate upon God in his goodness unto me, and
mind what God has prepared for me in heaven, and how I may be preserved from
sin, self, etc. and order my conversation aright.

Isaac went out to meditate in the field at eventide, Genesis 24. 63. do so, or
enter into thy closet, Mat. 6. 6.

Consider Psalm. 1. 2. and 32. 4, 5, 6. Heb. 10. 38. Jos. 1. 8. The book of the
Law shall not depart out of thy mouth, but thou shall meditate therein day and
night.

Meditation is wonderful sweet and profitable, by it we wind up our minds
from things below, Col. 3. 4, 5. and enjoy God, and thy self, and live in
heaven while thou art in the earth, refreshing thy self with the great
variety of those invisible comforts in heaven, the interest, joy, rest, that
thou shall find at last: we might meditate of the miseries, frailty, and
shortness of the time we have to live here, and how we may prevent sin, bear
the cross, deny our selves, live by faith, be contented in want, grow in
grace, escape temptations, keep a good conscience, and what is my duty to God
and man, and-wherein I come short, what mercies I enjoy, and how I live by
faith in every thing, how I profit by afflictions, or am thankful to God for
his sweet mercies to my soul or body, and a thousand profitable things, in
which the soul may find sweetness; and if ye be risen with Christ, seek
those things that are above, Col. 3. 1. By faith and meditation, keep thy
heart above, to view thy everlasting glory, filling thy self with joy,
enjoying the joys of heaven, which I shall certainly and quickly enjoy,
unutterable, unconceivable, and infinite, bottomless, boundless, endless. Oh
the ocean of the joys of heaven, the greatness of sweetness in so great
confluence of all joys, pleasures, and delights, which shall be for ever, and
never have an end!

20. Watch to deny self. That I daily deny my self, wit, wisdom, carnal
reason, learning, favor of men, applause, passion, ease, liberty, and all
things for God.

Consider, Luke 14. 20. 33. Mat. 16. 24. Mark. 8. 34. Luke 9. 23. It is good
thus to cross our selves, if we could deny our selves, every thing would be
easy for us to do; for all things are so sure under us, as we are above our
selves: in the same measure we are spiritual, or live by faith, so much we
deny our selves, such as cannot deny themselves, are not able to endure the
troubles and indignities of this world, but will shrink and fall off in the
day of battle, Luke 14. 28. 31.

21. To be humble. That in all my actions, I be humble, and meek, sincere,
serious, fervent, cheerful.

For humility and meekness, consider Mat. 11. 29. Sincerity, Deuteronomy. 18. 13.
Ephesians. 6. 14. Joh. 1. 47. Without faith and sincerity all is nothing worth.
Fervency, Fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, Romans 12. 11. Jam. 5. 16. Fervent
prayer. Cheerfulness; Rejoice evermore, 1 These. 5. 16. A cheerful and a
willing spirit is most suitable and acceptable, we often look not so much what
is done, as from what affection it is done, an unchearfull spirit is soon
weary, if we be overwhelmed with sorrow, fear, etc. and if we be filled with
lightness, vanity, we are unfit for any service of God.

22. Watch in use of means. That I use the means to enjoy and increase in
holy resolutions, desires, purposes, etc. to enjoy God, and the things of God
for God.

With my whole heart have I sought thee, O let me not wander from thee, Psalm.
119. 10. If resolution be wanting, if thou be forgetful, sloathfull, thou
art like to be a poor Christian.

Oh the strong and restless desires, and the unweariednesse thereof after God,
of a heart touched with his love, and tasted of his sweetness!

23. Watch to joy in God. That every day I rejoice in God, my union with him,
and interest in him, and privileges, and happiness by him, etc. and in the
exercises of his graces, and his word, and Saints, as the temptations, chiefest
joy, and greatest advantage.

I was in his love before the world was, love was the cause he shed his blood
for me, it is his love that preserves me, and crowned with it I shall be to all
eternity.

24. That I scorn none. That I slight none, nor check any with their
deformity of body, dullness, or weakness of wit, or memory, meannesse of
outward estate, birth, or smalnesse of gifts, parts, etc. and to pity those
who are still in their sins.

Consider, who made the difference between him and thee, see 1 Cor. 4. 7. Job
10. 10. Psalm. 39. 13, 14. 16. Isa. 28. 26. In spiritual things, Ezekiel. 16. Isa.
43. 25. Romans 5. 11. 2 Timothy 1. 9. Phil. 1. 29. Romans 3. 24. Ephesians. 2. 10. The
free grace and love of God only makes the difference, and if God should
convert him, he may soon become better then thee or me.

25. To know the vanity of the creature. Every day to consider the vanity of
these outward things, and the hurt we receive by them, how we exceed in our
affections unto them, notwithstanding they are not ours, and may in a less
time then an hour be taken all from us, or us from them, and that we are often
distracted and unsettled by them, to the end I may with more content want them,
and be weaned from them in my enjoyment of them, and so to use the liberties of
this life soberly, so as to be bettered by them.

All things below are full of transitorinesse, mortality, and change, vanity
of vanities, etc. all is vanity, Eccl. 1. 2. These things are under the Sun,
Eccle. 2. 7. (but above is constancy, and eternity of all excellencies,
perfections, and pleasures) we have no certainty of any thing below, Eccl. 1.
2. 1 Cor. 5. 25. Pro. 23. 4. Luke 12. 15. Experience makes it appear, the more
men possess of outward things, the less many use and enjoy, the more we love
them, the more we are crossed with them, and the more they have, the more they
are in want, because of their insufficiency, uncertainty, and perishing nature.
Religion often pays for men's getting riches, and often suffers most by them.

26. Watch in solitariness. That every day I be well employed, especially in
my retiredness, and solitary seasons, to prevent needless fears, thoughts of
the pleasures of sin, past, present, or to come, lest such thoughts cause
sin upon supposition.

Experience may teach some, that Satan's temptations have come more frequenter
and stronger, when alone, and that they have then sinned more freely in their
imaginations; oh cursed contemplation, that pollutes soul and body with
sensual filth, Genesis 38. 9, 10. and renewed guilt; nor is it good for a weak
believer to affect solitariness, Satan is more bold when thou art most
solitary, and his temptations then take a deeper impression.

27. Watch to speak for truth, etc. Every day, as occasion is offered, that I
earnestly contend for the truth, Jude ver. 3. own it, maintain it, and those
that are unjustly accused, and count it a glory to be reproached and disgraced
for Christ and his truth, 1 Pet. 4. 14.

28. Watch to do duties. Every day to catch at all opportunities of receiving
and doing good, shunning evil, and with constancy nourish all good and holy
desires, and consider what times we live in, and what they afford, and how I
may be most useful and fruitful, that I may finish my course with joy.

My beloved spoke, and said unto me, Rise up my love, my fair one, and come
away, Song 2. 10, 11. Our sloth, and our corrupt self, love, ease,
carelessness, inconstancy and unsetlednesse hinders us more then we are aware
of, of going to our beloved.

29. Watch against covetousness. Every day to take heed, and beware of
covetousness and earthly mindedness.

Consider, Mat. 25. 14. Luke 6. 2. Mat. 6. 25. to the end, Phil. 4. 6. 1 Timothy
4. 8, 9, 10. Jam. 5. 1, 2, 3. Pro. 23. 5. 1 Pet. 5. 7. Luke 2. 7. Mat. 8. 20.
To avoid covetousness, meditate on such places as these.

Covetousness deceives and hurts all, Jam. 5. 3. If we had riches, we cannot
keep them, they shall soon be taken from us, or us from them. Let such as
think they cannot be happy without outward riches, consider if earth be better
then heaven, where there is none of this thick clay to load themselves
withal, Hab. 2. 6.

30. To look for trouble. Every day to expect trouble and crosses, and look
upon all that befalls me, as appointed and ordered by God for my good in his
wisdom, love, and mercy, that so I may be thankful for them, and not fret,
knowing nothing can befall me without the will of God, and that it is sent in
love, and is best for me, and that God will supply with his all sufficiency
whatsoever I shall need, and that I desire not freedom from trouble, but a
free spirit, and an enlarged heart to God in it, and to express in every
trouble, wisdom, patience, humility, comfort, willingness, contentedness,
thankfulness, and faith in God, and that I endeavor to comfort others in
their trouble.

We should not look to be exempted from troubles, the whole course of a Saint
in this life is a life of trouble, and suffering, yea, more then other men,
Psalm. 73. 5. All our crosses, etc. are Christ's servants, they are under Christ,
they come and go at his command, and they are sent to do them good, and are
called back when they have done what they come for; therefore be not impatient
at them, fret not, Psalm. 39. 9. A Saint should be so fixed upon God, that
nothing below should move him, so as to disquiet him; for to say they cannot
endure and bear such a cross o^ trouble, is an expression as is unfit and
unsuitable for a Saint, Phil. 4. 11. 13. Our spirit should be above, and rule
and overruled things below, and not be ruled by them; a Saint should be under
nothing beneath it self: if we should rejoice in trials, etc. inward, outward
temptations, desertions, conflicts, outward troubles, and death it self, (is
to make us capable of a fuller enjoyment and communion with God, Jam. 1. 2.
etc.) how much more should we be content and patient? 1 These. 4. 18. Lord, I
will bear any thing, because my sins are forgiven me: a conscience so set at
liberty, can with ease undergo a great burden. Bees gather honey of bitter
flowers as well as sweet, and cannot we do so from bitter conditions? outward
bondage is not much to an enlarged and free spirit; what can do much hurt,
when all is well within? all is light and easy to him that can deny himself.

What God takes away one way, he can give it in another, which will be better;
How ever it be, yet God is good* and good to me, who will ever remain so to
be, and be the same to me. We have his promise, that we shall not want any
thing that is good for us, Psalm. 349, 10. Therefore when I think I want, I
will not believe I want, and that I have what I want, when I do not see it,
when I see not outward things, I see God can give, and I may have the comfort
of them without them, esteem God above all, and set him against all; what God
conveyed before by means, he instilles immediately from himself; the immediate
comforts are the strongest; see Joh. 16. 32. and when all forsook Paul, yet
God stood by him; and so it was with Christ, Psalm. 69. 20. Saints that are
poor, and under abasement, may be richer in faith, Jam. 2. 5. and have more
experience of Gods faithfulness, care, and love, and see more of their own
hearts, be more humble, more spiritual, and live more upon God, and more
weaned from the world, then those Saints who are richer; the meanest are as
happy, and as free from cares as the richest, and their sleep is as sweet;
therefore take we heed of sin, and then let come what can; Sin not, to avoid
trouble, for that is the way to bring greater trouble upon thee, for sin
defiles, distracts, insnares, and straitens a soul; where the spirit is
enlarged, it is not much troubled at outward bondage, if it be lightsome,
outward darkness will not be burdensome, if the Spirit be sound, it can bear
troubles, sickness; nothing can be very ill, when all is well within, what can
be grievous to him, whose eye is fixed in heaven, and knows it to be his own?
Heb. 12. 2.

We should not look so much at trouble, or freedom from it, as to God for
profit by it, comfort in it, strength to bear it; oh let no trouble trouble
thee, for when God seems to leave thee, he is near to help thee, when he
hides himself, he sees and will provide help for thee; as Genesis 22. 14. He is
all sufficient, Genesis 17. 1. and he is faithful that has said, all is ours, 1
Cor. 3. 23. And that we shall not want that which is for our good, Psalm. 34.
9, 10. The same faithfulness will make it good; therefore I shall not want
what ever can come, should each Saint say.

31. Watch to show mercy. Every day as occasion is offered, to show mercy and
pity to others in their misery, to supply their necessities, freely and
willingly, according to my ability, and that I be more industrious, and more
moderate in expenses, to supply others wants, especially the Saints, if it be
above my ability, with an open heart, hand, house, joyfully and
compassionately to supply the Saints necessities: Consider Mat. 5. 42. Mat. 7.
12. They that have no money must sell something to give; Sell that ye have,
and give alms, etc. Luke 12. 33.

As we have opportunity, let us do good to all men, especially to the household
of faith, Gal. 6. 10. Surely we should desire and endeavor to ease as many
men's burdens as we can, it is our duty to be helpful, and helpfulnesse
includes mercy and tender compassion, love, goodness, and such like virtues.
In lending, and suretiship, men must not be rash, nor hard-hearted, it is a
duty to lend to such who make conscience, and are careful and industrious to
pay at the time. I am sorry when I hear how many have suffered in this kind,
it is a sin to lend to such as have no care and conscience to pay: men had
need to have good experience of men's faithfulness and carfulness, before
they t^ust them with much: the experience of many have taught them this:
notionall knowledge in this is best.

32. That I grieve not the holy Spirit. Every day to watch that I quench not,
nor grieve the holy Spirit.

Grieve not the holy Spirit, Ephesians. 4. 30. Weequench and grieve the Spirit,
when we neglect the motions thereof, and slight the comforts of the Spirit,
and seek comfort from the flesh, and feed upon lusts, when we spend our
thoughts to content the outward man, and use spiritual things for carnal
ends, or father the work o^ the flesh upon the Spirit, or slight Gods way,
allow of any sin in my self, or others, to plot or contrive sin, or cavil
against any truth, or do duties in my own strength, omit duty, or slightly
perform it, to neglect or slight the graces of the Spirit in any, or despise
a Saint for his infirmities, and the like.

33. To take notice of Gods mercies. Every day to take notice of Gods mercies
to us, and others, and to acknowledge Gods goodness for them; In all things
give thanks, 1 These. 5. 14.

34. To be thankful. Every day will I bless thee, and praise thy Name, Ps.
145. 2.

35. To grow in grace. Every day to grow in grace and knowledge, 2 Pet. 3. 18.

36. Present condition is best. Every day to believe my present state and
condition of soul and body to be best for me; We know that all things work
together for good to them that love God, Romans 8. 28.

37. To cast my care upon God. Every day to cast all my care upon God, in the
use of means, Phil. 4* 6.

38. To look for death. Every day to desire to dye, and to look for death; All
the days of my appointed time will I wait till my change come, Job 14. 14.

39. To know my self. Every day to observe my profiting in Religion, 2 Pet. 3.
18.

40. To take notice of our failings. Every day to take notice of my sins,
omissions, and commissions, to be humbled by them, and more watchful for the
future against them, and to live the life of faith in all infirmities, as if I
had never sinned, living all the day long in the sweet enjoyment of the love of
God, and so to lie down in the apprehension and sweet enjoyment of it.

Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are
lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, if there
be any praise, think on these things, those things which ye have both
learned, received, and heard, (from the Lord Jesus Christ, that) do, and the
God of peace shall be with you.

SOME CONSIDERATIONS against sin, which are necessary to prevent sin.
1. COnsider, it is Gods command that we avoid sin, and subdue it, Romans 6.
The command of God ought to be wonderful powerful in us, and over us, and did
we know the majesty and authority of the command of an infinite and eternal
God, we neither could nor would do that he forbids to be done.

2. Know, it is the work of God to subdue the least sin, we cannot do it of
our selves, therefore Christ says, Without me ye can do nothing, Joh. 15. 5.
Yet we are to use the means he appoints against sin, and to strive against
it in his strength, and always resist sin and Satan.

3. Consider sin in the nature of it, and in the root and fruit of it; the
want of a true sight of sin, is a cause why men love sin, and sleep so
securely in it.

4. Consider, sin is the price of blood, Mat. 27. 6.

5. Consider, there is nothing in sin why we should desire it, there is no
true sweetness in sin, no true contentment and satisfaction there: the fruit
sin bears is miserable destruction at the best, is wounds, sorrow,
bitterness, shame, etc. I appeal to your experience, what fruit have ye ever
found come of ^inning? did it not fill you with horror, or rob you of peace, or
disable you for the service of God, etc. What fruit had you of those things
whereof you are now ashamed? Romans 6. 21. Pro. 23. 8. Sin fights against your
souls, 1 Pet. 2. 11. it disgraces the truth, grieves the Saints, by it we do
what we can to destroy others, harden their hearts, and hinder them of
receiving the truth, encourage men in sin, and open their mouths against God,
and his truth and servants.

6. Be sure you avoid the occasions of sin, as evil company, Psalm. 119. 63.
Pro. 13. 20. and 6. 9. places and provocations of sin, idleness, carnal joy,
excess in apparel, shut your eyes, stop your ears, take heed to thy tongue,
take heed of excess in eating and drinking, and pampering the body: Some have
so pampered their bodies, that they could not rule them, their want herein has
caused them to want no sorrow, and such as avoid not the occasions of sin,
let them not look to be preserved from sin; Walk circumspectly, not as
fools, but as wise, Ephesians. 5. 15.

7. Ask advice of fit persons, and crave the prayers of such as are the Lords,
that thou may withstand sin, and Satan, and get others to watch over you,
that you order your steps by his Word, Psalm. 119. 133. Receive reproof
willingly, and profitably, and thankfully.

8. Endeavor to know Satan's stratagems, be not ignorant of his enterprises, he
uses to double his assaults when he is resisted, that so he might persuade
men, the more he is resisted, the more they shall fall into sin, as if it
were in vain to resist him, but resist and give no place to the Devil, Ephesians.
4. 27. Jam. 4. 7. If ye yield to Satan now, it will be the harder to deny him
the next time.

9. Consider your relation and station, art thou partaker of the promises of
Christ, Ephesians. 3. 10. an heir of Christ, a fellow-Citizens of the Saints, and
of the household of God, Ephesians. 2. 19? Oh then do not so dishonor Christ, to take
a member of Christ and make it a member of Satan, to Serve sin, this were a
great wrong to Christ; We were sometimes darkness, but now we are light in the
Lord, walk as children of the light, Ephesians. 5. 8. And seeing we are the sons
and daughters of God, Gal. 4. 6. Kings and Priests to God, Rev. 5. 10. It is
wonderful unsuitable for such to sin, for that were to serve Satan, and do
his drudgery, Ephesians. 4. 20. Ye have not so learned Christ, Ephesians. 4. 17. This I
say and restifie in the Lord, that ye henceforth walk not as the Gentiles
walk, in the vanity of their minds. Christ gave himself for his, that they
should be holy, Tit. 2. 14. Romans 6. 10. see 1 John 3. 2. 2 Cor. 6. 18. We were
chosen to be holy, therefore I may not sin, Ephesians. 1. 4. Romans 8. 29.

10. Consider the eye of God is ever upon you, Heb. 4. 14. Pro. 15. 3. and 16.
6.

11. Let the love of Christ constrain you to hate and oppose every evil way.

12. Nourish the motions of the Spirit, Quench not the Spirit, walk in the
Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh, Gal. 5. 16. Nourish
zeal and hatred against every sin.

13. Examine your selves and ways daily, Keep your heart as your life, Pro.
4. 23. Reform the inside, Job 14. 4. and Satan shall not prevail.

14. Consider the shortness of time we have here to live, our time is short,
also the pleasures of sin are but for a season, Heb. 11. 25.

15. Know your interest in Christ, and profit by affliction, both which
destroys sin.

16. Hearken unto the noise of conscience, if conscience says, do it not,
hearken unto it, do it not, lest conscience be silent, and ye hardened.

17. When the pleasure of sin is presented unto thee, present to thy thoughts
the sting sin will leave behind it, with the many evils that attend it, also
present to thy self, a greater and better pleasure and sweetness, which is
thine, and that thou, if thou be the Lords, shall enjoy for ever with him, oh
mind home, and what is there, pleasures for evermore; set your affections on
things above, where your crown of glory is, 1 Cor. 9. 24. Such as think on
the supposed pleasure and sweetness of sin are deceived and inshared by it,
but give no ear to the lying noise of sin and Satan, they have fair
pretenses for a fool, as Pro. 23. 2. as that you may be saved notwithstanding,
or resist it the next time, but oh the deceitfulness of sin.

18. Pray to God earnestly and constantly for strength against sin, with
thankfulness for any preservation from sin: watch and pray at the first
approach of sin, change thy object and fall to prayer, Phil. 4. 6.

19. Believe God will give thee strength and subdue all thy iniquities, in his
time thou shall overcome them, be not discouraged, if thou be sometime too
weak, give not over, continue resisting, in due time thou shall prevail,
believe your prayers shall be answered, and that as there is strength enough in
Christ to subdue sin, and that you shall enjoy it; we are never overcome by
sin, but by reason of the weakness of faith: therefore above all, take the
shield of faith, Ephesians. 6. 16. Ephesians. 4. 12, 13.

20. Apply suitable promises against sin, consider Ephesians. 5. 5, 6, 7. Romans 6.
11. Psalm. 119. 6. God has said, Sin shall not reign over you, Romans 6. Do as
Mat. 17. 21. The Lord will preserve you from every evil work, and preserve
you till he bring you to glory.

The necessity, excellency, and benefit of Prayer.
THe Lord our God has commended Prayer to be a help to us in all our
necessities, and that we might love it, and improve it to his glory and our
good, saying, Ask and it shall be given you, Mat. 7. 7. Call upon me in the
day of trouble, and I will deliver you, Isa. 50. 15. Prayer has great promises
annexed unto it, James 4. and 5. Mat. 7. It procures wisdom, James 1. 5. The
Spirit of grace is given to such as pray. Luke 11. 13. It quickens the graces
of God in us, it is a remedy against all evils, Joh. 3. 8. 10. Psalm. 107. Prayer
is a means to fit us for those good things our souls desire, Jam. 1. 5.
Consider Exodus 14. 15, 16. Jonah 2. 1. 10. It has healed the sick, and raised
the dead, unloosed chains, and unlocked prisons, and delivered the Saints of
old, Act. 12. 5. 7. 11. and of late, and put in persecutors in their places. It
has set free the Lambs, and shut up the Wolves; we may truly say, the Lord
has slain Og, King of Basan, for his mercy indures for ever. And Prayer
caused the Sun to go back, yea to stand still, Josh. 10. 12. By it we bear
great burdens, and are made better by them: understand me of prayer in faith:
By it Jacob prevailed with God, Hos. 14. 3, 4. God delights to hear his pray,
Song 2. 14. By it we draw near to God, and have communion with him, and in a
sort are familiar with God, and know his mind, it ingageth Gods power and
truth. Prayer is the most universal help, it is good for all, and at all
times, in all things, and is most easy and ready to the Lords, in all places,
in all times. Would you do good to your brethren, friends, enemies, frequent
and improve this spiritual and heavenly duty.

Concerning the duty of Prayer.
To prayer three things are necessary, 1. A spiritual disposition before; 2. a
spiritual behavior in, 3. and a spiritual carriage after. The first includes
preparation to this duty.

That preparation is a duty God requires, consider,

1. God command it.

God says, I will be sanctified in them that draw near me, Levit. 10. 3.
Prepare to meet thy God, Amos 4. 12. Prepare your hearts unto the Lord, 1 Samuel
7. 3. Prepared for every good work, 2 Timothy 2. 21.

2. The Saints have practiced it.

Jehosaphat prepared his heart to seek God, 2 Chronicles. 19. 3. Ezra prepared his
heart, Ezra 7. 10. O God my heart is fixed.

Object. This is Gods work.

Answ. True; Thou will prepare their hearts, O God, Psalm. 10. 17. in the use of
means.

3. There are promises annexed to preparation.

If thou prepare thy heart, etc. see Job 11. 13. see what is promised verse. 15,
16, 17, 18, 19.

An evil not to do it. And Rehoboam did evil, because he prepared not his
heart to seek the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 12. 14.

What preparation is in general?

Preparation, it is an holy consideration of God, with whom we have to do, and
how unfit we are to have so near communion with him, that our spirits may be
composed, and our whole man rightly disposed, craving his strength to enable us
to a right performing of this holy duty.

In particular.

1. For the person, he must be accepted, must be a Son, Romans 8. 15. Also all
that pray, ought to put away all wrath, strife, envy, etc. God esteems so
highly of peace, that he will have his service stay till it be accomplished,
Mark. 11. 25. Mat. 5. 24. Therefore we should take heed, that there be no such
distempers found in us by him who knows our hearts, for it will choke
conscience, and weaken our boldness with God; If we regard iniquity, God will
not hear our prayers, Psalm. 66. 18. Such as love their sins, God loatheth
their prayers; The prayer of the wicked is abomination to God: God looks at the
heart. Christ says, When thou prayest, forgive: Such a forgive not others,
pray without life.

2. Prize prayer, have it in that esteem which God puts upon it, God has
honored prayer, so that every one that uses it is the better for it; for
every one that asks receives, Mat. 7. 8.

3. Set times apart for to pray, and separate thy self to some place where
thou may be alone, and out of the hearing of others, if thou can, that so
thou may freely power out thy soul to God without hypocrisy; for a man's
desire he will separate himself, Pro. 18. 1. Christ chose a time before day,
early in the morning, and one of the places he chose was a Wilderness, Mark.
1. 35. Sometimes a mountain, and a garden, and when that cannot be had, he
faith, When thou prayest enter into thy Closet, etc. We should so pray and
worship God, as men set free from all other things. So we need avoid all
occasions of hypocrisy; Hypocrites stand in corners of the streets, because
they love to be seen of men.

4. Before thou prayest, spend a little time, some thoughts concerning what God
is, and what may raise thy heart, and encourage thee to draw near to God.
Consider what be thy chief wants, lets, temptations, corruptions, also to
consider the suitable promises of a supply fits the soul to pray: also to
consider what mercies we have received above others, and what cause we have to
be thankful to God.

5. Prayer requires our ends to be holy, and right placed, as to enjoy God, and
for grace to obey him: and last and least of all, for such things as chiefly
concern our selves, as peace, etc. If the end be naught, or good, and not
right placed, we ask amiss, Jam. 4.

6. Deny thy self and come empty headed, hearted, handed, of all that is thy
own, that God and his grace may be all in all: emptiness raises our hearts in
prayer.

7. Mind thy own inabilitie to do any thing that is spiritual, and look up
to Christ by faith for strength, eying his promise; we are no more able to pray
or do any spiritual work of our selves, then to remove a mountain at once.

8. Consider God in his attributes, that he is great, gracious, merciful, slow
to anger, etc. and that he is so to thee, and that he is near thee, yea
present with thee; all in God is ready to help his, his ocean of grace cannot
be exhausted, spent, his fountain does nothing decay, though multitudes draw
from it.

9. When thou come to God, think thou can not have too high thoughts of
God, nor too low ones of thy self: Dust and ashes, Genesis 18. 27. a worm,
corruption, so Job. Thou can not set God high enough, nor thy self low
enough; if we could see our own filth, we should stink worse then the
filthiest carrion in our own nostrils.

10. Come to God with a heart that is large and cheerful, by faith in
assurance of person and prayer accepted, hate suspicions and jealousies of God,
see Ps. 65. 2. and 7. 7. 4. 7. ask cheerfully: such as go not cheerfully to
God, know not what a God they go to, say to thy soul, Come, O soul, rejoice,
be cheerful, for thou art a going to thy God.

11. Be abased under thy pride, formalitie, coldness, dullness, deadness, and
break through all impediments to go to God in prayer.

12. Empty thy self of all distractions, cares, and clogs of spirit, that thou
may be free when thou come to God, hold thy heart close to God, in love,
zeal, meekness, etc.

13. Observe fit times and seasons to go to God in, yet prefer that season
wherein God and thy own heart sends thee to prayer before a set time, embrace
it gladly and quickly, so sweet a motion of the Spirit, put it not by till
another time; I prevented the dawning of the morning, and cried, Psalm. 119.
147. with Mark. 1. 35.

14. Be sensible of others wants, especially for such as are the Lords, that
you may pray with a feeling of their necessities.

15. Pray for grace to stir thee up to pray, and fit thee with suitable
matter, suitable to the occasion, either for the Church, thy self, or others,
and to enliven us in all, abhor form and fashion, pray not in print, they
are deadly enemies to spiritualnesse; pray from an inward feeling and
sensiblenesse of thy wants: book-prayers is such a crutch, as it makes them
that use it quite lame; we are not so much to look to a set order of words, as
to a well ordered heart; weak expressions in uprightness of heart, the Lord
likes well, but if there be nothing but well framed sentences, God abhorres
them.

16. Above all come to God in faith, Romans 10. 14. How shall they call on him on
whom they have not believed? see Heb. 11. 6. Jam. 1. 6. Mark. 11. 24. This is
the most spiritual grace to come to God with above all other, no other save
this can fasten upon a promise, thou can not see God without faith;
whatsoever thou needst, believe that promise, Every one that asks receives,
Mat. 7. 8. Christ's incense and odors of his sacrifice, Rev. 8. 4. is for him
that believes. Faith gives force and life to prayer, it troubles not Satan to
make a thousand prayers full of tears, if they be without faith; according to
our faith, so is our prayer, Romans 8. 38. Faint faith, faith prayers; prayer
without faith is but beating the air; according to thy faith, be it unto thee.
Consider Mat. 21. 22. All things are possible to him that believes, Mark. 9.
22. Let him ask in faith, says James, nothing wavering; that is, in a certain
assurance to be heard, and that his request shall be granted, Jam. 1. 6.

17. Read and meditate before prayer, if time will permit, for the better
preparing our hearts thereunto. The graces of the Spirit, uprightness,
pureness, thankfulness, integrity, soundness of heart, and the like, these
will enable, inliven and fit thee to pray.

These well observed, and God blessing them, will fill thee with heavenly
affection, and rid thee of thy own inventions, manner, and ends, etc. Oh all
ye sons and daughters of the most High, in this fullness go forth to meet
your God with joy and full assurance of a supply of what ye need.

Concerning a right manner, and spiritual behavior in the duty of prayer;
observe,
1. Fix thy mind and faith upon God in the flesh of Christ, who is God with us,
and near us, else he cannot be comprehended by us, eye the flesh of our
Advocate, united to the deity, and hold the eye of thy faith upon it, (all the
while thou art in prayer) which gives life and strength to prayer, else thy
prayer is but a moral devotion, a mere shadow; by the flesh of Christ so
united, we have union with God, and access to God, which else could not; and
the more our faith lays hold upon this flesh of Christ so united to the
divinity, and we also by it, the more the Ordinance imparts Gods goodness
unto the soul, for whatsoever virtue there is in any thing, it is conveyed by
application, and touching of it; that whereby we touch God is our faith, which
never touches him, but it draws virtue from him: but that in which our
happiness consists, is our union with the divinity by Christ's humanity,
which is full, and admits not of any degrees.

2. Pray in knowledge, and not in ignorance, Joh. 5. 14.

3. Watch and pray against Satan's discouragements, sloth, ease, vanity of
mind, that if it were possible, no vain thought might come in all the while.

4. Pray as thy present state, condition, and frame of spirit requires.

5. Strive for the best affections thou can in prayer, and those ravishing,
which may carry thee furthest from thy self, and nearest to communion with
God, and look to the bottom upon which thy affections stand, as faith, and
inward grace, and eying a promise; serve God with all thy might, courage, and
strength, with frequency and fervency, for time, zeal, and intention, long
prayers often dead others affection; it is good to pray briefly, and often, as
Christ, Mat. 26. 39. Consider what others can bear, mind the time, occasion,
and season; in long prayers, we must take heed of custom, superstition, and
ambition, and in short, of profaneness and carelessness; whether long or
short, you must pray with affection, as joy, desires and grief.

6. When thou prayest to one in the deity, mind all three, and sever them not,
the object of our worship must be the union of the flesh with the Trinity.

7. Give God all thy heart, and see that thy heart and tongue go together all
the while, and observe when, and in what the heart draws back, etc.

8. If thou can, observe Gods order, first, express Gods greatness, next
his goodness, and his goodness to thee, his large love, and thy ill requiting
him; be thankful for former mercies, 1 Chronicles. 15. 13. Seek and ask
spiritual blessings before earthly, etc. If time will permit, confess thy
sins freely to God, with inward grief, and in faith beg, the Spirit of
supplication and mourning, Zech. 12. 10. And let all mourning flow from faith
of thy person accepted, and sins forgiven, or else all thy mourning and
tears are worth nothing, and no better then the howllng of a dog, but that
mourning which flows from faith of pardon, is a sweet grace, and an acceptable
sacrifice to God.

In thankesgiving, it is fit we should be as much and as large in it, as in
requests, be as ready to be thankful for mercies thou have, as to ask new
ones, spiritual, temporal, etc. Be thankful for all, to thee, thine, and
others, and thou shall not be barren, for either matter or manner, we ought to
be more ready to be thankful, then to crave what we want, we should prefer.
God before our selves.

In supplication, ask the Spirit of prayer, to pray in the holy Spirit, and in
understanding, etc. and ask all graces, and temporal things in faith, and a
blessing upon all, and be content to be at Gods dispose in all, and wait Gods
time, know if God hears thee not in that kind thou desire, he intends that
which is better for thee in stead thereof; God has not absolutely promised
thee measure of grace, and temporal things in particular, and so sometimes
denies them in love to his, because not fit for them, therefore ask with
submission.

Add fervency and importunity, as one loath to be sent away empty, and let thy
earnestness be according to the degrees of goodness of things prayed for, or
of thy necessity of them. The life of prayer consists in the heat of earnest
and fervent desires, Romans 15. 30. and 8. 16. Psalm. 143. 6. Of a cold prayer,
expect not more then a cold answer; if a righteous man's prayer be not fervent,
it will not prevail, Jam. 5. Oh Lord, give me what I come for, cease not
knocking till ye speed: what we need we have in God, and this is ours (oh
sweet love) turn fears into hopes, complaints into prayers, and thy
lamentations into supplications, and Christ will turn thy darkness into
light, and thy deadness into life, thy bondage into liberty, and thy
weakness into strength. Covet the best measure of grace, and rest in that
measure God thinks best forthee; pray often, 2 Cor. 12. 10. see Isa. 26. 26,
27. Be thankful to God in prayer for what thou obtainest from God by prayer,
and in prayer use that gesture that most befits the duty, and most befits thee
for the duty, weigh it well, consider the weakness of thy body, yet abhor
unreverence in prayer, both in soul and body, Acts 7. 60.

Concerning a spiritual carriage after Prayer.
1. As soon as the duty is ended, especially if enlarged and before others,
eye some one or more of thy defects (in prayer) to keep thy soul humble, and
also eye what was of God in duty, to the end thou may be thankful, and not
dejected and overcome in viewing thy weaknesses and distempers: view all the
parts of thy prayer, how it was performed (if thou can) both for matter,
manner, heart and affection, and consider what feelings, desires, comforts God
gave thee in prayer: take heed thou do not over-like thy prayers, nor think
that God dislikes them, because thou see not what thou should in thy
prayers.

2. Renounce all that is our own in prayer, feelings, hopes, affections,
zeal; as they are the ordinance of God, so I prise them, but as they are acts
of mine, they stink in my nostrils, yet the Lords fire shall heat me, My power
is perfected in my infirmity: very gladly will I be under infirmity, that his
power may be magnified in me, 2 Cor. 12. 8, 9.

3. Watch that Satan wound thee not with thy prayers; if thou be in any
measure sensible of sin, thy defects in duty, Satan is ready to tell thee,
if thou had the Spirit of God, then should thou have the Spirit of prayer,
and if thou had it, it should be otherwise with thee then it is, but if the
soul consent to what he says to be true, ye both agree to wound thy faith
and confidence in God, not only for an answer of thy prayer, but of thy
persons acceptance. Nay, rather charge all upon thy corruption and want of
preparation, and exercise of grace, and be the more careful and watchful for
time to come, and learn to distinguish between a nullity and a defect; and in
a word, if thou art sensible of thy sin in praying, and art sorry for it, thy
imperfection is passed by, and thou do not pray in fashion. The Spirit of
God discovers deadness, indisposition, and unbelief, and the like in prayer,
flesh and blood cannot discover these, and the Spirit of God only makes the
conscience tender and pliable.

4. Let the frame of thy Spirit be always thankful and cheerful after
prayer, whether thou be enlarged or straightened, inwardly or outwardly, alone
or with others; for when thou art at the best, thou standst in need of a Jesus,
look upward then by faith upon thy Advocate, and when thy defects are most,
and thou art at the worst, will not the same Jesus save thee? yea surely, and
if thou groundest thy comfort upon a right bottom rightly, thy comfort and the
cause of it is the same; because Christ is the same, Heb. 13. 8. And if Christ
be thine, shall not he disanull all thy sins as well as one, seeing he is
able and willing? But this is the childrens bread, this pearl is not to be
cast to swine.

5. If in prayer thy heart have been opened and enlarged, thy faith
strengthened, and thy conscience eased, etc. count it a sweet mercy, be
thankful to God for all; for want of taking notice of Gods goodness, and
thankfulness for it, it is just in stead of light to possess darkness, and
for feeling to find deadness, etc.

6. Press after (what thou have prayed for) in the use of means, Pro. 2. 3,
4, 5. there is the prayer, endeavor, and blessing. As he that makes prayer the
end of his prayer, rests in his prayer, and prays to no purpose: So he that
does not in good earnest pursue with zeal and conscience the grace and good
things he prays for, Ioseth his prayer. The Saints pray to put their prayers in
practice, and we tempt God to ask that we use not means to attain, our
endeavors must second our prayers, Pro. 20. 4. It is for hypocrites to pray
and return to their lusts with more freedom, as if they intended to have
liberty to sin. Such prayers are odious to God: take we heed that what we
build up with prayer, we pull not down by our practice, by remissness,
sleightnesse, frothinesse of Spirit, it had been well if this knowledge had not
been experimental, but a word is sufficient to the wise.

7. Expect and wait patiently for a full answer of thy prayers in Gods time and
way, consider Psalm. 40. 1. Rev. 3. 10. Hab. 2. 2, 3. We should be loath to lose
any part of the answer of our prayers, and that we may wait, we must first be
sure we have a promise that we shall speed, that we may feed our minds with
the meditation of it: this is necessary, for the time of fulfilling may be
long, lest we faint, Psalm. 147. 11. Psalm. 135. 6, 7. Have patience and tarry;
that comes hardly, is often most prized, but lightly come, lightly go: God knows
the fittest season to do us good, take not a delay for a denial, many things
God has promised, he has not set down the time or year, but when it is best
for us, let God alone for the time, and ye shall see what God will do. Watch we
what event our prayers have, and observe Gods dealings with our selves, and
others, both with his, and his enemies: and be thankful for any answer of
prayers. The Saints are often afflicted, that they may often pray, and that
often praying, they might pull down many benefits from the Lord, and return
many praises unto him; we sin against God, and hurt our selves for want of
thankfulness.

For hearing the Word.
1. Labor to be informed of the excellency and preciousnesse of the mercy to
hear the Word, and that no treasure of this world is like it for goodness,
beauty, and truth, there is nothing like the Word, it informs, convinces,
comforts, what comfort is like to this, if the heart be not lost in profits,
pleasures, forth and ease?

2. Prize the Word, 1 Pet. 2. 3. Above all things we prize precious things, and
for such as love their lusts, let them consider Ezekiel. 14. 7, 8.

3. Hear not for noveltie, etc. but let your ends be good in obedience to God,
to know and practice.

4. Deny thy self, thy own wisdom, see the Lord in all, be a fool that thou
may be wise; set God above all, and say, Speak Lord, for thy servant hears.

5. Come in faith, believe God can speak in particular to thee, whether weak
or strong, and supply thy wants, Micah 2. 7. to the end, Isa. 48. 17. eye the
promise; If any man will do his will, he shall know whether the doctrine be of
God or no, Joh. 7. 17. Hear and your souls shall live, Isa. 55. 3. Believe
the promises, meditate on them, plead them, apply them as thy own portion, and
rest satisfied and contented with them, they that have the promise are sure
enough.

6. Come with a resolution to learn and a heart resolved to practice what God
says; say as David, Psalm. 119. 33, 34. Psalm. 86. 11. And covet earnestly the
best gifts, 1 Cor. 12. 31. Consider 1 Cor. 12. 4. and 1 Cor. 3. 4. 22.

7. Come empty in the sense of want, he fills the hungry, but the full are
sent empty away, Luke 1. 51. Pro. 27. 7. Empty of distractions, and worldly
thoughts and affections, Exodus 3. 5. Empty of prejudice of man, gifts, or
means, be humble, the humble he will teach, Psalm. 25. 9.

8. Pray to God to prepare thy heart, and to open thy eyes, Psalm. 119. 18. Show
me thy truth, and bless it to me, pray that he that speaks may not seek
himself, and so rob God, and that he may speak as he ought to speak, Col. 4.
4.

In hearing, take heed to your eyes, ears, hearts, Luke 8. 18. Ezekiel. 40. 4.
1. Consider thou art in the presence of God, and consider Job 21. 6. Psalm. 16.
8. Acts 10. 33.

2. Attend diligently, Isa. 55. 23. Watch that nothing come between thee and
it, sleep not, wander not, gaze not, Luke 8. 18. Consider Act. 8. 6. And the
people with one accord gave heed to those things that Philip spoke.

3. Hear for thy self, and mind especially that which most concerns thee.

4. Hear with understanding and judgment, Mat. 13. 13. Mat. 15. 10. Joh 21.
11. Put a difference between truth and error, The simple believes every word,
Prove. 14. 15. Take heed what ye hear, Mark. 4. 24. and whom ye hear, and
how ye hear.

5. If thou can, observe the method and scope of the speaker to help
memory.

6. Hear with thy heart and affection, as one that longs for it.

7. Mix the Word with faith, believe it, obey it, believe it is true, and
thine, ^ Pet. 2. 3. if tasted.

8. Hear it as the word of God, or else it can do thee no good, see 1 These.
2. 13. apprehend and digest well what Gods soveraigntie of God is in a command,
and the tie of obedience of the creature to God means; consider the insolency
of the creatures that dare reject the Word of the Lord.

Come buy and eat, Isai. 55. 1. buy gold, etc. Rev. 3. 18 Forsake all, Mat.
19. 27. If thou seek her as silver, Pro. 2. 4, 5. Hearken and eat, Isa. 55.
2. In eating is required appetite, chewing, taste, relish, pleasure and
delight, Nehe. 9. 25. Let the Word sink down, Luke 9. 44. Hide it in your
hearts, Psalm. 119. 11.

After hearing.
1. If God has manifested himself any way in his Word, be thankful, oh that
the Lord should reveal himself to me, and not unto the world, Joh. 14. 22.
Consider Mat. 13. 17. Psalm. 147. 20. 1 Cor. 14. 25.

2. Hold fast that thou have, lose it not in the air of the world, let nothing
rob thee of it, let memory call upon consciscience, and conscience upon thee.

3. Examine and prove what ye have heard, as 1 These. 5. 21. Acts 17. 11. and
consider Acts 8. 34. Romans 3. 8.

4. What good soever thou receivest, give glory to God, not to man, for he is
but as an instrument in the hand of God, He that planteth and waters is
nothing, but God it is that gives the increase, 1 Cor. 3. 7. It is not in the
graces of men. Also consider Acts 8. 1. with Acts 11. 19. 21. nor learning, for
Acts 4. 13. So then God does all.

5. Muse and meditate on what thou have heard, Think on these things, Phil. 4.
8. Deuteronomy. 3. 39. She pondered, Luke 2. 19. Meditation helps memory and
affection, and works an inward feeling of it, if God bless it, but if we
meditate not on it, it does us no good.

6. Apply what thou have heard to thy occasions, which are many.

7. Practice what thou have heard, this is the end of hearing, Deuteronomy. 5. 1. Mat.
7. 26, 27. We have no benefit by it, if we practice it not, Jam. 1. 25. God
looks for fruit, if we enjoy means, Isa. 5. 2. Mat. 21. 34. Luke 13. 7. Where
much is given, much is required, Luke 12. 48. see Joh. 8. 47. Job. 12. 40.
Practice presently; I made haste and delayed not, Psalm. 1. 19. 60. Genesis 7. 23.
with 22. 3. Abraham went presently; that which we put off till hereafter is
seldom done. Consider Pro. 24. 33, 34. Many motions through delay have come to
nothing: they were not to stay, but to step in presently as soon as the Angel
stirred the water, Joh. 5. 4.

8. Omit not opportunities, for thou know not whether God will bless this
or that, Eccl. 11. 6.

Concerning Reading.
To read with profit requires diligence, wisdom, preparation, meditation,
conference, faith, practice, prayer. For the first consider Pro. 2. 12. Mat.
13. 54.

2. Wisdom is necessary for the choice of matter, order, time; for the matter,
it must be suitable to our necessities and capacities; for order, first that
which concerns the foundation, and after the building: also order is a help to
memory and understanding, and for want of order, some read much, but profit
little: also wisdom must difference the fittest time to read in respect of
other business: God has made every thing beautiful in its time, Eccle. 3. 11.

3. Preparation requires, first humility, and a sensiblenesse of our own
insufficiency, to teach our selves, and prayer to God to teach us, and to give
us sound judgments and good affections.

Secondly, Faith in Christ, for him to open the book that is sealed, and the
heart also believing he will bless his means unto us.

Thirdly, a heart prepared to learn, Pro. 17. 16. Such as received the Word
with a good and an honest heart, brought forth fruit, Luke 8. Wherefore is
there a price in the hand of a fool to get wisdom, seeing he has no heart to
it?

After we have read, meditate.
Meditation makes that we have read to be our own; Meditate.
Blessed is he that meditateth in the Law day and night, Psalm. 1. 2. And
unless by meditation the judgment be refined and settled, and work it upon
our affections, and lay up what we read in our minds, all our reading and
hearing will come to nothing.

Conference with others, Conference.
who are able to direct us, is necessary to inform us in what we understand
not.

The Word must be mixed with faith, Faith.
else it profits us nothing, Heb. 4. 2. Luke 18. 18.

The end of reading is to practice, Practice.
and the best way to know is practice; He that will do his will, he shall know
it.

Without prayer we cannot well use the means, Prayer
nor expect a blessing by them, 1 Cor. 2. David prayed and praised God, Blessed
art thou, O Lord, teach me thy statutes, Psalm. 119.

He that profits by hearing and reading.
1. He must have his mind turned to Christ, and fixed upon him in his Word, as
Psalm. 119. 15. Mark. 7. 14. He must believe, and he shall know.

2. He must not be wise in his own eyes; The humble he will teach, Psalm. 34.
Psalm. 119.

3. Pray continually, 1 These. 5.

4. Search the Scriptures, Joh. 5. 39.

5. His end must be good, 1 Cor. 10. 31.

6. He must love the Word, Psalm. 119.

7. He must resolve to obey, John 7. 17.

Of Meditation.
MEditation is a serious reviving of those truths we have heard, or the
administrations of God toward us or others, of that which we know, we further
debate upon it, that both mind and heart being seasoned with the savor thereof
(in applying it to our selves, that we may have some use of it in our
practice) and be furthered thereby to duty. In which the memory is exercised
to remember some things past, also the understanding gathering some other
things, as namely in finding out the causes, fruits, properties, as when a man
meditateth on the Word, remembers and museth on it, so going from point to
point, applying generally some things unto himself, and wisely examining how
the case stands between the Lord and himself, in those things whereby he has
his heart thereby stirred up to put some things in practice. The work wrought
in the affections, is that they are framed, either to love or hatred, joy or
sorrow, love, fear, according to the diversity of the thing, with the
reasonable part, has seriously considered of.

Of the excellency of Meditation.
MEditation is a pondering in the heart, a considering, a weighing with our
selves; by meditation we retain truths, and are enriched by them, and it makes
them sweet unto us, by it we ascend up to heaven; it is the life of all means,
the way to knowledge, the mother of wisdom, it refines the judgment, and cuts
off errors within and without, it increases love, it makes the mercy of God
fresh unto us, it is the life of hearing, reading, conference, praying, etc. By
it all means are made profitable unto us, it reveals truth to us, and
acquaints us with our selves, it makes all to become our own, it removes lets,
and settles truths upon our spirit, it breeds good affections, and quickens
them, and makes us profitable to others, and makes things easy and sweet unto
us, and fires the soul with love, it helps the memory, and stirs up
affection, and filles us with experiences, and inableth us to apply it to our
own use, and benefit of others. Judge then how useful this duty is, and what
a treasure we forgo when we neglect it.

Before Meditation.
1. Read and confer with reverence and diligence, Psalm. 119. Reading the
Word fits us to meditate on it.

2. Be sure thou have fit texts or occasions of matter forelaid, suitable to thy
wants, and spirits, provide matter suitable, of all sorts, precepts, promises,
etc. Be not barren of fit matter to meditate on, fit for thy necessity and
capacity.

3. Choose a fit time, the morning is the fittest time for religious duties,
and noon, and evening, day and night, Psalm. 1. 3. We ought to frequent this
duty, for the morning, Psalm. 119. 147. Mark. 1. 35. for the night, verse. 148.
In the morning our memories are the quickest and strongest, and our selves the
readiest to conceive things, our natural powers being revived, have the
greatest liberty; at night we are more dull and heavy: Idolaters will rise
early in the morning to worship an Idol. Oh that we were so wise to prevent
the morning light, Psalm. 119. 147. Mary came early to the Sepulcher, Mat. 28.
The holy Spirit came upon them in the morning, Act. 2. It was the third hour
of the day: Consider Jer. 7. 13. Joh. 8. 2. Mat. 21. 28.

4. Separate thy self to this work; for a man's desire he will separate
himself, Pro. 18. 2.

5. Choose a fit place, as for prayer, so for meditation, where thou may not
be disturbed by any thing.

6. Love the Word of God, and meditation will follow, Psalm. 119. What we love,
we think on, love draws our affections, according to the love we have to any
thing, so accordingly is our pleasure, study, and delight in it.

7. Believe God will bless it unto thee.

8. Pray to God to bless it unto thee.

In Meditation.
1. Look up to God and mourn for thy estrangement of spirit from holy things,
which should be familiar, and bend thy self (after separation of thy thoughts
from frothy things) to consider seriously of the truths set before thee, and
look up to God for strength to resist a hard wandering dead defiled heart,
which makes thee weary of the work of God.

2. Let the Word of God be the object of thy meditation, Psalm. 1. 2. Psalm. 119.
99. and from generals proceed to particulars.

3. Meditate but of one thing at once, and at one time, and observe order, 1.
travel with our memories; 2. judgment; 3. our affections, before we come to
make use of it in our hearts: after our memories, let thy judgment consider
what weight the thing is of, and how it concerns Gods glory, our selves, or
others, and whether we have it at all, or in such a measure as we need, and may
have; how we came by it, what are the lets of getting and enjoying it, and how
they may be removed, what means are to be used to attain it, both for manner,
measure, end, time; and having so done, rest not in overfights, but stir up
and provoke our affections accordingly, and so work it upon our hearts. Take
an instance, when we come to make use of that we meditate of in our hearts and
affections, thus put case it be some special promise, how happy were I if I
could enjoy it, what things here below are like unto it? then proceed to remove
all the objections and temptations against it, lay all in the promise, and hold
the promise until thou can suck sweetness out of it, till faith and
comfort issue in thy soul; if any should do all this, unless God add his
blessing, and with his almighty power bless means to us, all is nothing, yet
we must use the means.

4. If in meditation, thy mind rove and wander after other matters, as soon
as thou perceivest it, sigh deeply to God, and fall to prayer to be
established, from whence Satan and our corruptions would draw us, and having
desired the Lord to deliver thee from a vain, light, and frothy spirit, etc.
fall to meditation again.

After Meditation.
1. We must ever be mindful to be humble and thankful.

2. The more thou meetest with the Lord in this way, let it more encourage thee
to frequent it, and make it a great part of thy communion with God, and be as
joyful when God has blessed it unto thee, as any can be when they find a
mine of gold, or great spoil.

Directions for the understanding of the sense of the letter of the Scriptures.
1. WHen the word (one God) is expressed, the Father, and the Holy Spirit is
included, as appears in Joh. 17. 3.

2. All the attributes or works of God are proper to any of the three without
exception of any of them, so Christ is said to create the worlds, Heb. 1. 2.

3. Repentance in God, notes no change in God, (who is immutable) but in the
thing or action.

4. The word (of God) notes authority, sometimes it notes only excellency,
as, Psalm. 1. 5. 17.

5. The Scriptures must not be understood against Christ, but for Christ.

6. Whatsoever is truly and soundly collected from Scripture, is to be believed
and rested upon, as well as that which is expressly written, yet no Ordinance of
Christ, nor the administration of it, but it is plainly expressed in Scripture,
and depends not upon consequences, much less means.

7. It is usual in Scripture to attribute that to the instrument, that
efficacy and force which belongs to the Author, as 1 Timothy 4. 16. Romans 3. 28.
and 5. 4. Deuteronomy. 5. 22. Heb. 13. That good means may be respected, and bad
slighted.

8. In a parable, the mind, scope, and intention of the Spirit of God is to be
marked above all, it must be expounded and no further strained then things
agree with the principal drift, as Mat. 20. 1, 2. The scope is, God is not a
debtor to no man: strain no parable.

9. We may not interpret Scripture by allegories, unless we be able to prove
the allegorical sense by some other place of Scripture.

10. In interpreting Scripture, we must take the sense from the word, and not
bring one to it.

11. Comparison of places together, darker with plainer, is the way to
understand it. Nehe. 8. 8.

12. There can be but one only proper true sense of one place of Scripture,
which we are chiefly to search after, and rest in; we may not make every
Scripture speak every thing.

13. The literal sense of Scripture which arises from the words duly
understood, is the only true and proper sense.

14. Scriptures must be understood according to the largest extent of the
words, except there be some restraint of them by the matter, phrase, and scope
of them, (as the word grace, 1 Pet. 1. 13.) or by some other place of Scripture
it appears they must be restrained.

15. They must be expounded simply, according to the letter, except necessity
compel to depart from a literal sense to a figurative.

16. We must not take a figurative speech properly, nor a proper speech
figuratively, Mat. 26. 26, 27. This is my body, is a figurative speech; it is a
great servitude to take signs for things, of which words be but signs.

17. Where there is a sentence in Scripture, which has a tropicall or borrowed
word, we may not think the whole place figurative, as Mat. 26. 28.

18. That which is said to one, must be understood to be said to all in the
like case and condition, as appears by comparing Joshua 1. 5. with Heb. 13. 5.
For of the like things there is the like reason and judgment to be given, let
the circumstances be considered wisely.

19. A particular example will afford a general instruction, when the equity
of the thing done is universal, and the cause common, otherwise not.

20. The Scripture puts upon dead things the person of such as speak, by a
fiction of a person, Ps. 19. The firmament speaks, etc. So Romans 19. 20, 21.
Psalm. 98. 7, 8. By this manner of speech we are moved to affect the things
spoken, and more easily brought to understand them.

21. By bodily things the Scripture leads and lifts us up to divine: thus a
hand applied to God, signifies his working power, so an eye, his knowledge, a
heart his will, his foot his presence or government, wings, his care or
protection, a mouth, his word or commandment, a finger, his might, and a soul
put for the essence of God.

22. The Scripture ascribes the names of things unto the similitudes and
representations, as 1 Samuel 28. 14, 15.

23. That exposition that causes an absurdity to follow, is a false
exposition, Romans 4. 14. and 10. 14, 15.

24. The word heart, is commonly put for the soul of man.

25. There is such a necessary and mutual relation between faith, and Christ
the object, that where one of these is expressed alone, the other is included;
Christ only is the matter of our righteousness.

26. The Scripture diverse times expresses the antecedent by the consequent,
Romans 9. 33. with Isa. 28. 16. For not making haste in Isaiah, Paul says, Shall
not be ashamed, shame and confusion being an effect which follows haste.

27. The Scripture uses one word twice in one sentence, with a different
signification, Joh. 4. 35. Harvest is taken first for earthly, and in the
latter place for spiritual harvest. So the word water in Joh. 4. 13, 14.
First, elementary; secondly, spiritually, viz. the graces of the Spirit.

28. The word of commanding is often put for wishing, as, Let thy kingdom
come, ^hy Name be hallowed, that is, Oh that thy Name were hallowed; Let him
kiss me, Song 1. 1. for oh that he would kiss me.

29. Crying in Scripture does often betoken a strong noise outwardly, but
inwardly compunction and fervency of spirit and affection, Romans 8. 15. Heb. 5.
7.

30. Things proper to the body are ascribed unto the soul, as hunger and
thirst, to declare the earnest desire of the soul; because the soul is
unknown unto us, the Scripture very often speaks of invisible things by
visible, and shadoweth spiritual by corporal.

31. A hyperbole is sometimes in Scripture, this kind of speech expresses more
then can be signified, by the proper acceptance of that speech it increases
the truth, as Genesis 13. 16. and 15. 5. The meaning is no more then that his
posterity shall be very great, as Genesis 17. 4. so Joh. 21. 25.

32. It is usual in Scripture to put ( all) for many, 1 Timothy 2. 3. Mat. 3. All
Jerusalem, and Mat. 4. 23. All diseases; So on the other side, many is put for
all, as Romans 5. 9. And whether all or many is meant, may be known by observing
the matter handled.

33. Nothing is for little, Joh. 18. 20. Also small and none for few, Act. 27.
33. and always for often.

34. The negative particle ( not) is often put comparatively and respectively,
not absolutely and simply, as Hosea 6. Not sacrifice, viz. rather then, or not
sacrifice in respect of mercy, see Jer. 32. 33. So not is put for seldom, Luke
2. 37.

35. The word ever or everlasting, do not properly signify eternity, in
every place where it is used, but great continuance, as Psalm. 32. 14.

36. In Scripture the word ( until) does not always exclude the time
following, but signifies an infinite time, or until, viz. eternity, 1 Cor.
15. Mat. 28. 28. Mat. 5. 26. That is to say, never, and also a certain limit
of time.

37. The copulative particle ( and) is often when it is not joined to other
matter, as Psalm. 4. Ezekiel. 2. 1. and 5. 1. And so often elsewhere: Also this
particle therefore or then, is not always illative or argumentative, Romans 8.
1. O^ it coupleth words outwardly to that which the Prophet heard inwardly.

38. The particle ( if) is not always a note of doubting, but of reasoning, as
Romans 8. 31: Joel 1. 14. Acts 8. 22. Sometimes it notes the difficulty of the
duty, and sometimes the necessity of the thing, and sometimes it is put for
doubtingly, Mat. 3. 14.

39. When a Substantive is repeated or twice mentioned in one case, it
signifies emphasis or force, as Lord, Lord; secondly, a multitude, as droves,
droves, Genesis 32. 16. many droves: thirdly, distribution, as 1 Chronicles. 16. a
gate, a gate, 2 Chronicles. 19. 5. Levit. 17. 3. a City, and a City, that is,
every City: fourthly, diversity or variety, as Pro. 20. 20. A weight and a
weight, that is, diverse weights; An heart and a heart, diverse or a double heart.

40. A Substantive, repeated in diverse cases, if it be in the singular number,
it argues certainty, as Sabbath of Sabbath, Lamentation of Lamentation, Micah
3. 4. If it be in the plural number, it signifies excellency, as Eccl. 1. 1.
Vanity of vanities, Song of Songs, Cant. 1. God of Gods, Psalm. 136. 2. King of
Kings, Lord of Lords, for most high and excellent.

41. Repeating of an Adjective, and of a Substantive, sometimes signifies
increasing, as Holy, holy, holy, Jehovah, Jehovah, Temple, Temple, etc.

42. A Verb repeated or twice gone over in a sentence, makes a speech more
significant, or else it shows vehemence, certainty, speediness, as to dye, by
dying, Genesis 2. And is my hand shortened in shortening, Isai. 30. 2.

43. A Conjunction doubled, does double the denial, and increase it the more;
Shall not perceive, Mat. 13. 14.

44. A figurative speech affords matter to nourish our faith, as Mat. 15. 35. 1
Cor. 12. 12. Acts 9. 4.

45. An Ironie, which is when the contrary to that which is spoken is meant,
carries with it a just reprehension of some sins, as Genesis 3. last. Judge. 10.
14. Mark. 7. 9. 1 Kings 22. 15. Go up and prosper, 1 King. 18. 27.

46. Questions do sometimes affirm an earnest affirmation, as Genesis 4. 7.
Josh. 10. 13. Joh. 4. 35. Genesis 37. 13. 1 Kings 20. 2. Sometimes they signify a
forbidding, as, Why should the Gentiles say, where is their God? Psalm. 79. 10.
also 2 Samuel 2. 22. And sometimes they argue affection of admiring, compassion,
fault-finding, and complaining, as Psalm. 8. 10. Isa. 1. 21. Psalm. 22. 1.

47. Confession and yielding, has sometime in it a denial and reprehension,
as 2 Cor. 12. 16, 17.

48. The word, behold, is not used always, or only to stir up attention, as
the report of some weighty or admirable thing, but most commonly it signifies
a thing manifest and plain, where men may take knowledge, as Psalm. 51. 6. Mat.
1. 23. and often elsewhere.

49. Doing does sometimes import believing, as Mat. 7. 2. Joh. 6. 40.

50. Negative speeches in Scripture be more vehement and forcible then
affirmative.

51. Grammar must give place to Divinity, because things are not subject to
words, but contrariwise.

52. The placing of things before which should come after, and some things
after which should be before, is frequent in Scripture.

53. We are commanded to be perfect, viz. in uprightness, shining to all
duties, for perfection in measure and degree, we are not capable of in this
world.

54. All places of Scripture have this proper to them, that they be interpreted
by the matter handled, and phrase, scope, end, which is aimed at, or by
circumstances of time, persons, places, also by precedence and subsequence, by
conferring Scripture and analogy of faith.

55. Scripture has allegories, as Gal. 4. 22, 23, 24. An allegory is ever to
be expounded according to the meaning and drift of the place where it is found,
allegorical senses are not of private motion, but to be followed where we
have the Spirit for our precedent and subsequent, by conferring Scripture and
analogy of faith.

56. Numerall words, as, 5, 7, 10, etc. notes not always a certain time, as
seventie weeks of captivity, etc. yet a certain finite time is put for an
uncertain oftentimes, as, to fall seven times, to forgive seventie times
seven, and the like. Also diverse numbers be Prophetical, as the number of
Daniels weeks, or mystical, as the number, Rev. 13. 8.

57. The Scripture often in one word saying, utters one thing plurally, and
many things singularly, as, Blessed is the man, etc. Hear, O Israel, and thou
shall not have any strange God, because God would have every one to take to
himself that which is meant of that society and kind whereof he is one.

58. In setting down numbers, the Scripture is not exact to reckon precisely,
as Luke 3. 23. Act. 1. 15.

59. It is usual in Scripture, by a part to signify the whole, as Romans 13.
Let every soul be subject, for every person, man and woman; and the whole
sometimes notes only a part, Mat. 3. 5. All Judea, that is, a great part.

60. Some wishing speeches be not so much prayers as Prophesies, foretelling
what shall be, rather then desiring they should be as imprecations against
Judas, etc.

61. The Scripture repeats the same things in the beginning and end of the
sentence, as, Psalm. 33. 10. It is done by way of explication, sometimes for
confirmation, sometimes for expressing or exciting zeal, as, Isa. 3. 9. Joh.
1. 3. Psalm. 6. 9, 10. 2 King. 9. 10. Romans 11. 8.

62. In sundry places of the old Testament, cited by Christ and the Apostles,
the sense is kept, but not always the same words, as, Romans 10. 15, 18, 19, 20,
21. and elsewhere. To teach us, that the Scripture is considered by the
meaning, and not by the letters and syllables.

63. Some places in the old Testament, which seem mere historical, containing
bare Narrations of some things done, yet are mystical withal, and have a hid
and spiritual sense; as Jonah's being in the Whales belly, holds forth Christ's
death, burial, resurrection, for it pleases God to make some histories
already done, to be types and Prophesies of things afterward to be done; as
that of Hugar and Sarah, Gal. 4.

64. The Scripture has sundry words which according to the place where they be
used, do signify diverse, yea even contrary things, as Leven, to signify the
nature of the Gospel, Mat. 13. and also heresy and superstition, Mat. 16. 6.
12. And sometime for sinful corruption, as, 1 Cor. 5. So a Lion signifies
Christ and the Devil, 1 Pet. 1. 5. Likewise Serpent is put in good part, Mat.
10. 16. and in ill part, Genesis 3. 1. Because these things have several
properties and contrary.

65. Where the text of Scripture is ambiguous, as it cannot be found out by us
after diligent search, to which sense of two or three to lean unto, that text
may be interpreted in both senses, if analogy of faith will suffer, and they
be not against the circumstances of the text, for we must not swerve from the
general scope of the whole word, faith in Christ, and love to God, and our
neighbor.

66. Many things be first generally spoken, and presently declared by
particulars, as, 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2. There be many such examples.

67. Some things in Scripture are incomprehensible by our reason, yet true.

68. Such Scriptures as have show of repugnancy, are easily reconciled by an
intelligent reader, as, 1 Timothy 2. 3. with Romans 9. Not all. By all is not meant
every one, but of all sorts and kinds of men, rich and poor, etc. See Joh. 5.
17. Genesis 2. 2. That is, from making more works anew of nothing. So Matthew
speaks of a staff which might cumber and burden, but Mark of one that might
ease and relieve a traveller, Mat. 10. 10. Mark. 6. 8, 9.

69. Some things are said in Scripture not according to the truth of the
things, but after their profession, appearance, or visibilitie and opinion of
the times, as others thought. Thus the Scribes and Pharisees are termed
righteous, Luke 15. And thus hypocrites are said to have faith, Jer. 2. 18, 19.

70. The Scriptures do not allow always the things and actions from whence
similitudes be fetched, as the manners of thieves, and unjust Stewards, and
Judges.

71. Some of Christ's works were miraculous, and proper to him as Mediator; but
Christ's moral duties were given us for example and pattern, Mat. 11. 29, 30.
1 Pet. 2. 21. 1 John 2. 6. That we should walk as he has walked.

72. By the words poor and needy in the Scriptures is often to be understood
all Gods people, poor or rich.

73. When sinful actions are attributed to God, as to provoke others to anger,
to envy, or to harden Pharaohs heart, and the like, we must know God tempts
none to sin, as Jam. 1. But he does it by delivering them over to Satan, and
their lusts, to be hardened, God often punishes sin with sin, Romans 1.

74. Sundry interrogations in Scripture, as, Romans 10. 14, 15. have the force of
a negative, that is to say, they cannot. Some again do so ask a question, as
they require and have an express answer, Psalm. 15. 1. Romans 11. 1. and 3. 12.
It is to quicken attention, or to urge more vehemently the affection, or to
prepare way for some weighty discourse.

75. The title ( God) is sometimes put absolutely, and in the singular number,
then it notes the Creator, or the essence. Sometimes it is used with an
addition, as in Exodus, I have made thee God of Pharaoh, or in the plural
number, Psalm. 84. I have said ye are Gods; and verse. 1. In the assembly of
Gods, then it belongs to the Creator, see Romans 1. 7. Sometimes essentially, as
Joh. 4. 24. God is a Spirit. So the word Father is sometimes put essentially
for the deity, Mat. 6. Our Father. Sometimes distinctly, The Father is greater
then I. Ignorance in these Rules causes errors concerning God.

76. Words of knowledge and sense do signify (besides) action and affections,
as. God knows the ways of the righteous, Psalm. 1. 6. And that he knows who
are his* 2 Timothy 2. 19. Apoc. 2. 3. is meant he knows them with love, favor,
and approbation, to reward and crown them. Also it is said, whom he foreknew,
Romans 11. 2. with 1 Pet. 1. 2. is meant his eternal love imbraceth these as his
own; for he knew barely before all reprobates and devils, and their works too,
but not with favor and allowance. Also the word, Remember, is a word of sense,
yet it often imports care, love, delight, 1 Cor. 11. Do this in remembrance
of me. (Genesis ^8.)

77. Legal and Evangelicall promises must not be distinguished by books, but
by the nature and condition of the promises; for Legal promises may be found
in books of the New Testament, as, Romans 2. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. and 10* 5
Gal. 3. 10. 12. And Evangelicall promises of grace are in the old Testament,
as, Psalm. 132. 1, 2. Jer. 32. 31, 32. etc. Observe them according to these two
rules following.

78. If promises of temporal or eternal things are propounded upon condition
of works, they are Legal, Christ only has kept the Law, and they which
believe are to claim them by this tide conveyed to them by faith in Christ.

79. All promises for this life or a better, which are made as one condition,
of believing, repenting, working, (for these are works though imperfect) are
only effects and fruits of faith, and not conditions nor causes, but are only
to declare what persons God will save; Godliness has the promises, etc. 1 Timothy 6. He that believes, etc. Joh. 3. And to understand them in any other
sense is Legal, see Psalm. 1. 1, 2, 3, 2 Cor. 7. 10.

80. Touching such places* where moral duties are commended and commanded,
they must be understood according to these Rules following; as, 1. though no
word be spoken o^ Christ, yet it must be understood that he alone is the whole
cause of every part of our salvation, Act. 4. 12.

81. All moral duties are then commended in any party, when the party which
does them, is first in Christ, and his sins pardoned through his death, as 1
Pet. 2. 5. Heb. 11. 6. Our best duties are imperfect, if in Christ accepted, if
out of Christ, men's best duties cannot cause them to be accepted.

82. All good works must have a pure heart, Gods glory for the beginning and
the end, having a conscience to God in obedience to his Word: unless the
person be accepted, the bare deed or action cannot please God.

83. Where blessedness is promised to moral duties doing, those places are
not to be considered as causes thereof, (for Christ is the cause of all) out
only to declare what persons they are which God does save; and what the Saints
duty is to do.

84. These duties must not be understood in the strictness and rigor of the
moral Law, but of a continual and unfeigned desire, purpose, and endeavor to
do them. This rule prevents scruples and fears, which weak ones have through
the sense of their wants and failings.

85. The Scriptures use to call them sons, which by nature are no sons to
them whose sons they are called, but they are sons legally, and by
succession: thus Salathiel, being son of Neri naturally, Luke 3. 27. is
legally and by succession made the son of Jechoniah, whom he succeeded in the
kingdom, as Mat. 1. 12.

86. After this manner Zedekiah or Jehoiakim, 1 Chronicles. 36. 10. and his son, 1 Chronicles. 3. 16. His brother by generation, his son by right of succession. By
this Rule the two Evangelists, Matthew and Luke are reconciled in their
Genealogy; for Luke follows the natural order, and Matthew the legal order.

87. Many things are said in Scripture by anticipation and recapitulation.

88. In Scripture some things are spoken well, when righteous things are taught
rightly, as, Repent and believe, etc. Or secondly, when evil things are taught
evilly, when wicked things are persuaded, as, To curse God and dye. Or thirdly,
when good things are uttered evilly, when some right thing is said with a
perverse mind, as Joh. 9. Be thou his Disciple. Or fourthly, evil things well
spoken, and dishonest things uttered in honest terms; as, David went in to
Bathsheba, and Romans 1. 26.

89. The Scripture speaks many things in the person of the ungodly men, whose
crooked words it does report unto us as well as their deeds.

90. That word which seems to forbid goodness, or to command wickedness, is
a figurative speech, as, Unless a man eat my flesh, etc. This is wickedness,
because the word is pure, it cannot allow any thing against honesty of manners,
or verity of faith.

91. Tropes and figures in Scriptures are not to be accounted lies; as for
Christ calling Herod a Fox, and himself a Vine, a Door, etc. Because there is
no purpose to deceive in them, but by meet resemblance to express the truth.

92. Similitudes are rather to make dark things plain, then to prove any
doubtful thing; similitudes are not argumentative, as Stewards in Joh. 15.

93. To make allegories and figures, where none are in exposition, is
licentious, dangerous, and hurtful.

94. In things that be subordinate, the affirming the one does not sollow the
denying of the other.

95. All interpretations must be fit as well as true.

96. It is a ready way to all error, to interpret Scripture by prejudice, in
favor of some opinion of our own.

97. In Scripture a betrothed woman is called a wife, Mat. 1. 20. and so of the
man, Deuteronomy. 22. 23. Because betrothing is an essential part of marriage, yet
the solemnization is necessary unto comeliness and avoiding of offense.

98. That interpretation is corrupt that builds not up in faith and love.

99. A figurative speech in Scripture does more affect us with delight, then if
the same thing were spoken plainly without figures. Psalm. 23. 1. Gods care is
set out by a Metaphor of a Shepherd, and Isai. 5. 1, 2, 3. Also see Joh. 15.
1, 2. For new things engender delight.

100. When the Scripture speaks somewhat darkly, it uses for the most part to
join thereto some plain thing in the same place to give light to it, as, Isa.
51. 1. The latter part of the 1. verse is somewhat hard, is opened in the
beginning of the second verse. So Isaiah the 1. the third verse expounds the
second; and the former part of the first verse of Isai. 53. expounds the
latter, and Romans 10. the 5. and 6. verses, expounds the 3. and 9. 13. 8. Says
the word is near, that is, the Gospel. See the like, Romans 8. 20. 31. 2 Tom. 4.
6. Romans 11. 7, 8. 1 Cor. 5. 9. yet this Rule holds not always.

Demonstrations, that the holy Scriptures, called the Bible, are of God, and
from God.
THe Scriptures are from God, or from men, they are not from men, because
neither the folly, nor the wisdom of men cannot effect such a work.

1. Because men as men cannot understand the meaning of them, nor agree upon
any meaning of them: So that it appears they are a mystery above the reach of
nature.

2. They are not from men, because they condemn that which is most excellent
in man, as the wisdom of man, etc. it being contrary to nature, for to
condemn that which is most excellent in nature, the Scriptures declare natures
wisdom in the things of God to be foolishness, and the wisdom in man
esteems the wisdom of God to be foolishness.

3. It is not from men, because the whole scope of the Scriptures tends to
destroy that which the nature of men love most.

4. Because that which the Scriptures require, is not only contrary to the
nature of man (so that men delight and choose to read any book rather then the
Scripture) therefore before men can submit unto it, they must deny themselves.
So also that which it requires, is beyond the power of men, and requires a
divine power, as the Scriptures and experience teach.

5. It is not from men, because the more any is ruled by it, obeying it, the
more such are hated and persecuted by men, which shows it came not from
nature.

6. The Scriptures came from God, because they tend to God, it being a rule in
nature, Every thing tends to its center, a stone to the earth, the waters to
the Sea from whence they came. So the Scripture ru^s to God; shows God in his
goodness, wisdom, power, love, there is in them a divine wisdom, they speak
for God, they call men to God, to be for God.

7. They are not from men, because the way of bringing them forth into the
world, was contrary to the wisdom and expectation of men, who in great matters
imployeth great* honorable, and wise men, but God takes a quite contrary
course, he chooses such who were mean and contemptible, silly tradesmen, as
fishermen, and Tent-makers, etc. to be the publishers and penmen of the
Scriptures.

8. They are from God, because God has wonderfully continued them* preserved
them strangely; first, in making the Jews, who were enemies unto Christ, and
the Scriptures, great preservers of them; also preserving them when the
greatest power has sought their destruction, by searching for them, and
burning them, etc. The like preservation cannot be declared of any writings of
men, which have had so great opposition.

9. The miracles that were wrought at the first publishing of them, (shows
them to be immediately from God*) and for the proof of this we have the
testimony of them who lived in Christ's time the Jews, who would not own
Christ, nor his doctrine, yet in their writings they confess, there was one
Jesus who did such miracles as the Scriptures declare, as Josephus; and others
testify.

10. We know the Scriptures to be from God* because we see some of the
Prophesies accomplished in our days, according to the saying of Christ, that
there shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, that shall say, I am
Christ, Mat. 24. 5. 24. There being now two or three, or more, that have said
so of themselves: Also the division foretold in Luke 12. 52, 53. From
henceforth there shall be five in one house divided, the father against the
son, and the son against the father, and the mother against the daughter,
etc. which is now accomplished in these days, for when there has been but
five persons in one family, every one of them of a several opinion concerning
Religion. The Spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter times some should
depart from the faith, giving heed to sed^cing spirits and doctrines of Devils,
1. Tim. 4. 1. etc. How many lies are now held and received for truths, so that
men dare speak against the Scriptures, deny the resurrection of the body;
others teach that men and devils shall be saved; and that the soul is
mortal; and that there is neither heaven nor hell; with diverse other opinions,
that I am ashamed to name some of them which are held for truths; This know
also, that in the last days perilous times shall came, for men shall be lovers
of their own selves; covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to
parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, trucebreakers, false
accusers* incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, traitors,
heady, high minded, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God, having a form
of godliness, but denying the power thereof, 2 Timothy 3. 1. etc. Which things
our eyes have seen come to pass, more then ever has been heard of by any
that have been before us, and are like to increase more and more. And thus it
must be that the Scriptures may be fulfilled; and if men must have a reason for
every thing in Religion; for, says one, how can the dead body eaten by another
creature be raised again? To whom I reply, God is said to be without
beginning, (and so he is, else he could not be God) but what reason can be
given, that God never had a beginning, or that God is ever present in all
places, and knows, and orders all things, yet he is so, yet I see not how
reason can reach these things, etc.

To believe the Scriptures is a work of faith, and unless the holy Spirit of
God persuades the truth of them, there will be doubting; the Lord persuade his
of the truth of the Scriptures, and of their interest in the same.

That Christ dyed not for the sins of every man in the world.
SOme men affirm that Christ dyed for all the sins of every person in the
world, and yet they shall not all be saved: To whom we reply, how can it agree
with the wisdom of God, to grant that which he knew would never profit? As for
God to give Christ to dye for the salvation of man, and yet decree to condemn
him? and does not Christ lose the end of his death, to dye for their salvation
who yet perish? or is it justice to require the payment of one debt twice? is
there remission of sins in Christ for every man, but no righteousness, no
everlasting life for them? did Christ purchase salvation, but not the
application of salvation, which is necessary to salvation? how does it appear,
Christ purchased salvation, or enough for salvation, or is the death of Christ
of an uncertain event? is Christ appointed to death, to purchase a possibility
of salvation, but not salvation it self, with the application of it, then
Christ shed his blood to save man, and yet no man saved by it; for if it
depends upon man's believing of it, why may not all of them perish as well as
any of them? And if it be so, if man please, Christ shall lose the end of his
death: but it clearly appears, that all those for whose sins Christ dyed,
are justified by his blood, and shall be saved from wrath through him; For if
when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much
more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life, Romans 5. 8, 9, 10. and B.
3. 4. (but this subject is handled at large by John Spilsbery in his book
entitled, Gods Ordinance) if the Son shall make you free, then are you free
indeed, Joh. 8. else not. But upon second thoughts, they affirm that Christ
never dyed for the sin of unbelief, and that final unbelief is the
unpardonable sin. Answ. It cannot truly be denied, but unbelief (is a not
believing Christ) which sin is most immediately and directly against Christ,
which sin is pardonable, with all manner of sin and blasphemy, which Christ
says, shall be forgiven unto the sons of men, as appears Mat. 12. 31, 32.
therefore not believing in Christ, is not the unpardonable sin also. Such as
believe, have been guilty of unbelief, which is pardoned in them, and if the
sin of unbelief, which is none of the least sins, is pardoned without the
blood of Christ to the Elect who believe, why might not all other sins in
like manner be so pardoned to them, and then shall not the blood of Jesus
Christ be shed in vain, because by their reason their sins might have been
pardoned without it, as well as their unbelief. And seeing without shedding of
blood there is no remission, Heb. 9. 22. let them declare how unbelief can be
remitted: also if the blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanses us from all sin,
then from unbelief also, 1 John 1. 7. Also if final unbelief were the sin
against the holy Spirit that is unpardonable, then it could not be committed
before death, There is a sin unto death, if thou see thy brother sin, etc. But
if a man could not commit this sin before he dye, he could not be seen so to
sin, 1 John 5. 16. which sin is described Heb. 10. 29. therefore final unbelief
is not this sin here spoken of. To conclude, Christ dyed not for the sins of
all the world; for Christ says, He lays down his life for his sheep, Joh.
10. 15. You believe not, for ye are not of my sheep, verse. 26. Yet as many as
were ordained to eternal life believed, Acts 13. 48. see Joh. 17. 2. 19. 24.
29. The end of Redemption is application, Phil. 1. 29. Joh. 6. 37. 39. The
Scripture says, He took upon him the seed of Abraham, Heb. 2. 16. and how
Abraham's seed is considered, appears Gal. 3. 16. 22. 29. Such as are Christ's,
such as believe are Abraham's seed. And seeing all Adams posterity cannot be
considered to be Abraham's seed in no sense, therefore there is no ground to
co^ceive that Christ dyed for the sins of all the seed of Adam, as they
affirm.

That all men under the Gospel, have not sufficient grace given them for
conversion.
FOr the word sufficient grace, how can we conceive that grace to be sufficient
in power, which is not sufficient in performance of the work? for seeing
conversion follows not, how is it sufficient to conversion? is that sufficient
to conversion that never attaines it? is that medicine sufficient to cure such
a disease, which being taken does not cure it? Sufficient and effectual is all
one. And seeing many were never converted, it must of necessity follow, that
sufficient grace was never given unto them; for if sufficient strength be put
to move the earth, motion must needs follow. The reason why they came not to
Christ, was because the Father did not draw them, Joh. 6. 44. and inwardly
teach them. God must give a heart to perceive, and eyes to see, for miracles
cannot do it, Deuteronomy. 29. 3, 4. Joh. 12. 37, 38. The arm of the Lord must be
revealed. They say it was because they would not believe. We answer, They
neither would nor could, the Lord says, they could not believe, Joh. 12. 39.
Therefore man cannot finally hinder his conversion; for whom God will save, no
power of man can destroy. Man in his first conversion is wholly passive, we
cannot work it in our selves, nor hinder Gods working of it, because we are
dead in sins, Ephesians. 2. 1. Col. 2. 13. Ephesians. 5. 14. and spiritually blind,
Rev. 3. 18. Ephesians. 4. 17. and 6. 8. Mat. 6. 23. Luke 4. 18. Joh. 1. 5. Acts 26.
18. 1 Cor. 2. 14. Our hearts stony and destitute of goodness, Ezekiel. 36. 26.
and 11. 19. Gods work in converting us is a raising from the dead, Ephesians. 2. 5.
Col. 2. 12. Rev. 20. 6. Joh. 5. 21. 25. A restoring the sight to the blind,
Luke 4. 18. A new birth, Joh. 1. 13. and 3. 3. Another creation of him, Ephesians. 2.
10. Psalm. 51. 12. 2 Cor. 5. 17. Gal. 5. 15. The giving of a new heart, Ezekiel. 9.
19. So that man cannot prepare himself to conversion. God regenerateth man
that he may believe. The tree must first be good, before it can bring forth
good fruit. How can they that are evil speak good things? Mat. 12. 34. It Is
an error therefore to think that man's conversion to God begins in some act man
performs, and not in a work first wrought in us by God. They allege, Isai.
55. 11. to prove the word and the Spirit goes together. Ans. Not to make it
powerful in the conversion in all. They reply, Act. 7. 51. Ye have always
resisted, etc. Ans. True; in resisting the outward means, but it cannot be
proved that they resisted in the inward work of God upon their hearts. From
Mat. 25. 29. they affirm, that he that uses nature well, shall have grace.
This text is to be understood of the gifts of the Ministry in the improvement
of them, the increase is in the same kind, nature and grace are not so. Also
it is plain, grace has not been bestowed upon such as used nature best, as
appears by the rejection of the Sidonians and Capernaits, who were better
fitted for nature. Therefore the well using of nature, is no preparation for
the receiving the Gospel. And to what end shall God give means sufficient to
work faith and repentance in such as he has not appointed to life? But all
that are given unto Christ, do in time come to him, and he brings them to
everlasting life, Joh. 6. 37, 39. To you it is given to believe, Phil. 1. 29.

Reasons why we dissent from such as hold free will.
1. BEcause it exempts the creature from being under the power of God, for that
which gives a creature power to do as he will, when God has done all he may
unto him, that does make him no instrument subject to Gods power; for they
affirm, that God does not work in his omnipotency, but leaves it to the free
will of the creature. It is one thing to be able to do a thing by persuasion,
and another to do it by power which I cannot refuse, this latter they deny.

2. It denies Gods decree to be infallible, for either God determines in such
and such cases, with the circumstances thereof, or not, if not, then he comes
short of the creature herein, for he determines such things in his matters.

3. If God does not determine and apply the creature to will and work that
which he works in the creature, then the creature is the cause why God
wills this or that, and by consequence is the cause why he wills this or
that, but the creature is not the cause, etc. Gods working this or that, must
either go before the will, and so cause it to will, or else it must follow,
accomplishing that which man's will wills, the latter makes God to follow and
tend on man's will. Also it makes the will of man to have a casual force in God
himself, as if God should say, I will work conversion, faith, etc. in such a
person if he will.

4. If liberty of will stands in such a power, free for exercising good or
evil, then Christ had not liberty of will, son he had liberty only to work
that which was good; nor has man of himself any liberty or power to come to
Christ; For, says Christ, none can come to me, except the Father draw him,
Joh. 6. 44. 37. So that they are deceived who make God by his grace to convert
us. So that he leaves it in our power, whether we will be converted or no: but
who can resist that which God works by his almighty power, Ephesians. 1. 20: when
he puts forth this his power which raised Christ from the dead? and if this
could be resisted, it were not almighty. The Apostle says, that the power did
work in him mightily, Col. 1. last, Ephesians. 3. 20.

5. Because God in his good pleasure of his will, does freely and effectually
determine of all things whatsoever he wills, he does all things according to
the counsel of his own will, Ephesians. 1. 11. All things are in the mind of God
before they are in themselves, and what he wills, he effects in his time,
and nothing is done, if he wills it not to be done, Psalm. 115. 3. and 135. 6.
Jehovah does whatsoever he pleases. The will of God is the first cause of
things; By thy will they are, Rev. 4. 11. He by willing makes the object, Jer.
1. 18. He has mercy on whom he will, Romans 9. 18. and there is no cause to be
given of his will; It Is God that works in you to will and to do, Phil. 2.
17. And such as make the will of God to depend upon the creature, as if he
believes, God wills his salvation, if he believes not, he wills his damnation,
makes Gods will mutable, and to depend upon the act of the creature; and then
it will follow, so often as the will of the creature changes, so often God
changes, and then God will do this or that if man will: But whatsoever God
wills in all things he wills effectually, so that he cannot in no wise be
hindered or disappointed; for if God should will any thing he could not
obtain, there should be imperfection in God, and if he can obtain it and will
not, how then does he will it? Isai. 46. 10. Every decree of God is eternal, 1
Cor. 2. 7. Acts 15. 18. and remains always immutable, Numb. 23. 23. Pro. 19.
21. And as many as were ordained to eternal life believed, Act. 13. 38. Whom
he predestined, them he called, Romans 8. 30. God did from eternity know every
several thing, with all the circumstances thereof, and knows how to apply the
fittest occasion to every thing, and how to effect all things: He that frames
the heart, observes all their works, Psalm. 33. 15. Isai. 44. 2. even those
things that seem to happen most freely God determines of according to his
will, of the very heart of man, Psalm. 33. 15. 1 Samuel 10. 9. 26. Pro. 21. 1. Of
a man killing another by chance, Exodus. Of the lot cast into the lap, Pro. 16.
33. Of sparrowes falling, Mat. 10. 29, 30. Of lilies, flowers, and grass of
the earth, Mat. 6. 28. 30. Yea of all creatures and things, Joh 38. Psalm. 104.
Isai. 45. 7. Jer. 14. 22. That the bones of Christ should not be broken. By all
which it appears, the will of God determined the certainty of the event. And
if God should not determine of all things, the will of God should not be simply
and universally the first cause; and to deny him to be the first cause, implies
that there are two first beginnings, or more then two, which cannot be truth.
And for any to say, that man has power to resist all God can work for his
conversion, is to put grace in man's power, (and not man's will under the power
of grace) is to say, that man is able to frustrate Gods counsel concerning his
conversion, and power to resist all that God can work herein, is to affirm,
that man has power to frustrate Gods counsel; and if it be so, will it not
follow that man has power to make God a liar? If God by his omnipotent power
inclines the wills of men whither he wills, then he has them more in his
power then man has; then his will decreeing is the cause necessity follows,
and the will of the creature is not the cause of the necessity of things. The
Scriptures declare that God works all things after the counsel of his will
(not man's will) and made all things for himself, Pro. 16. 4. Isa. 43. 6, 7.

Object. Then you take away the liberty of the will, if man have no power to
do otherwise.

Ans. 1. That which does (not having power to do otherwise) from second
causes, compelling it so to do in that it is not free: Gods will in himself
is the first cause of all things, and this omnipotent will of God does
determine the creature.

2. Men ground the freedom of will falsely, for the freedom of will as it is a
faculty voluntary or elective, does not require this indifferency of the
inclination in exercise, for it is bound by Gods decree, so as not any thing
can be done but what he has determined, yet nothing can satisfy some, unless
it be granted, that they have power of will to cross Gods decree.

3. If the cause why God chooses me (and not another) is because I will, etc.
then it is not merely from his will, and then you deny the freedom of Gods
will. Also if a man has liberty of will to resist Gods will and work, so as
God shall not convert him, it will follow that when we are converted, we
convert our selves, which is contrary to the Scriptures, as, Psalm. 51. And do
not they give the Scriptures the lie, that say the will of an unregenerate man
may be free to righteousness, will it, and embrace it when it is proposed: But
if a seeing eye were in darkness, it could not discern any thing, how much
less shall the blind see? By nature we are blind, Rev. 3. 17, 18. We are
darkness, till we be made light in the Lord, Ephesians. 5. 8. Darkness cannot
comprehend the light, Joh. 1. 5. The natural man cannot receive the things of
the Spirit, for they are foolishness to him, 1 Cor. 2. 14. Therefore the
Saints pray to God to reveal to them the knowledge of Christ, and to inlighten
their eyes by the Spirit of wisdom and revelation, Ephesians. 1. 17, 18: Man's will
being wholly inthralled into sin, as appears Romans 6. 20. and 8. 6. The
carnal mind is enmity to God, it is not subject to the Law of God, nor can
be; how then can it will, desire, and receive grace by nature? As God commanded
Pharaob to let Israel go, yet he could not, for God hardened his heart that he
could not be willing, Joh. 12. 39. with Romans 11. 32. they confess, that
unless God give faith, it is impossible for men to believe; so then the reason
men do not believe, is because God does not give them faith, Phil. 1. 29. But
to what purpose is it for God to give Christ to dye for men's sins, seeing as
they confess, they shall have no benefit by him unless they believe, and that
they cannot do without God, and God does not give them faith (if he did, they
could not but believe) what great love is this which is showed to them? The
substance of those famous, or rather infamous opinions of ours, of such as hold
free will, and that Christ dyed for the sins of all Adams posterity, is that
God wills the salvation of all men, but he is disappointed of his will. Those
whom God will save by his antecedent will, he will destroy by his consequent
will: that God does seriously intend the salvation of all persons, yet
nevertheless, he calls men by a means, and time, that is, not apt, nor fit,
by reason whereof those who are so called, do not follow Gods calling. That
faith is partly from grace, and partly from free will; that God is bound to
give all men power to believe. They distinguish between the obtaining of
salvation, and the application of salvation; The first, they say, is for all;
The second is only for them that believe, but the application of salvation is
neither willed, nor nilled to men. That man may determine and open his own
heart, and receive the word of God; That the reprobate may be saved; That the
number of the Elect is not certain; That the decree of Reprobation is not
peremptory; And that a Reprobate may convert himself; And that faith is not
of-meere grace. They bring in God speaking thus; I decree to send my Son to
save all who shall believe; but who and how many they shall be, I have not
determined, only I will give to all men sufficient power to believe, but he
shall believe who will himself: I will send Christ to dye for the sins of
many, whom I know it shall not be effectual at all unto, to whom I will never
give faith, and notwithstanding Christ has satisfied for all their sins, yet
they shall suffer my wrath for them for ever.

That God did not elect for foreseen Faith.
WE grant God knew all that ever was, is, or shall be, but we deny that God
did elect to life any for any thing he did foresee in them; for if God should
look out of himself to any thing in the creature, upon which his will may be
determined to elect, were against his al sufficiency, as if he should get
knowledge from things we do, implies an imperfection of knowledge, and of
will, if he should see some thing in us before he can determine, as if God were
in suspense, saying, I will choose this man if he will, I will upon foresight
of my condition absolutely choose him. To say, I will elect (...), if they
believe, is a conditional election, and if they can do this without God, then
God is not omnipotent; if they say, he will give them faith to believe, then it
is all one with an absolute will, as I elect to life, and I will give these
faith; Far whom he predestinateth, them he calls, etc. Romans 8. It seems God
wills our salvation, if we believe, that is, he wills the having a thing on a
condition, that he will not work, and then it is impossible, unless the
creature can do something that is good, which he will not do in him, or on a
condition, which he will work, and then he works all he wills, or on such
a condition as he sees the creature cannot perform, nor himself will not
make him perform; and this were frivolous. Also to say God decreed to send
Christ to save all, if they will believe, I see they neither will nor can,
therefore I will condemn them. Joh. 12. 39. God has shut up all in unbelief,
as, Romans 11. 32. therefore they could not believe, because he has blinded
their eyes, and hardened their hearts, that they should not see with their
eyes, nor understand with their hearts, and be converted, Joh. 12. 39, 40.

Concerning Infants Baptism.
SOme reasons why we dissent from it. 1. Because we find no command nor
example in the word of God, that any infants were baptized, and we are
forbidden to presume above what is written. And if we should admit of any one
thing in the worship of God which we find no warrant for in the Word, we
should be forced by the same reason to admit of many, yea, any invention of men.

2. Because God requires that such as are baptized, should first be made
Disciples; Believe and repent, etc. Mat. 28. 19. Acts 8. 12, 13. 36, 37, 38.
Acts 2. 38. 41. Mat. 3. 6. Mark. 1. 4, 5. Acts 10. 44. 47, 48.

3. Because Christ in his Testament, which is his last will, the Legacies
therein contained are given to such as believe, and to none else, Gal. 3. 6, 7.
14. 23. 29. Romans 8. 17. and 14. 11, 12. These are the heirs of the kingdom of
Christ, with the privileges thereof, Jam. 1. 18. 1 Pet. 2. 23. Joh. 1. 12, 13.
1 John 3. 9. 10. Those that believe are the seed of the righteous, and of the
promise, Isai. 43. 5. with Rev. 12. 17. Gal. 4. 26. 31.

4. Because the matter of the Church of Christ ought to be Saints, living
stones, as, 1 Pet. 2. 5. 9. Ephesians. 2. 19. to 23. and 4. 6. 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13. 25,
26, 27. Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. Joh. 4. 23. Act. 20. 28. Rev. 17. 14.

5. Because God in his word denies fellowship and communion with such as do not
believe, Joh. 3. 5, 6. 36. Heb. 11. 6. Romans 9. 8, 9. They which are the
children of the flesh, these are not the children of God, but the children of
the promise are counted for the seed. If ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's
seed, and heirs according to promise, Gal. 3. 29. For ye are the children of
God by faith in Christ Jesus, verse. 26. Those God owns for his in his word are
purchased by his blood, who are called, chosen, and faithful, 1 Pet. 2. 5. 9.
Jam. 4. 23. Ephesians. 2. 19. to 23. and 4. 16. Romans 8. 29, 30. Rev. 11. 7. Ephesians. 1.
4, 5, 6. 2 These. 2. 13, 14. 1 Pet. 1. 2. Act. 2. 47. and 13. 48. The natural
posterity of believers are not so much as in appearance such.

But because this Controversy is handled largely in several Treatises, such
as desire further satisfaction, may have recourse to them.

Some affirm, that the children of believers in Church Fellowship, are to be
baptized, which is now practiced in New England, and elsewhere. There are
three doubts to be answered.

1. What if neither of my parents, nor their parents can be proved believers?

2. Nor any members of a true visiable Church?

3. If I were baptized with godfathers and godmothers, Common Prayer Book,
Cross, and Surplice, and by a Minister made by the Bishops, all which are now
found out to be Antichristian, and the manner of Baptism was also by
springling water upon my face; concerning which the Scripture is silent: how
may I be assured God will own such a baptizing for his Ordinance, seeing also
themselves confess, that no man may lawfully baptize but a true Minister that
has a lawful calling? And although we conceive men able to preach the Gospel
may baptize, yet we do not believe God sends such to baptize, whom he has not
informed of the manner how to do it, which is not by sprinkling water on the
face, but by dipping in the River, as, Mat. 3. 16. Acts 8. 38.

That the gift of miracles is not essential in him that dispenses Baptism.
THat some of those that did baptize, did miracles we grant, and that all that
baptized did so, cannot be proved; John baptized, yet he did no miracle, Joh.
10. 41. nor Apollo, etc. And seeing that the Scriptures do not declare that
the gifts of tongues, or miracles, or laying on of hands, is to be in those
that dispense Baptism, we have no word to warrant such a restriction; men are
to administer baptism by virtue of gifts.

1. Then that gift and ministry which God in his word owns, is to be
acknowledged sufficient for his Ordinance; but some one or more of those gifts
in 1 Cor. 12. 8, 9, 10, 11. 28, 29. etc. still continue, as they confess; Ergo.

2. All the gifts of the Spirit are of the same nature, viz. spiritual, though
diverse in operation, and are of equal authority, and so to be esteemed by us,
1 Cor. 12. 7, 8, 9. 24.

3. As in the natural body, we honor and put comeliness upon those parts
which we think least honored, for our comely parts have no need; so ought we
to do the same in spiritual gifts, as, 1 Cor. 12. 23, 24. Do they so who tie
the administration to one of the gifts of the Spirit, and not to another; and
do not they who seek to honor one gift, to the dishonor of another,
dishonor all the gifts of the Spirit? For as it is in the body, 1 Cor. 12. 26.
so it is in this case; and this was the Corinths sin, as appears 1 Cor. 12.

4. We are all baptized by one Spirit, 1 Cor. 12. 13. He says not by the gift
of miracles, etc. and he that is baptized by any gift of the Spirit, is
baptized by the same Spirit, verse. 28, 29, 30.

5. If the administration of Baptism be not annexed to the operation of one
gift of the Spirit, more then to another of the same Spirit, then we may not
so annex them: but to the operation of any one gift of the Spirit, Baptism is
not annexed: Ergo: for proof, see 1 Cor. 12. 7. to 14.

6. If God works in all the operations of the Spirit, then to be baptized by
any of the operations of the same Spirit, it must be acknowledged to be the
Baptism of the same God: but the first is true, 1 Cor. 12. 6. Ergo, the latter
is true also.

7. If the Apostles might baptize, because they were Apostles, then might they
baptize in case they had not the gift of miracles and tongues, etc. For it is
one thing to be an Apostle, and another to have the gift of tongues or
miracles, as appears 1 Cor. 12. 28, 29, 30. They were several gifts, and
though they might have the gift of miracles, it is not because they were
Apostles; for they were given according to the good pleasure of his will; he
divides to every man severally as he will, 1 Cor. 12. 11.

8. If any affirm Baptism was to be administered by those who had such gifts
of miracles, etc. because those gifts were greater in operation, and so the
greater gifts: I answer, the gift of faith is greater then the gift of
miracles, for a man may perish with the latter. They confess, some of these
gifts still continue, if the rest are not, then these are the greatest now, and
so Baptism may be dispensed by him that has any of them, and if they be
ceased, might it not be, because they were Idolized above the rest of the same
Spirit?

9. It is said, that Apollo conferred the gifts of the holy Spirit by laying on
of hands, because he baptized not until he had learned the principles of
Religion, and so understood the ministry of the Spirit. I answer, it follows
not, because it is one thing to understand the ministry of the Spirit, and
another to work miracles, and confer the gifts of the holy Spirit, and
speak with tongues, etc. As it is one thing to learn the doctrine of
Baptism, and laying on of hands, and the resurrection of the dead, as Heb. 6.
2. and another thing to have the gifts, and to confer them by laying on of
hands; it is one thing to learn and believe the resurrection of the dead, and
another to raise the dead.

10. They affirm, that those that believe in truth, are of the body of which
Christ is the head, and that they are of the Church, and that many now believe.
Whence I also infer, those who are of the Church of Christ, they have the
power of Christ, because Christ is theirs, and Christ and his power are never
separated, Mat. 28. 20. Ergo, they have the power of Christ, as, 1 Cor. 3. 21,
22. Therefore they have authority to administer the Ordinance of Christ.

They grant, many have right to Baptism by the free gift of God, and the blood
of Christ. Ans. Be it so. I cannot believe that God gives his a right to any
thing that would do them no good; and if the enjoying the Ordinance be good,
how can we think that God so orders it, that they cannot come by it? Psalm. 34.
Christ purchased no privilege for his, which they may be as well without; is
not Gods power as great as his love? and as the Communion of Saints, Baptism,
and the Supper, are the privileges of the Saints, given them in love, so God
has appointed a way for them to enjoy them, and so to affirm, holds forth as
much wisdom and love in God to them; as to say, God has given them a right to
such privileges, but has not afforded them any way, or means for them to
come by them, that they might enjoy them. But this subject is handled at large
in John Spilsberies Book, entitled, Gods Ordinance. It is foretold that
Antichrist shall come with signs and wonders, as, Mat. 24. 23, 24. and 2 These.
2. 9, 10. We are not to look for Christ to come in this way, yet it may be
said of some, Except ye see signs and wonders (to sense) ye will not
believe, Joh. 4. 48.

OBSERVATIONS AND EXPERIENCES.
Of the attributes of God.
THey are fountains of comfort, and rocks of strength to his, and those that
eye them, live comfortably upon them.

Of affections.
The affections do often persuade the judgment.

Our affections often deceive our selves, and others, and go for spiritual,
when they are natural.

In our greatest earnestness, we have most cause to examine our hearts and
affections.

All the disquietnesse and distempers within us, and by us, is occasioned by
the want of bounding and well ordering our affections.

Our affections of joy and sorrow will exceed their bounds, unless they be
forced.

When the object is spiritual, and the motive is spiritual, the affection is
spiritual.

If our affections, anger, grief, joy, etc. do fit us to pray, they are
spiritual, else not.

Our affections come far short of that which we think we have in our
judgments.

Our affections declare to us what we love.

We have many occasions of doing good, but we often want hearts and affections
to improve them.

The quickness of our affections depends much upon the spirits of our bodies.

If our affections were answerable to our apprehensions of God, etc. they would
destroy our bodies, because they could not bear it.

Of actions.
That which is the ground, cause, and end of a man's action, in that he lives,
whether it be God or self; in those actions that concern our selves we often
exceed in, but such actions as are for God chiefly, we are hardly drawn unto,
but easily drawn from.

If Satan cannot corrupt the action, he will endeavor to corrupt the judgment
and affection.

Many conceive that some of those things God commands, are needless, but it is
a great error.

Of afflictions.
Afflictions are little, light, short, and seasonable, though they often seem to
be many, great, and long.

Affliction breeds patience, humbles and mortifieth self, teaches a Saint
experience, and sends him the oftener to God.

God is always present with his, yet in affliction they least see him, by
reason they look so much to the affliction, if oppressed with it, but some see
God best in afflictions.

God is as sweet and may be as much enjoyed in adversity, etc. as in
prosperity; not any affliction could trouble a child of God, if he knew
wherefore God did send it.

Of assurance of the love of God.
He that has assurance of Gods love, can trust himself with God in any estate
and strait.

He that has assurance of the love of God, can part with any thing for God.

Of Christ.
Christ is sweet in meditation, more sweet in contemplation, most sweet in
fruition.

Union with Christ is equal alike to all who have union with him; and union
with Christ is the greatest happiness and honor a believer can enjoy.

Such as have union with Christ, should spare no cost for him, although no cost
of ours can procure him.

Christ's servants are for the most part poor, and they appear to the world
very silly and contemptible.

Of corruption.
Corruption cannot be reformed.

Corruption neither will nor can subdue corruption.

Of Counsel.
There is much safety in many counselors, who are wise and faithful.

Such as follow their own counsel, do often prove burdens to themselves and
others.

Of Creatures.
The creatures are full of emptiness.

The reason why we are so subject to be drawn away with the creatures, is
because we see not the emptiness of them.

We often love creatures more before we had them, then when we had them, because
we expected more from them, then was in them.

All things below are fading, part we must with them, and with life also ere
long.

So much as the creature takes away in parting, so much our life was in it.

He is not troubled at the coming and going of the creatures, when the heart is
fixed on God.

The love of creatures hinders us in good things, but the wise use of them do
much further us.

A child of God uses many things spiritually, which others use carnally.

God often bestows abundance of outward things upon some, not for themselves,
(for they need them not) but that they might supply the wants of others; and
many of them keep them for themselves.

Concupiscence.
Concupiscence is strong and raging, and hardly tamed, yet it is to be attained
with difficulty.

Comfort.
We often seek comfort in creatures, which have no power to comfort; all my
comfort is in Christ, if I live, he will provide for me, if I dye, he will
receive me.

Custom.
Form and custom are deadly enemies to spiritualnesse.

Custom without truth, is but an old error.

Custom so shuts men's eyes, that they cannot see the true visage of things.

Custom makes hard things easy, and bondage no burden, and adds delusion to
blindness.

The rich observe customs, but the poor pay dear for them, for they are
starved by them; if that which is spent at burials were wisely bestowed upon
the poor, it were far better: and so in other needless customs.

Of Conscience.
Sinning against conscience exceedingly hardens the heart.

Conscience can see best in darkness, and speak most lowdly in silence.

Conscience is a very tender thing, a small thing will trouble it, but a blind
conscience will swallow up any thing.

The natural conscience will be satisfied with the outside of a duty.

Crosses.
Crosses are not pleasing to the flesh, but profitable to the Spirit.

The more crosses a Saint has, the more they do him good, and is the more
like Christ.

Great crosses are good physic for great stomachs.

Contentment.
Earthly contents are present to our sense.

No earthly thing can give content.

Joy in God breeds content.

So much as we deny our selves, so much contentment we have.

Contemplation.
Divine contemplation, makes us high in thoughts, and rich in expectation.

Contemplation of Gods free love, and the souls interest in it, does revive,
raise, and enlarge the soul.

To contemplate on the things above, is most pleasant of all things to them who
have tasted the sweetness of them.

Covetousness.
Such as are not contented with that they have, are covetous.

Distrust of God causes covetousness, which is the root of all evil.

So much as we are discontented with our estates, so much covetousness there
is in us.

Covetousness does us and others more hurt then we are aware of.

Such as think themselves least covetous, are most covetous.

A child of God knows not how to be revenged upon his self for his
covetousness of the things of this world.

Contraries.
Every contrary, the more it is resisted, the more it appears.

Deadness of spirit.
Deadness of heart is an enemy to action: he that will support diligence, must
support cheerfulness: deadness is the grave of many graces.

Such as come to God unchearfully, often return unthankfully.

Spiritual deadness, is a great grief to a child of God.

Delays.
Delays a rise from sloth.

The more we delay, the more we may.

By deferring we presume upon that we have not, and neglect that we have.

To morrow, to morrow, cozens many a man.

Death.
Death has something to say to every man, and would feign be heard, but men
are not at leisure.

Every man must dye.

The day of death is the first day of life.

He whose hopes are in heaven, is not much afraid of death.

Death is to him no misery, whose hope is in eternity.

Death when it seems to dispossess a Saint of all, it possesses him of all
things.

Such as are spiritually dead, are not aware of it; they only mind and savor
the things of the flesh.

Difficulties.
Difficulties are discouragements; and handsome excuses are welcome to a
sloathfull heart.

Love will carry on through all difficulties, and to undergo all manner of
torments.

Dreams.
An evil dream shows some evil that prevails in the heart.

By dreams God may foreshew some sin to come, which we are in danger to fall
into, which we are not afraid of.

Self-denial.
They live the sweetest lives that most deny themselves.

There are very few that do deny themselves, but many can deny Christ, and his
truth.

Self may be denied a little in one kind, if it may please self much in
another.

Distractions.
Distractions of mind in duties, is either from our minding other things, or
resting in our own strength, or from a not serious setting our minds on the
thing propounded by us; for that which the heart is thoroughly set upon, it is
so attentive to it, that it can be present to no other thing at that instant,
especially to hinder the thing in hand.

The want of a wise ordering and dispatch of business causes a great
distraction in men.

Duties.
It is no wonder some do so much, because they expect heaven for what they do.

Such duties as flow not from faith and love, are legal and slavish.

Many will own and confess their duty in the general, that will wholly deny
it in particular, especially when it concerns themselves.

A believer, as he is a believer, he does fetch all from God, refer all unto
God, and do all for God.

Examples.
The examples of men is not to be any rule to walk by.

Men's example is very forcible, when it is universal.

The worst examples are most observed.

Excuses.
When we have sinned, Satan and our corruptions help us to cover it with
excuses; which is to cover a lesser evil with a greater.

It is easy to frame an excuse for any evil.

Education.
Good education does often cause an outward reformation.

Evil education is a great provocation to sin.

Excesses.
Men do too little, or too much: men love extremes; as many eat too little,
or too much; work too little, or too much.

Most men are drowned in adversity, or drunk with prosperity.

Extraordinary.
For men not to seek themselves is extraordinary.

To practice the truth against great opposition, to be the more humbled by
knowledge, and to go against custom, is extraordinary.

For a man to refuse to join house to house when he can, is extraordinary.

For the rich to take reproof willingly and profitably of the poor, is
extraordinary.

For to part with riches as freely as they were received, is extraordinary.

Ends in duties.
The end rules the means, and is above them.

A believer is ever true to his end, but he often fails in the means.

Error.
When errors prove profitable, many will embrace them.

Ignorance is the foundation of error.

It Is common for error to be called truth, and truth to be called error.

Effects.
Effects are in order to second causes, not to God, who most certainly,
necessarily, and wisely has willed them; and nothing falls out accidentally,
as referred to him whose wise intention reaches every thing.

Favor of men.
The favor of men is a vanity, yet much desired.

The favor of men is an uncertain thing, soon got, and soon lost.

Men desire the favor of men, God denies it to some, to exercise their faith,
weane them from the world, or because we perform not our duties unto them.

Folly.
Many never see their folly, until it be too late.

Fears.
Fears make the understanding weak, and the judgment dull.

Fears hinder the certainty of faith.

So much as we fear men, we forget and slight God.

Faith.
Where God gives faith, he gives trials also to exercise it.

Faith quiets, comforts, and strengthens the soul.

We enjoy Christ by faith, and not by feeling.

When faith is at the greatest, then there is the least feeling.

As our faith is, so are we encouraged to obey God.

The more faith, the less fear.

God.
Gods presence in every place is a great comfort to his.

They that live upon God alone, live most comfortably, for there is
satisfaction, and no changes, he fears nothing that can befall him, he lives
comfortably in all.

Grace.
Grace is exceeding strong (especially faith and love) to carry a man through
all.

God will exercise the graces that are in his.

The more grace any have, the more need to pray, because Satan is most ready to
tempt such.

Grief.
We cannot heartily be grieved for that sin in another, of which we make not
conscience in our selves.

It is a grief to a child of God, to speak of any good they find a want of
in themselves.

If we did not immoderately love outward things, we would not grieve at the
loss of them, nor keep such a do to get them.

Of gifts.
The greater gifts spiritual or temporal, the prouder the flesh is, and the
readier Satan is to assault.

Good.
A man may do good in the strength of a lust.

We often do least good to them to whom we owe most.

There be many good things will decay if let alone, but evil things let alone
will increase.

Parents think they do their children great good, when they can make them
rich and great in the world, they make them the greater sinners; for then they
shall have little else to do but to waste the creatures, and live in excess,
idleness, lust, pride, and oppression.

Glory.
When we think we most seek the glory of God, we too often most seek our
own.

What a man trusts in, he glories in, and what a man glories in, he trusts in,
and is confident of.

Healing.
God sometimes heals corruption by not healing it.

Hope.
The Saints hope is in heaven in God.

The natural man's hope is to get honor, fine clothes, good cheer, ease, and
pleasures.

Hearts.
Many men's brains deceive their hearts.

What the heart likes best, the mind studies most.

Habits.
In acquired habits the act goes before the habit, and prepares for it, but in
infused habits it is contrary, for as we have first the faculty of seeing
before we see, so we have first the infused habit, before we exercise the
operation of it.

Humility.
One may be humbled, but not humble.

When we are content to be admonished of our faults sharply by our inferiors,
we have some humility.

Honor.
The honor of men, is a very shadow, a vanity.

The more men desire honor, the less they deserve, and the less they often
have.

Hatred.
That sin which a child of God loved most before conversion, he hates most
when he is converted.

Joy.
While we live here, we have joy and grief mixed: this life, nor our bodies
will not admit of perfect joy.

Outward joys make a great noise, but never truly heat and comfort the heart.

There is no sound joy in earthly things, they reach not the heart, but the
fancy.

In temporal things, our joy is greater then the cause; in spiritual things,
the cause is greater then the joy.

Every heart seeks joy such as it is.

Spiritual joy opposes carnal, and carnal opposes spiritual; the more we
relish heavenly, the less we relish earthly.

Now joy is in the Saints, when they are in heaven they shall be in joy.

Ignorance.
Ignorance is the cause of profaneness, and all evil.

Devotion with ignorance breeds superstition, and Idolatry, and persecution.

Hope with ignorance causes presumption.

Fear with ignorance causes desperation.

Impossible things.
It is impossible to be conformable to Christ, and to the world; to please God,
and the world.

Of idleness.
An idle person is fit for nothing, but sin and temptation.

An idle life is much loved and entertained of most men.

Knowledge.
That knowledge that is from God, subjects the soul to God.

That knowledge that is only in the brain, is notionall, and neither subdues
sin nor Satan.

If we know good things, we cannot but love and affect them.

Love.
That love which is not constant is false.

Love is most active, when it is least known, and cannot be requited.

Love and labor go together, as our longing is to enjoy God, so is our love
to him; if we greatly love the Lord, we greatly long to enjoy him; for as our
love is to any thing, so accordingly is our endeavor to enjoy it.

Such love the way of God, who hate all things that are contrary unto it, and
practice it when it is most despised.

Such things as we love, we keep with care, possess with joy, and lose with
grief.

Live.
We live in that we mind and love, and are made like the things we love.

The most seek life in the regions of death, where it is not.

Many in this natural life have comforts few, crosses frequent, pleasures
short, and pains lasting.

Light.
Light causes them that see it to follow it.

Liberty.
We are more prone to desire liberty, then to know how to use it.

Many of the Saints abuse their liberty they have in Christ.

It is the greatest liberty to enjoy God, and to have a free heart to serve
him.

Such as plot and plead for liberty for the flesh, are very carnal.

Of losses.
There is no loss in losing for God.

What we lose for God, shall be made up unto us in God.

The benefit which follows the loss of outward things, is that they are never
troubled with them more.

Motions.
Forced motions cannot be perpetual.

Mind.
When our minds are not fixed, they rove every where, and are no where to
purpose.

Such as mind the things above, savor them, and have interest in them.

Mirth.
When men are most cheerful and merry, they are most free and bountiful.

Natural mirth ends in sadness and sorrow.

In natural mirth, when we are most merry, we are nearest to danger.

The mirth of the wicked is vanity and madness.

Mercies.
Many possess many mercies, and yet want the comfort of them.

We enjoy more mercies then we are aware of.

Occasions.
The more secret and colorable any occasion of evil is, the more men are
endangered by it.

Obedience.
Our obedience to God is most direct, when there is nothing else to sweeten the
action.

Of peace.
Men cannot give peace: until the Lord speak peace to the soul, there is no
peace.

Where there is no peace, there may be quietness or silence.

Gods people are a peaceable people.

Passion.
The causes of anger and passion, are ignorance and pride.

Promises.
The wicked desire promises for peace, and not for strength against sin.

The promises make the people of God not careless, but more fruitful and
serviceable.

There were never any ashamed that rested only upon God in his promise.

One promise from a man will please some men more then ten from God.

Of prayer.
There is no duty in Religion that is so much counterfeited as the duty of
prayer is.

Verbal prayer causes great deadness.

Some pray when they should sleep, and sleep in prayer, and pray when they
should work, but wisdom divides to each its proper time and season.

Of poverty.
The heirs of the earth are often pinched with poverty, and Saints who are
Kings lie in prison.

It is better to be poor and weaned from the world, then rich and covetous.

Men are much afraid of poverty, yet it never did any hurt.

Pride.
The proudest men are the weakest, and most troubled with discontent.

Principles.
When that which is taken for a principle of truth, is a principle of error,
the more it is relied on, the worse it is.

Pleasure.
Such as have their eyes open, see outward pleasures to be very mean things.

Sin is desired for the pleasure of it, but there is in sin more grief and
misery then pleasure.

The more carnal a heart is, the more it affects natural pleasures.

Sinful pleasure ends in sorrow.

Quietness.
When quietness is in the heart, there is not much disquietnesse in the tongue.

He can easily be at peace with men, who knows he is at peace with God.

Reports.
Such as cannot with patience bear ill reports, cannot live a comfortable life.

Such as are much joyed at good reports, will be much grieved at ill.

Often times the best suffer, (the worst reports,) because they will be no worse.

There is not a good man that can escape evil and false reports from the
wicked.

Riches.
Riches are uncertain, we must leave them, they ensnare many, but there are
but few that are drawn the nearer to God by them.

The greediness of riches are more sharpened by the having of them, then by
their wants.

Riches are the destruction of many.

Commonly the richest men do the least good to others.

Riches make many afraid to confess Christ and his truth, etc.

Religion.
It is impossible for every man to be of one Religion and Judgment, because
their lights and ends differ.

Where Religion is in truth, it is in power, and enableth a man to practice it.

A form of Religion only with riches is embraced, rather then the power of
Religion with poverty.

Most men love that Religion best, which best suits with their lusts, as,
honor, pleasure, eas^, and their bellies.

A little Religion goes a great way in rich persons.

Reproof for sin.
Those that complain, because they are reproved for sinning, show their folly.

Poor persons have a privilege above the rich, in that they are reproved.

Such as are wise count reproof a privilege.

Sin.
Many sin by omission and commission at one and the same time, and yet know
of neither.

Some sins of omission may exceed some of commission.

The beginning of sin is often by the Devils concupiscence suggesting evil
thoughts, evil thoughts cause delight, delight consent, consent ingendreth
action, action causes custom, and custom causes necessity: custom wins
strength by time, and is more fierce then nature; one sin draws on another;
grant a little, and a great deal will follow.

The more there is of the will in the acting of sin, the greater the sin is.

The more deliberation and the weaker temptation any has, and yet sins, the
greater the sin is.

According as men's sight of sin is, so they hate it, and them selves for it.

The less sensiblenesse of sin there is after sin is committed, the
greater is the hardness of heart.

Ignorance and unbelief, and want of consideration and meditation, and not
shunning the occasion of sin, causes much sin.

Such as the more they fall into sin, the more they hate it, and are grieved
for it, and the more they go to God against it with faith, they shall conquer
it.

Satan.
It is the great design of Satan to draw the Saints from God, his truth and
people, and that we neglect the means, or wholly rely upon them; in good
things he severeth the means from the end, in evil he separateth the end
from the means.

Sorrow.
It is the nature of sorrow to bring the soul down.

Senses.
Our senses every day decay by little and little, though we take not notice of
it.

Truth.
Jesus Christ is the truth, and his word is truth.

No man can teach himself or another the mystery of truth.

Whatsoever is without, or against the Word, is not truth.

That which the most men do is not truth.

The authority of men is not always for the truth.

That which carries the greatest show of humility is not truth.

Neither the learned, nor the unlearned, can know the truth, until God shall
please to teach it them.

Man's reason cannot dive so deep as the truth lies.

He that is naturally wise, is least capable of divine things.

The greatest enemy that truth has, is concealment, for the more manifest
truth is, the more gloriously it appears.

If truth may have liberty to go abroad, it will quickly suppress errors.

Thirst.
Spiritual thirst is as strong as natural thirst, yea, stronger.

Time.
Time is not valued to its worth.

Time past cannot be recalled again.

Time ill spent turns to great loss, and ends in deep sorrow.

Temptations.
Temptation tri^th men's strength; he is strong that stands in strong
temptations.

When temptation is absent, a fool is wise, and the froward patient.

Those temptations are most dangerous which suits best with holy ends.

Strong and lasting temptations, are to show us our selves, and humble us.

An overmuch fearing a temptation and a weak purpose to resist it, weakeneth
us, and incourageth Satan to tempt.

When we are tempted, it is best presently to fall to prayer, and not to stand
reasoning with the temptation.

Trials.
They who are least exercised with trials, have the least wisdom and
experience.

Trouble.
There is nothing but trouble under the Sun.

The less trouble men expect, the more they often meet withal.

A troubled soul cannot do good, nor receive good.

A soul cast down by self, or Satan, rests not in God, but in trouble.

Self cannot stay, nor check it self, much less recover it self out of
sinful trouble.

Usury.
To pay use when the profit is uncertain, is a means to fill men with
troubles, cares, distrust, if not with oppression.

Want.
It is a sin and a dishonor to a child of God, to say or think he shall
want, or to say, What shall I do?

A child of God never wants, though he may think he wants; for he is
possessed of all things.

If hands, estate, or friends fail, God will send supply some other way.

He that suffers want contentedly, is a strong man.

Of weeping.
Excess in weeping, is against nature, reason, and Religion.

Many make a God of other tears.

World.
Such as are full of the things of this world, are empty enough of spiritual
things.

According as the world is sweet unto us, the things of God are bitter to us.

The world is a deadly enemy to spiritualnesse.

He that is full of worldly business, needs no other troubles.

Will.
Many prefer their wills before their lives; for when they are crossed, they
wish for death.

When we want a will to do any thing, we pretend want of power, and say, I
cannot.

To will is natural, but to will well, to will spiritually, is supernatural.

Those virtues that grace the will, as, love, grace, mercy, justice, are more
glorious then those that grace the understanding, as power and wisdom, etc.

Weakness.
The wisest Saint is most sensible of his own weakness.

Weakness with watchfulness will stand, when great strength with
selfeconfidence fails.

Watchfulness.
Spiritual watchfulness is a special grace of God, a chief part of
godliness, a special help to holiness, and a great privilege of a Saint.

Because the Saints watch no more, they fall so much.

There is no good order in their lives, who watch not.

A wonder.
Natural men wonder at worldly and sensual things.

It is no wonder for a natural man to seek himself in all things.

Zeal.
Every man is zealous, either for God or himself.

These few Experiences, I present unto thee for a taste, though many more might
be added, which I leave thee to find out by experience; also considering there
are many sweet experiences recorded in the Scriptures, especially in the
Proverbs and Ecclesiastes, and also in other places in the Bible, to which I
refer thee.

GRAVE COUNSELS.
Concerning actions.
LEt all your actions have a good foundation, a word of God to warrant them,
else they are evil: to do things not required by God, is the error of the
wicked, 2 Pet. 3. 17. God will say, Who required this at your hands? as, Isa.
1. 12. consider Deuteronomy. 12. 32. Ephesians. 4. 14. First look that what ye do be
lawful, next consider that it be expedient, the circumstances of time, place,
persons, must be wisely considered: to a good action is required that all the
circumstances be good also: Next, look to your ends, why ye do what ye do,
for the end and scope of an action conduces to the being of it: if two duties
come together, do the chiefest first, unless works of mercy and necessity
hinder, and look to do every duty required of thee; to do one, and neglect
another, is uncomely; give each duty its due respect; and look with what
affections ye do what ye do: serve the Lord with the best, and serve him
fully for measure and degree; he that does these things, his conversation is
beautiful and savoury.

Concerning the judgment and affections.
Ever suspect your judgment and affections when the cause concerns your
selves.

Often call your affections to account.

When your affections exceed their bounds, ask thy soul the reason of it.

Let not your judgment be taken captive by your affections.

Make not your affections known in company as little as may be, unless the
cause be extraordinary.

Concerning afflictions.
Slight not affliction, nor let it overpresse thee, it is appointed, 1 These. 3.
3. Romans 8. 29. There is a fruit of the least cross, look more at the fruit
then deliverance from the cross, the longer it continues, the more thou may
get by it.

Labor to know the cause of every affliction.

All that are the Lords, are to stay themselves in the love of God, and attend
upon him for the time, manner and measure of their deliverance.

Bondage.
Esteem that bondage that causes thee to sin, or keeps thee from God.

Conscience.
Conscience is a very tender thing, and must be tenderly used.

Prize and preserve a tender Conscience, and hearken to the noise of it.

Take heed ye wound not your Consciences to please your affections.

Creatures.
Use the creatures so as thou be not unfitted by them to serve God and man.

God gave not the creatures to hurt us.

Companion.
In the choice of a companion consider what soundness of judgment there is,
what knowledge and sensiblenesse of their own inward corruption, and whether
they speak of others infirmities with compassion; never trust him who will
conceal any sin he sees in thee.

Crosses.
Be not offended at crosses, they may do thee much good, and let out sinful
self.

Concupiscence.
To avoid concupiscence be temperate in all things, diet, sleep, apparel,
recreation, etc. And fear thy self, watch thy senses, and avoid the occasion
of it, as, persons, times, places, be frequent in fasting and prayer, and look
up to God for strength against it.

Desires.
We had need to use means to moderate our desires to things below.

We should rather endeavor to make our desires equal to our estates, then to
make our estates equal to our desires.

Excuses.
Be afraid to cover over any evil with an excuse.

Of errors.
If you would be kept from errors, pray to God, search the Scriptures, and be
well grounded in the principles of truth.

Of others falls.
Let the consideration of the many great falls the Saints have had, cause thee
to fear thy self.

A friend.
Esteem him thy friend that would hinder thee in sin.

Grief.
Discover not thy griefs to many, and choose such as are able and willing to
help thee.

The Lord is loving and pitiful, able and willing to help; it is best to
complain to him.

Of good.
To do good, we live therefore, think not much of doing a little good, though
it be with great trouble.

Esteem not that to be the chiefest good, that may be taken from thee.

Concerning thy estate.
Judge not thy estate by thy knowledge, affections, and actions, but by the
principle.

Men.
Be sure ye try men well, and have good experience of their faithfulness,
before ye trust them with much.

Reproves.
Receive reproves willingly and profitably.

Reproaches.
Slight not reproaches, he that is not guilty, may be guilty in part, or
has been, or is in another kind, etc. so it is but a mistake, thou may be
guilty in the same kind, it may be sent to humble thee, and give thee warning
of the same sin.

Of success.
Judge not of the goodness of thy action by the success, but judge thy
success by the goodness of the action, etc.

Of sin.
Judge not sin always by the matter or act of it, but by the rule and
greatness of the authority of the commander that forbids it, and bring in all
the circumstances and aggravations of it.

Of speech.
When thou speak of thy self, speak modestly, without vanity and boasting.

Time.
Redeem the present time to do good, depend not upon the time to come, which
is uncertain, and not at thy disposing.

Counsel to the unmarried.
1. Think not of marrying, until ye have first sought God by earnest prayer,
for strength and contentedness to live a single life.

2. Use such means as may best enable and fit thee for a single life: observe
a wary and temperate diet, company, fasting, and prayer, meditation on God,
etc. diligence in thy calling: it may please God by these, and the like means,
thou may attain the gift of chastity.

3. Be informed of the conveniences and inconveniences of a married life:
consider whether you be able and willing to drink of the bitter cup of
discontents, which the married often drink of: what cares and burdens attend
that state.

If upon the use of means for some space you find God inclines your heart to
marry, fear nothing, but cast thy care upon God, and be as wise as thou can,
and venture upon a wife or husband.

1. Pray to God to give thee a wife, (or husband) that may be a meet help for
thee; a virtuous wife is called a gift of God, the crown of her husband;
crowns are precious and honorable; happy is he that has such a crown; Her
price is far above Rubies, Pro. 31. 10. No jewel is to be compared unto her;
she is worth the asking.

2. Do nothing rashly, snatch not up the first that comes to hand, prove she
well or ill; she may please well for a moment, and be a thorn in thy side for
ever after.

3. If thou be the Lords, marry in the Lord, love such as the Lord loves:
that which is desirable in a man is his goodness, Pro. 19. 22. So in a woman:
men seek wealth and beauty, though they have no Religion, but these things
cannot supply the want of Religion: great portions, and great stomachs, high
spirits, costly fashions, and great expenses often go together; external things
will quickly blast, and the most resolved loves vanish quickly, when the fuel
of love fails.

4. Choose one that i^ suitable to thee; first, Suitable in Religion; how can
there be amity and love, where diverse Religions are, seeing no opposition is
so strong as that which is for Religion? Consider Deuteronomy. 22. 11. Job 1. 8, 9. 2
Cor. 6. 15. apply it. Secondly, Suitable for age, some mary as old again,
others as young again, etc. But unsuitable matches are dishonorable. Thirdly,
Sutablenesse in dispositions are to be looked to, lest ye smart for it;
because ye are not made of brass but of flesh, a few odious qualities will in
time wear off much doting delight. Fourthly, Suitable in respect of condition
of life, and ability of body, to labor and fare as thy ability requires,
such wives as must fare and wear that which is costly, and so weak not able
to labor, are fit for such as can bear it, in respect of their estates and
minds.

5. Take heed of wronging your self, or any others; take heed what ye
promise, if ye give your promise, then your liberty is gone, and another is
added to you, it may be to your perpetual grief, and make as much conscience,
not only of keeping your promises with others, but take heed lest ye express
your self in such a way as shall justly cause it to be interpreted love in
that kind. A man may make a profession of love, and yet so express himself
as he shall not be engaged by promise, (when by his practice he is) and so at
pleasure depart, to the great wrong and hazard of the other party, without
giving any sufficient reason of it; the wrongs in this kind are fit to be
severely punished by the Magistrate for an example to others.

6. Marry with parents consent, Deuteronomy. 7. 3. 1 Cor. 6. 36. unless they extend
their authority to the hurt of soul and body: in some cases the want of
parents consent hinders not, as in case the party has been married before, or
Numb. 30. 4. or Exodus 22. 16.

Mutual counsel to husbands and wives.
1. HAve you both a high esteem of marriage, if you prize not marriage, who
shall? you should preserve the honor and comfort of marriage, and say, What is
equal to marriage for the being and well-being of life, it is the prop of
mutual content, the aid of nature, the perfection of health, wealth, beauty,
honor, experience, no condition is sweet where marriage supplies it not, it is
the preservation of chastity, the pillar of the world, and of the Church, the
glory of peace, and the life of the dead; nothing is so precious in worldly
respects as that for which the husband loves and desires the wife, and she
him; no union so strong as this, no joy in any outward union so contentfull as
this, etc.

2. Nourish love, and abhor all occasions to the contrary, strive who shall
love each other with the most cordial affection; love is given to both, to
make the miseries of marriage tolerable, therefore live and love, and cease not
to love, till ye cease to live: have a care ye lose not your first love: and
so demean your selves, as may best draw forth each others heart in all love
and amity, and ever be ready to express love and sympathy, avoiding a peevish
carriage, which provokes to weariness, impatience, and discontent.

3. Bear with each others infirmities, fret not, cavil not at them, cover
them with tenderness: If you have a bad bargain, make the best of it you can,
now it is too late to complain; impart not your discontents to strangers, ask
no counsel of them but with a free consent of both, when necessity requires
it. Observe it, such as complain to others, they show their clamorous and
turbulent spirits, and want of wisdom and love; if thy husbands or wives
virtues be but small, make them great by contemplation, and put upon them the
great value of their worth: an eying each others infirmities, deads and kills
the affection of love.

4. Observe each others tempers to prevent discontents, and preserve your first
love.

5. If there fall out a difference between you, be both freely willing the word
of God may decide it, and to submit unto it, fear breaches, and know a small
spark of difference may increase a great flame, if not timely prevented.

6. Be both chaste, and love each others company, and be faithful each to
other; let one purse, one bed, one house, serve them that are but one.

7. Be industrious and provident, that neither of you may want.

8. Hinder not each other in serving of God.

9. Tender each others good name.

10. Find as little fault one with another as possibly you can, and then
express them not in anger, but in love, and when ye be both alone.

Counsel to the wife.
1. LOve your own husbands, and express your love in a reverend, amiable and
modest manner, in thy husband thou may behold authority, government,
forecast, soveraigntie; from man thou first receivedst thy being, from thy
husband thou enjoyest countenance, protection, direction, honor, love, etc.

2. Honor your husband inwardly in your heart, and outwardly in your actions,
esteem him as he is your superior and head, and yield to him, let your will be
subject to his, you must have no will but his, if he speak the word, you must
not contest, but in humility yield, if he be angry, be ye silent, set before
you what the carriage of the Church ought to be to Christ, to be a pattern for
you, and know where love is, duties are frequent, and acted with ease and
delight.

3. Obey thy husband; obedience is a hard word, many a proud stout stomach
neither will nor can yield their necks to the collar of subjection in every
thing; the Lord knew how it would come to pass, that both husband and wife
would both have their wills, though each were quite contrary to the other,
therefore God thought fit to order it as he would have it, that the wife should
yield to her husband, and be obedient to him in every thing; Wives submit your
selves unto your own husbands, as unto the Lord; for the husband is the head of
the wife, even as Christ is the head of his Church, etc. Therefore as the
Church is subject unto Christ, so let the wives be unto their own husbands in
every thing, Ephesians. 5. 22, 23, 24. Therefore know, O woman, whosoever thou art,
rich or poor, that God has commanded you to be subject to your husband, and
if you do it not, God will call you to an account for it one day, though it
may be, your husband be contented to let it pass, in the fear of God consider
it, and tremble at the thought of living in the breach of so plain and clear
a command; consider Christ is the author of salvation to all that obey him,
Heb. 5. 9. and no more; therefore go to God for humility and self-denial,
to stoop to thy husbands command (if it be lawful) 1. Because God has
commanded it, and though marriage be an equal state, yet the carriage of both
is not to be the same, therefore let thy love to thy husband be with a loyal
sweet subjection, without slavery, and thy obedience shall be a blessing to
thee, and an increase of thy inward peace and joy; also thou shall avoid many
quarrels, envy, and discontents, which others endure, also by thy obedience
thou shall honor God, and be a good pattern to others to do so also.

Counsel to the Husband.
1. COnsider the command of God is upon you, that ye love your own wives, and
be not bitter unto them, let love descend, first from thee, she is a deserving
object of love, she has forsaken all for thee, and perhaps is shiftlesse
without thee, great are her burdens and pains in conception, and bearing
children, etc. Let thy love to her be full and free, love her in some sense
better then thy self, and let thy love be conveyed to her with royalty
without tyranny: Husbands love your wives, even as Christ also loved his
Church, and gave himself for it, so ought men to love their wives as their own
bodies; he that loves his wife, loves himself, Ephesians. 5. 25. 28. For no man
ever yet hated his own flesh: they two are one flesh, 29. 31.

2. Let her share with thee in the benefit of thy (graces, gifts,) estate, if
thou have plenty, let her have plenty also, she shall be sure to share with
thee in the ill, in poverty, sickness, disgrace, and other miseries, oh
therefore let her share in thy plenty also; let her have for delight as well as
thy self, make her cause thy own, and do so as thou would be done unto, and
give it her freely without asking. Some men have much, and spend much upon
their pleasures, but allow their wives just nothing; such give their wives
ground enough to question their loves to them, because love is bountiful where
there is plenty; why should not part of that which is yours be hers, for her
necessity and comfort?

3. Ease thy wife as much as thou can, though she be bound to obey thy
command, yet it is like you need not command so many things, or not so
frequently, and so the burden of subjection may be much lighter to her; if she
be willing to obey, spare her; if unwilling, forbear her, that she may sin
less. Say not, that thou will make her, be not too confident of thy strength
to mould thy wife into subjection, as wise and strong as thou art, could not
do it, (only God can make a stout stomach to yield to a weak and wilful
Governor) Victory is not always to the strong, Eccl. 9. 11. It Is ill grapling
with a headstrong woman, she may be weak in body, but strong in mischief;
the tongue is an unruly member, no man can tame; be not so mad as to strike thy
crown, nor cast it in the dirt; if she answers not thy desires, inform her
of her duty from the Scriptures, and pray to God to set it home upon her
conscience; if God be not regarded, who shall?

4. Honor thy wife, right her wrongs, suffer none to slight nor abuse her in
no kind, etc. Follow Christ's carriage to his Church, which is most loving,
meek, and sweet.

5. Provide all things needful for her, that she may live comfortably with
thee; and whether she be good or bad, you ought to do what you can to provide
means, that she may live comfortably after you in this world.

6. Dwell with her, deprive her not of the benefit of thy presence, by long
journeys, etc. unless absolute necessity enforce it, and rather err with
over-loving thy wife, then otherwise.

Thus I have thought fit to mention some few things, which so much concern the
comfort of a married life. This may be of use to some of those into whose hands
it may come, though this is more largely handled in several Treatises.

The Remedy of fears.
SOme few observations from Isai. 41. 10. Fear not, for I am with thee, be not
dismayed, for I am thy God, I will strengthen thee, yea I will help thee, yea I
will uphold thee, etc.

Obs. 1. Some things are terrible to a Saint, which he is subject to fear.

2. It is the will of God, that his people be not troubled, but to live a sweet
and quiet life, in, and upon God.

3. God is always present with his, to keep them from evil, and do them
good, though they know it not, or consider it not.

4. Fears arise in not beholding the presence of God.

5. The consideration of the presence of God, a remedy against fears.

6. I am thy God; when a child of God is at the worst, still God is his God.

7. The knowledge of an interest in God, is enough to raise a soul out of all
its fears.

8. I will strengthen thee; God is engaged by promise to help and strengthen
his.

9. The Saints should mind Gods promise, and live upon it.

10. The promise of God is enough to quiet and settle a soul from fears.

11. The weakest Saint with God shall prevail.

12. Strengthen thee; there is strength enough in God.

13. The Saints strength is God.

14. It Is in vain for men to oppose the Saints, for God is with them to help
them.

15. I will help thee; the Saints in themselves are weak, and cannot help
themselves.

16. There is no help but in God; creatures cannot help, they are vanity.

17. So much as the soul rests upon the promise of God for help, so much its
freed from fears in the greatest appearance of dangers.

18. Uphold thee; The trialls of the Saints are above their strength, they
cannot stand without God, God upholds his.

19. Strengthen, help, uphold; God applies himself suitable, and in
particular, to the wants of his people.

20. When God will preserve a man, it is not any thing that can hurt him.

From all which we may observe.

Obs. 1. That the ground of fears are ignorance, as, Psalm. 62. 11.
forgetfulness, Isa. 12. 13. and living by sense, and not by faith.

Obs. 2. That it is unreasonable, and sinful for a child of God, to fear
men, or be dismayed at any thing.

Reas. 1. Because it is against Gods command, which says, fear not, etc.

2. They have the presence of God to keep them.

3. They have an interest in God, which is a happiness beyond all miseries.

4. Because nothing can befall them, but what God appoints, who loves them
infinitely.

5. Because whatsoever befalls them, shall do them good, Romans 8.

6. The bitterness shall be but short, Romans 16.

7. Fears never do any good, but hurt; they dishonor God, his truth, and
people, and often cause an omission of duty.

8. Fear is unsuitable for a Saint, Rev. 21.

Lastly, fears are unreasonable for a child of God, because God has given
unto them many great, sweet, and precious promises, that they shall not want no
good thing, Psalm. 34. For he has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake
thee, Heb. 13. 5. Therefore they are well enough, they need not care, nor
fear, but in God always rejoice, and sing praises to him.

Now unto him that is able to do for us abundantly, above that we are able to
ask or think, be praise and glory in all the Churches of the Saints to all
ages, Amen.

A Table of some of the principal things contained in this TREATISE.
A.
What it is to feed upon ashes, 2, 3. 5. Assurance and faith differs, 82, 83.
All that have faith have not assurance, 82, etc.
B.
Christ is the true bread, 3. 5, 6. Men believe before they know it, 61. Men
are in Christ before they believe, 46, 47. What all men are to believe, 48, 49.
Such as desire to believe, have faith, 53. 101. A believers comfort, hope, joy,
should be always the same, 97, 116. The state of a believer in Christ, is a
state of perfection, 13. 113. 149. Such as see a beauty in Christ, loath
themselves, 23. 41. Man's believing procures no pardon of sin, 46, etc.
C.
Christ is enough, 132. and mind him, 112. 113. 79. 131. Christ proclaims
peace to his, 106, 107. Christ and a believer are one, 12. Christ's holiness is
the Saints happiness, 121. Christ's blood saves his, 12. 145, 147. Christ is the
way to life, 13. 36, 37, 38. Christ highly esteems of his, 136, 137, 142.
Christ being made sin for me, is better for me then if I had never sinned, 15,
16, 161. Christ dyed not for the sins of Adams posterity, 7, 8. Comfort to
all that are in Christ* 12. 65. 132 Unless Christ had dyed, man had not been
saved, 7. The Saints are to live only upon Christ, 79. The Saints comfort is
in Christ, 79. Who live upon Christ, 15. 38, 39. 79. 80. Such as are Christ's
should serve him, 153. The Covenant of grace is not made with man but with
Christ, 26. The Covenant of grace is unconditionall on man's part, 46, 47. There
is not any thing required of man to do to make him partaker of the Covenant of
grace, 46. The consolatio^s of God are to be prized, 121. The comfort of the
Saints is not to depend upon their personal sanctification, and why? 114, 115.
The confidence of a believer should be ever the same, and why, 113, 114. 121,
122. All our cares are to be cast upon God, trusting him in all estates, and
why, 129, 130. Corruption may be strong in a Saint, and why, 96, 97. 159, 160.
A man may be confident of his salvation, and yet be deluded, and why, 14, 15.
67. Grave Counsels, 363. to the unmarried, 369. To the married, 372. 375. 378.
D.
Causes of doubting, 65. 105. The fears and discouragements in many are
groundless. 3. and from the Devil, 106. It is an infirmity to give way to
any discouragement, 108. 79. We are to look to Christ, and not at
discouragements, 52. 113. There has been discouragements in many of the Lords,
87, 88, 89. Grounds of discouragements and fears, 16 No man is to despair,
158. The time of doubting is a barren time, 71. No man can deliver his soul,
and why, 12, 13. There is death in our best duties, 41. It is not any thing man
can do that can make him to be loved of God, 24, 25, 97. The Saints daily duty
and desire, 199, etc. Causes of unwillingnesse to duties, 77.
E.
Election not for foreseen faith, 320. 148. It is impossible for the Elect to
perish, and why, 140, 141. We should be content with our present estate, 130,
131. 127. Treasure up experience of Gods goodness, 119. Several experiences,
331.
F.
There be diverse kinds of faith, 55. Faith what, 56, 57, 58. 61. Many are
mistaken in faith, 55. Faith is not to be placed in enjoyments, 80. Faith looks
not at sight nor feeling, 80. 124. Faith is so small and weak in many, that
they cannot discern it, 47. 83, 84. 86. When faith is wrought by God in the
soul, 45 Faith is where spiritual desires are, 75. 53. We should ever live by
faith, 79. 123. Faith quiets and settles the foul, 103. 122. Faith evidenceth
to us our justification, 115 The word and promise of God, is the only ground
of faith, 15. 123. The act of faith is a work, 145. Faith is no condition of
the Covenant of grace, 46, 47. We should not yield to fears, 51. 102. We
should not fear want, and why, 165. 227 What it is to be fatherless, 63. A
remedy against fears, 381. Wherein the life of faith consists, 143. The Saints
are to live by faith in justification, 154. In sanctification, 154. In
infirmities, 156, etc. For graces, 167. In use of means, 175. For protection
and supply of all wants, 148. In adversity, 188. In the life past, 189. For
glorification, 193. And to dye by faith, 197.
G.
God is ready to forgive, 25, 26. God is unchangeable, 80. 95. 97. God often
hides himself from his, 94. God was found of them that sought him not, 34. God
is not an enemy to his, though they greatly sin against him, 26, 27. 97. 146.
Gods free grace is to be admired, 127. God gives Christ to enemies, 50, 51. God
never fayles his, 78. God draws the soul to Christ, 41. The manner of Gods
drawing men to Christ, 42, etc. Gods children are in various conditions, 127.
Of the growth of the Saints, 70, 71, 72.
H.
Heart, what, where it is seated, 53, 54. What it is to give God the heart, 54,
55. There is hardness of heart in a child of God, 100. The heart of man is not
to be hearkened unto, and why, 7. We should watch our hearts, 202. Why men
follow the counsel of their own hearts, 10, 11. Encouragements to hope, 20,
21. The happiness of believers depends not upon their doings, 34, 35, 36, 37,
38, 39. 46. Of hearing the Word, 259.
I.
How men are made just before God, 10. 121. No effect of sanctification can
evidence justification, and why, 115, 116. It is one thing to be justified, and
another to be sanctified, 114, 115. Who are fit to judge of men's estates, 111,
128 Many men's apprehension of justification, is not from God, and why, 116.
162, 163. What an infirmity is, 155, 156. When men live by faith in
infirmities, 163.
K.
It is one thing to know, and another to know that we know, 94. 61.
L.
What it is to be lost, 123. God loves us before we love him, 49. The love of
God being discovered, scatters all discouragements and fears, 5. We are not to
answer Gods love by our mortification of sin, 78. God loves freely, 110. 23.
False lives men live, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 124.
M.
Fallen man cannot help himself, 6. 12, 13, The mercy of God is infinite, 25.
see 33. 51. Such as have received mercy from God, should be merciful to
others, 130. That which moves God to show mercy, is in and from himself, 24,
25. Means to settle a soul in assurance of the love of God, 105, etc. Means
alone are not able to settle a soul, 66 Of Meditation, 268. 122. That Miracles
are not essential to the administrator of Baptism, 325.
O.
The Saints are not their own but Christ's, 138 Obedience is the Saints duty,
38, 116. 130
P.
Pray to God, 127, 128. Of Prayer, 290. We should mind suitable promises, 118.
65. Presumption what, 66. Peace none can give but God, 109. God is the portion
of his people, 139. The Saints should rejoice in their portion, 131. God will
pardon a lost sinner, 3. 26. The poverty of Saints, 91, 92.
Q.
Men's qualifications are worth nothing, 34. The quiet soul is fittest to
receive comfort, 119
R.
Man's righteousness is not only imperfect, but also filthiness, 11. Such as
prize their own righteousness, know not Christ's, 121. 35. 37. Such as prize
their own righteousness, are in a sad condition, 37, 38. That righteousness
which justifies us is not in us, 11, 121. Christ's righteousness is the Saints
comfort, 39. 22. Christ's righteousness is perfect, 10 Christ's righteousness is
sufficient to satisfy us at all times, 98. 122, 123. 26. The meanest Saint is
as righteous as the best, 14. 139. The Saints are to rejoice in God, 97. 107.
Regeneration, wherein it consists, 72. Concerning reading the Scriptures, 177.
Carnal reason to be abhorred, and why, 125.
S.
Christ saves none but the ungodly, 23. Sin should humble the Saints, 155. 159.
14. Sin drives the soul from God, 5. 62. The greatness of sin ought not to
hinder any in believing, 39. 104. 18, 19. 21. 112. What the unpardonable sin
is, 27. Of sensiblenesse of sin, 62, 63. To be convinced of sin, what, 40, 41.
43. Why sin is left in the Saints, 159, 160. The sins of a believer are laid
upon Christ, and now they are Christ's, and not their own, 113. No man ought to
allow himself in any sin, 117 It Is possible for a child of God to fall into a
great sin, 95, 96, 24. Considerations against sin, 233. etc. The Saints have
made the greatness of sin an encouragement to hope, 22. Why God leaves sin in
his, 78, 79. Whether the combat in men be from the Spirit or no, 84, 85. The
sins of the Elect are forgiven them before they know it, 31, 32. Satan is not
to be hearkened unto, 9, 10, 29. What it is to live by sense, 124, 125. Why men
seek to save themselves, 11, 12. Such as God saves, he causes to understand
the way of salvation, 5, 6, 7. The satisfaction of Christ satisfies the soul,
7 The holy Scriptures are the word of God, 298 Sufficient grace is not given to
all, 307.
T.
Terrors should not hinder faith, 80, 81. 87. Temptations against believing,
should encourage us in believing, 123. 86. How a soul tempted may answer
Satan, 73. Weak believers are not to apply the threatenings to themselves, 111.
How to prevent trouble, 120.
V.
Causes of unbelief, 105, 124. Lying vanities are to be renounced, 124. We
should put a difference between Christ's voice, and other voices, 108, 109. 329.
etc. And between the voice of the Gospel, and the voice of the Law, 110. We
should know Christ's voice, and hearken unto it, 108, 109.
W.
To wait upon God, what, 32. 44. 95. Good works justify us before men, 151.
Deliverance is before our working, 35. 71. Of the freedom of the will, etc. 3.
10. 318.
A Song of the love of God to such as are in Christ.
THe love of God has been to me full great, Ephesians. 2. 4.

In leaving me in such a state to be; Romans 3. 9.

And then to set me free from this estate, Romans 3. 24.

He gave his only Son to dye for me. Joh. 3. 16.

Which is a greater happiness to me, 1 Cor. 2. 9.

Then if I had not been in misery. 1 Cor. 15. 45

I was as vile as any man could be, Ezekiel. 16. 3

And my vile state did openly appear; Ezekiel 16. 6

When God in love did please to look on me, Ezekiel. 16. 6

And caused me a joyful voice to hear. Ezekiel. 16. 6

For passing by me, Ezekiel. 16. 6
he to me said, Live,
Which voice of his unto me life did give. Genesis 1. 3.

When I heard this sweet voice of God to me, Ezekiel. 16. 6

Upon my heart effectually it wrought; Ephesians. 5. 14.

That I was then so set at liberty, Romans 8. 37.

That often times I did ponder in my thought. 1 Cor. 2. 9.

From sin, Joh. 8. 36.
Satan, curse, wrath and hell, so free,
That I fear not what they can do to me. Romans 8. 38.

Love caused God for me his Son to give; Gal. 4. 4, 5.

Love caused Jesus Christ for me to dye; Joh. 10. 18.

Love caused God to say to my soul, Live; Ezekiel. 16. 6

Love in my soul does again reply (forth Ps. 116. 7.

In songs, Heb 10. 7.
how lovingly Christ did come
A mighty price, Mat. 10. 45
and ransom of great worth.
What glorious sight of love is this I see, 2 John 3. 1.

That being had before the world could be; Ephesians. 1. 4.

Without al time, Ephesians. 1. 4.
bounds, measure, or degree,
Is this his love which he has set on me. Ephesians. 2. 4.

One glorious sight of this so great love, Ephesians. 3. 19.

Will cause a soul for to be sick of love. Song 5. 8.

This love made known to me, 1 John 3. 1.
made me to muse,
That ever God should be to me so good; Rev. 1. 5.

To give his Son for me, Ephesians. 1. 4.
and me to choose,
Which was his enemy, Ezekiel. 16 6
and in my blood;
When I fled from him, Jer. 3. 7.
after me came he,
I sought not him, Isa. 65. 1.
but he sought after me.
The love of God to me is passing great, Ephesians. 2. 4.

Which had a being ere the world began; Ephesians. 1. 4.

It boundless is, 1 Ioh. 3. 2.
and every way complete,
And longer does endure then this world can. 1 Cor. 2. 9.

Like love to this has never yet been heard, Romans 5. 7.

And there is none can be to this compared. Romans 5. 7.

That many in their sins should be destroyed, Ioh. 8. 21.

Whose first condition was as good as mine; Isa. 64. 6.

And yet to me this mercy is injoyd; Romans 5. 1.

Thus being freed I shall in glory shine. Ioh. 17. 24.

This shows his love to me was great and free, Hos. 14. 4.

And could not be deserved at all by me. Isa. 64. 6.

Oh, Psalm. 63. 3.
who could wish himself a thing so rare,
As to be hemd in, Romans 8. 39
and compact about,
With boundles love, Ephesians. 3. 19.
oh! who can it declare,
Or who by fadoming can find it out? Hos. 11. 4.

My heart, Ephesians. 3. 19.
my hand and tongue are all too weak
Of matchless love, 1 Cor. 13. 9
to think, or write, or speak.
It is through faith applied so excellent, Romans 3. 30.

It comfort and elevates on high Col. 3. 1, 2.

The saddest heart, Romans 5. 1.
and fills it with content;
Yea it revives a soul ready to dye. Ephesians. 5. 14.

The apprehending it, brings joy and peace, Romans 5. 1.

When it is clouded, Romans 7. 24.
peace and joy do cease.
Each soul that does this boundless joy possess, 1 Pet. 1. 6.

May well be swallowed up in admiration; Ephesians. 3. 8.

And to the praise of God may it express, Romans 7. 25.

And often have it in his meditation. Joh. 16. 22.

Well may it cause him to serve, 2 Cor. 5. 14
fear, and love
This boundless lover, 2 Co. 13. 11
ever God above.
A Song that Jesus Christ is all in all to his.
CHrist is his Fathers chiefest choice, Mat. 3. 17.

And I in him the very same; Ephesians. 1. 4.

Why should I not in him rejoice, Phil. 4. 4.

Who am secured from all blame? Romans 8. 38

In God through Christ, Phil. 3. 3.
the Saints rejoice,
When they know they in Christ are found; Phil. 3. 9.

Through Christ they with a joyful voice, Psalm. 66. 1.

In singing do his praises sound. Psa. 18. 49

I now in Christ have beauty bright, Eze. 16. 14

I am complete in him alone, Col. 2. 10.

Being clothed in his robe that is white, Rev. 19. 8.

In him I have perfection. Col. 2. 3.

In me God does, Mat. 3. 17.
through Christ delight,
In God through Christ I interest have; 1 Cor. 3. 21

Through Christ I may come in his sight, Heb. 10. 19

And needful things may ask and have. Mat. 21. 22

My privileges are full large, Gal. 4. 7.

Through Christ my Savior and my King; Psalm. 2. 6.

Who only under-went the charge, Romans 5. 8.

Me to redeem, Ephesians. 2. 13.
and me home bring.
And now I am by him set free, Heb. 10. 11

Union with him for to enjoy; Joh. 17. 21.

The thought of it so cleaves to me, Joh. 17. 24.

That nothing can me much annoy. Romans 8. 35

What is it worldly men desire, Psalm. 4. 6.

But beauty, Luke 12. 19
riches, and fine fare;
With pleasures, Luke 12. 19
ease, and rich attire,
Things which the world in them do share? Psalm. 49. 6.

And what these things to them can be, Psalm. 49. 6.

The same is Christ to me and more; Phil. 3. 8.

And what thy best works are to thee, Romans 10. 3.

Better to me is Christ my store. Phil. 3. 7.

Christ is my light, Col 3. 4.
my life, and power,
My Prophet, Acts 7. 37.
Priest, and King is he;
My husband, Luke 2. 11.
head, and Savior,
Oh, none but Jesus Christ for me. 1 Cor. 15. 19

Should my performances grow slack, Rom 7. 18.

And should I dead and lumpish be; Joh. 15. 5.

Or should God seem to turn his back, Mar. 15. 34

My part in Christ shall comfort me. 1 Cor. 1. 30

Though my corruptions should increase, To. 23. 24.

And sin should seem to master me, Romans 7. 23

Yet Christ shall be my health and peace, Ephesians. 2. 13.

My strength and righteousness is be. Psalm. 71. 16

In life and death so shall I be, Phil. 3. 7.

For all things else are vanity; Phil. 3. 8.

What ever my condition be, Romans 8. 38

Nothing but Christ shall comfort me. Psalm. 71. 16

For Christ to me is all in all, Col. 3. 11.

In life and death, Phil. 3. 21.
advantage he
Unto me is, Gal. 6. 14.
and sure he shall
More then a Conqueror make me. Romans 8. 37

And in this does my joy abound, 1 Pet. 1. 8.

That I in Christ am ever found, Phil. 3. 3.

Where all perfections do abound, Col. 2. 3.

And I with him shall be crowned. Romans 8. 17.

Therefore I shall set forth his praise, Phil. 4. 13.

And honor him while I have breath, 2 Cor. 5. 14

Yea, Col. 3. 23.
him love, fear, and serve always,
From henceforth to my day of death. Rev. 2. 10.

FINIS.

