A DECLARATION Against Wigs or Periwigs.
Phil. 3.3. Jer. 22.24. Wigs no Peri-Wigs.(...), [Peri] in composition
signifies [Excellency,] as well as [about](...) excellent cut, as well as cut
about.


SEveral Testimonies having been given by Friends against Pride in Apparel
relating to Women; it is considerable whether Women being reflected on may not
reasonably reflect on Men, their artificial frizled Hair; for Women's Hairs on
Men's Heads swarm like one of Egypts Plagues, and creep in too much upon and
among Christians. And a Nehemiah is desirable, that might pluck off this
strange Hair of strange Women lusted after, Nehem. 13.25. And the Heathen may
rise up against us, for an Ambassador coming before a Senate with false Hair, a
Grave Senator said, What credit is to be had to him whose very Locks do lie?
And if upon necessity the Locks of any amongst us do lie, it is fit they should
lie to purpose, viz. so as not to be discerned from native Locks: For to seek
to deceive, so as to be perceived, argues as much want of Wit as of Sincerity;
and a want of an endeavor in it not to be perceived, argues a want of Humility
and Moderation.

Isocrates, a Famous, Wise, Virtuous Grecian, seeing his Neighbor wear his
Hair of another color than Natural, because in Fashion, gave this ironical
excuse for him, viz. That it was lest any should ask Counsel of him; intimating
that none should seek Wisdom in so Fantastical a Head.

Philip King of Macedon, put a Courtier of his out of his Office, because he
wore Hair of another color than Natural; saying, He would not be true to the
Public, that was treacherous to his own Hairs.

And the Emperor Titus thrust one form him, because he smelt of Purfume,
saying, He had rather he had smelt of Garlic; and denied him his Suit.

Plato, in the Tyrant Dionysius's Court, said, He would not wear Women's Attire.
Then, What wonder Women wear Gay Gold and Pearls,
When Men Religious wear Gold Locks of Girls?
Should Christian Guides affect a Whorish Guise,
Which Heathen tempt by Tyrant did despise?


I have read in our Chronicles (I think it was about the twelfth Age) that the
Clergy wore Periwigs of a light Color, as our Priests and others do now;
though I have heard that of late the Bishop of Exeter, censured his Priests, in
his Visitation, for wearing them.

The Physician is but a course Covering, as if wearing of Gold and shaving of
Heads were Wholesome: This pretense for Pride, is no better than that which is
for Drunkenness and Whoredom; for they will say, It Is Physic to be Drunk once
a Month: And Oxford Scholars had half a Crown a Month allowed to go to a Whore,
ad purgandos ^enes. But the Protestants of Bohemia disputing at the Council of
Basil, about Fifty Days on Four Questions, one of them was, That no Sin should
be Tolerated to prevent a greater: Then much less to prevent a bodily
Infirmity, which may be done by other lawful means, and not by working
Confusion in wearing Women's Coverings, Deuteronomy. 22.5. 1 Cor. 11.15. Some say,
Shaving is to prevent the Pox; Small honor to Wig-wearers to incur such a
suspicion of it, or of any Infirmity or Defect. If Heat cause Headache, sure a
Wig under a Hat is not a means to cure it. The Prophet Elisha likely had
neither, when Bethel Boys cried, Abald Head. Polling of Heads came first in
Fashion, by occasion of the Emperor Charles the Fifth, his being troubled with
the Headache; whose Example all his Court followed, and all Europe theirs; (see
ye the force of Example, and the abuse of it) yet they wore no Wigs: Insomuch,
that a Russian with long Hair, meeting Earl Cromwell, and excusing himself that
he had a Vow for it, the Earl told him, He should lie in Prison till 'twas
ended. One would think, that they that have for wearing Wigs the most excuse,
should have most care to stop the abuse coming by Example, that it may not
produce the taking of an Ell, through the allowance of an Inch; and that they
should stir up Sober, Virtuous People to take notice how far they that wear
them are necessitated thereto; and if so, what Modesty they used therein. This
as cold Water to dash them, expects something a coming hotter than a
Crisping-Iron to burn them.

John Mulliner, a Friend about Northamton, a Wig-Maker, left off his Trade, and
was made to burn one in his Prentices sight, and Print against it. John Hall, a
Gentleman of Northumberland, being Convinced, sitting it a Meeting, was shaken
by the Lords Power, plucked off, and threw down his Wig; so it is considerable
whether care may not be taken, Calvus bald.
that conceited conterfit Calvinists may not continue amongst us, nor that any
of the People of God make themselves bald for Pride now, as they did of old for
Sorrow, Levit. 21.5.

Objection, Wigs may be worn not only for Use, but Ornament.

Answer, It appears very oppost to the Apostles Doctrine, and also their
Practice; for not only the Apostle James, James 2.2. reproves respect to gay
Clothing in general, (and is not Gay Clothing to gain Respect, as Modest is
to avoid Contempt) but also in particular, the Apostles Peter and Paul forbad
ornament of platted Hair, (as ours translate, 1 Pet. 3.^. 1 Timothy 2.9. Vulger
tortis. Lucian, Clemens, Chrysostom.
Crisped or Curled as others) and the Ancients write, that they both had
Bald-Heads; and if they should have covered them with Women's Hair, would they
not have retorted, Was that the Cause, Peter and Paul, that you bad us leave
off our Locks, that you, and such like, might get them your selves, to make
Peri-wigs of? Can any Christian believe, that Peter and Paul would run into
such an absurdity? who it is very probable, restrained Women, not Men, expressly
as needless. Solon, a Wise, Virtuous Lawgiver, made none against Parricide, as
not to be supposed. It was a shame then, for Men to have long Hair naturally
like Women, among the Greeks and Romans too: For Julius Caesar, ^s I remember,
was by his Foes called scornfully [Puer comatus] Long hair'd Lad, viz. in
effect, a Lass. Was it then likely they would wear long Wigs of Lasses Hair for
an Ornament? Woodland a Martyr, a Deacon, taunted by a Persecuting Bishop (for
his stocked Hose) saying, He was decked like a Deacon, answered, More like a
Deacon, then thou like an Apostle. True, For if Deacons Wives must be Grave and
Sober, and their Ornament not outward but inward, much rather the Deacons, and
then much more Bishops. And most Apostles, whom Christ sent forth with Sandals,
a single Coat, etc. Math. 10.10. whose Examples the famousest Primitive
Christians followed. Origin went in a plain Coat, bare Footed, and that too
before the Emperor, who yet admired his Majesty. Tertullian left off the Gown,
and took the plain Coat, for which he wrote a Book Dopallio. Clemens wore a
White Coat, and writes in defense thereof. So did John Huss the Martyr, the
eminentest Preacher in Bohemia, and bequeathed his White Coat to one, his Gray
Coat to an another; not his White Wig to one, his Brown Wig to another. He
suffered for opposing Preachers Pride.

It remains to show, That it is not an Ornament, but a Deformity, more then that
it would Cover, as if it were not in Fashion would appear, even to the simple
natural Eye. The Americans seeing one Captain Morley, take off his Wig, cried
he had two Heads. And 'twere apt to affright a Child unused to it, like the
horrid and hideous Head of a Snake-hair-twisted Gorgon, or cristed Bellona; as
Homer says Hector did his Son with his Horse-maned Helmet. And who can refrain
to fall into a Poetical Vein, and Paint it out in such sad Colors, that it may
look as ugly as it does: For a glorying in a Shame, as an Ornament, sharppens a
Pen to describe it to make it appear as it is. Difficile est satyram non
scribere.

Metamorphoses.
The manner of this Age unmannerly
Is, Man unmaning, Women's Hair to buy,
Dub Poles and Joles Dame Venus Knights to be,
Smock-Coat and Petticoat Breech their Livery,
Scarce Man-like Faced, though Woman like in Hair,
As sting-tail'd Locusts in the Vision were,
As of Hyena's kind, Hermaprodites,
Or as abused Italian Catamites;
And like unto the Phrygian Ganymede,
Or as Tiresias Femaliz'd indeed,
Or one that (since he would a Woman be)
Put Period to Assyrian Monarchy.
Hair in a Night turned hew, of Old 'twas said,
An Old Man Young, a Boy a Girl was made;
^lders so now transformed to Girls appear,
And Girls to Boys by their short curtailed Hair.
By B^lls some seem 'ith 'twilight turned to Owls,
As Antique Harpyes or some new Night Fowls,
As charming Sirens (bate their ugly Hair)
Having their Arms, Necks, Breasts, Backs, Shoulders bare,
Nay for their Knights rich Garters some prepare.
Richard Richardson.

THE END.

