PROVIDENCE and PRECEPT: OR, THE CASE OF Doing Evil that Good may come of it,
STATED and RESOLVED; According to Scripture, Reason, and the (Primitive)
Practice OF THE CHURCH of ENGLAND. With a more particular Respect to a Late
Case of Allegiance, etc. and its Vindication.

In a Letter to the Author.

The Second Edition.

And the Lord said unto him, Wherewith? and he said, I will go forth, and I
will be a lying Spirit in the Mouth of all his Prophets. 2 Kings 22.22.

A wonderful and horrible Thing is committed in the Land.

The Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear rule by this means, and my
People love to have it so: and what will ye do in the end thereof. Jer. 5.30,
31.

London, Printed in the Year 1691.

SIR,
I Have at last by the help of a good Friend (my Circumstances being such I
could not purchase them) perused your Case of Allegiance, etc. and its
Vindication: And finding them both of a Piece, I shall not go about to divide
what you have so Providentially joined. And therefore it will be needless to
speak to the latter, by reason it stands only upon the Foundation of your
former; the Removal of which will be like Sampson's pulling down the Pillars,
or main Prop, so that consequently the whole Fabric must fall to the Ground.
But before I enter the Field against such a mighty Champion and brave
Challenger, (that is Armed Cap-a-pe, and Charges as it were in Armor) I will
(for some Reasons) let you know what I am, by telling you what I am not; and
also the Reason of this my bold Undertaking. As to the first, know then that I
am neither Lawyer, Divine nor Physician, Scholar or Pretender to Letters, and
so you need not fear my troubling you with hard Words, or philosophical
Distinctions, with the latter of which your Case, etc. is pretty well
furnished; but I presume that was only to let the World see how nicely you
could split a Hair, or like a good Lawyer (for his Client) make the best of a
bad Cause; which in them is tolerable, if not commendable: But in a Grave,
Learned Divine, it looks methinks as odd, as a Protestant Priest preaching up a
Mohammedan Doctrine, in opposition to Christian Precept. Pray mistake me not, as
if nothing was intended by this Letter but a little Railery, for you shall find
when I come to serious Things I can talk seriously of them, and my Designs are
honest and fair; and therefore will as much as in me lies endeavor to give no
Offense, by confining my Discourse to Generals, without concerning my self with
any Particulars: For my aim is not to expose bad Men but ill Principles, which
I am sure are destructive to all Civil Governments in the World. And in
Prosecution of which, I will at your own Game (for nothing but Diamonds cut
Diamonds) play you Text against Text, and then leave your self, or any other
Providential Divine, to judge of the matter. I consess you have (according to
your own stating the Case) taken a great deal of Pains in transferring an
Allegiance from a Legal and Rightful King to a Providential one, or (in your
own Phrase) from the Person who has still a Legal Right (and, Page 26.
as you say, he may recover it if he can) to another, whom your self owns (for
there cannot be two Legal Rights at one and the same time) has no such Title;
and all by a nice Distinction, Page 16.
Though the Man is in Being still, the King is gone; which Learned Distinction
I presume you took from the Measures that was taken in Forty one, by Reason
it is so agreeable with that Rebel Notion (which our Law condemns) of taking up
Arms against the King's Person to defend his Authority; which Republican Notion
I am sure can never be serviceable to the present, nor any thorough Settlement
whatever. And I am confident you did not meet with any such Doctrine in Bishop
Overal's Convocation Book. Which happy Book, if you had not Providentially met
with, the Church, as well as the State, had (as to that Point) lost a great
Champion, and poor distressed Subjects the Advantage of knowing their Duties to
the Supreme Authority when ever a Civil Government is changed, by Peoples
following the conduct of your Providence contrary to Precept.

But it may be objected, Why should I concern my self with Things so much out
of my way? Or, as the saying is, A Cobbler should not go beyond his Last. To
which I answr,

A Stander by may (as often it happens) see more than a Gamester; and so it
commonly appears when as opportunity serves he discovers the Mistake. Besides,
though I am but poor in Purse, yet I am rich in Faith, and inclinable to
believe (with some old Philosophers I have heard talk of) my Soul may not be
inferior to other Bodies let them shine never so Gay or Glittering. And (as
you, use to tell us) God is not a Respecter of Persons; which is a good
Argument for me, and every good Christian, to set a value upon his Soul, let
his Body be never so poor and contemptible: And that is one Reason of my
Enquiry into the Reasons you have given the World, both for your conforming and
nonconforming to the present, etc. For you (like the Children of Israel) did
halt along time between two Opinions; and (I am apt to believe) had not you met
with Something besides the Convocation Book, you had (as you tell us) perhaps
stuck till this time where you did stick; for stick you did, till Mr. Dr.
Sherlock's Pre^.
Jenkins kind hand (more than the Bishop's Convocation Book, as I shall show
you by and by) relieved and haled you out of the Mire, and set you safe upon
dry Land, on which you now stand as firm as a Rock.

But before I enter upon the Premises, I will give you a second Reason (which
is indeed the chief) for my so doing, viz. I having proved my Soul of as Noble
an Extract as your own; and that the Eternal Peace and Welfare of it depends
upon our Allegiance and Submission to the Supreme Authority: For they (as you
say) that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation. I judge it well worth
the while to observe the Apostle's Rule, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21.
of proving all things, and holding fast that which is good. Which is (I hope)
a sufficient Reason to excuse my Presumption, in enquiring whether you are not
more mistaken in St. Paul's meaning as to your New Case, etc. than you were in
the Case you had formerly in your Eye, (as you tell us in the Preface) when you
proved he meant no such thing. And as to that Case, you still think you were in
the right, and, truly, so do I, and yet you must be mistaken either then or
now. And that it was then, and not now, does not appear to any Body but your
self, that I know of, neither have you produced any Authority to convince the
World that you are more in the right now, notwithstanding you have (possibly)
another Case in your Eye: so that, for ought I can see, you may be as much out
now, as you were before; and, if so, what are we the better for your new
Discoveries, (in your Case of Allegiance) when you give us so little
Encouragement (from your being so liable to mistake) to believe you.

It Is true, you have taken a great deal of pains to make the Convocation Book
speak (as you would make the World think) very plain to the Point; but how much
it serves your turn, (notwithstanding your nice Distinctions, and ringing the
Changes between Divine and Humane Entails, Legal and Providential Kings, and
Through Settlements, etc.) has already been demonstrated by more skilful hands.
But though that Book did you but little service, yet there was other Writings
that would have done the trick to an hair, such as Hobs, Baxters, Owens, and
Jenkins, etc. But, I presume, your not strengthening your Case, etc. with
quoting those Authors, was because their Tenants did not so well agree with the
Doctrine of that Church which you pretend to be of. But to the Point in hand;
and the better to inform my self and others, I will (as well as I can) observe
some kind of method, viz.

I will first lay down your providential Hypothesis on which your Case, and. is
built, and (as you have very wisely observed) if the World do not judge it a
right Rule to go by, you know not where to fix one. Page 24.


Secondly, I will examine those Texts of Scripture which you quote to prove it.

Thirdly, I will draw up some useful Inferences, very necessary for practical
Reformers of Church and State.

But before I proceed, Dr. Sherlock's Pre^.
I cannot but take notice of that one thing you thought necessary to recant;
but though it is but one, yet it is the only one on which the Case turns, etc.
And truly you were in the right, for otherways you had given room for Richard
against Baxter, etc. Besides, your Case of Allegiance, if compared with your
Case of Resistance, would have been very little to the purpose, save only to
serve a present Case which has possibly fallen in your Eye. And if so, it is but
reasonable your Judgment should vary (not so much with the Times, but)
according to the different Cases that at different Times chance to fall in your
Eye. And also it is but just upon every such occasion to strain (I do not mean
Conscience, but) your Art and Skill to make our blessed Lord and the Apostles
to go hand in hand with you to gain the Point. But now if any Body should ask
me this Question, viz. How shall we know the Doctor did better understand St.
Paul when he writ his Case of Allegiance, than he did when he writ his Case of
Resistance? Let me perish if I could tell what to answer, and therefore I leave
that, Sir, to your self, and so proceed to what I promised, viz. the laying
down the Hypothesis on which your Case, etc. is built. And I cannot do that
better, than in the words of a great Man, (when Time was) as I have found them
ready drawn up to my hand about 40 Years ago; and I dare be bold to say, they
would have been as good a Preface to your Book as that you have writ; and do
but read your own Name for his, and you will, perhaps, be pleased, to see how
exactly it agrees with your own Notions of Providential Rulers, and Civil
Governments; but take them in the Author's own words, and then judge of the
matter.

[Mr. Jenkins's Recantation: Or, his Acknowledgment, by way of Petition, to the
Parliament, wherein he confesses his Sorrow for his acting against the State,
and the unsutableness of it to his Calling and Profession. As also the
Parliaments Answer to his Petition, as it was printed in the Year 1651.]

To the Supreme Authority the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England.
The humble Petition of William Jenkins Prisoner.
Humbly shows,
THat Your Petitioner is unfeignedly sorrowful for all his late Miscarriages,
whether testified against him, or acknowledged by him; and for the great and
sinful unsutableness of them to his Calling and Condition. That upon earnest
seeking of God, and diligent enquiring into his Will, Your Petioner is
convinced that the Alteration of all Civil Governments are ordered by and
founded by the wise Providence of God, who removes Kings, sets up Kings,
rules in the Kingdoms of Men, and gives them to whomsoever he will. That the
Providence of this God have, in the Judgment of Your Petitioner, as evidently
appeared in the Removing of others from and Investing Your Honors with the
Government of this Nation,
as every they appeared in the taking away or bestowing of any Government in
any History of any Age in the World. That he apprehends that a Refusal to be
Subjects to this present Authority,
under the Pretense of upholding the Title of any upon Earth, is a Refusal to
acquiesce in the wise and righteous Pleasure of God; such an opposing of the
Government set up by the Sovereign Lord of Heaven and Earth, as none can have
Peace either in Acting in or Suffering for. And Your Petitioner looks upon it
as his Duty to yield to this Authority all active and cheerful Obedience in the
Lord, even for Conscience sake, To promise (he being required) Truth and
Fidelity to it; and to hold forth the ground of his so doing to any as God
shall call him thereunto, etc.

The rest relates only to his particular Condition and Imprisonment; an
Enlargement from which he very humbly and submissively prayed for, which was
granted him in the following Words.

Resolved that Mr.
Jenkins be pardoned both for his Life and Estate, and that Mr. Attorney General
be required to prepare the Pardon to be passed under the Great Seal of England,
and that his Body be forthwith discharged from Imprisonment, and his Estate
from Sequestration.

Which extraordinary Favor he obtained through the Mildness of that Government
to poor Delinquents. And here give me leave to observe, (viz.) Had such a Case
been printed in Oliver's time, it would have posed a good Divine (no dispraise
to your self) to know, whether you had taken your Notions of Providence from
Mr. Jenkin's Petition, or he his from your Case of Allegiance: For, in truth,
they are so very like, that it creates a just Supposition of your being one of
his Pupils. And this is the first Thing I promised, (viz.) The laying down the
Hypothesis on which the Foundation of your Case, etc. stands. And I will appeal
to all Mankind, Whether this Providential Principle would not serve for the
French King, the Grand Signior, nay, a Marssinello, or a Protestant Joyner?
provided he could but get enough of the Mob on his side to knock out the Brains
of their Opposers, the better to instruct them to whom the Sovereign Power do
belong; especially when they are strong enough to Crush them into Obedience.
For that is (it seems) one Rule you go by to know when a Government is
thoroughly settled. Page 6.
But thanks be to God he has given us a better; for if Power to Crush be a
sufficient one, then no body can deny but Marssinello's was a thorough
Settlement in Naples. And though his Reign was but short yet his Power was
great, and he did Crush all that opposed him; and had he not met with a Stroke
from a Providential Hand (which possibly thought Killing no Murder) he might
have lived to have given Laws like a Conqueror to that great and populous City.
And by your, and Mr. Jenkin's Hypothesis, a Divine Right for so doing.

Which brings me to the second Thing I promised, (viz.) The examining those
Texts of Scripture which you quote to prove your new Doctrines by. And though
those are several, yet the main stress of the point lies on Romans 13.1, 2.
Page 19.
Let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers. For their is no Power but of
God: the Powers that be are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists the
Power, resists the Ordinance of God: and they that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation. Now I must confess since you have taken leave of your own
Judgment of the Apostle's meaning in that Place, it will be the more difficult
to convince you, by reason it will not perhaps suit so well with the present
Case that you have in your Eye. However (from a knowledge of your humble
Christian temper of not thinking your self too old to learn) I will presume to
attempt it, Pres.
though I know at the same time my self incapable; and therefore am inclinable
to believe you had far more persuasive Reasons for Recanting your former Tenets
than what you are pleased to give us in Print. But to the point; It Is true the
Apostle requires a Subjection to the Higher Powers, etc. but can it be imagined
that the Apostle means by the Higher Power any that shall attain or get
possessed of it by Force or Violence? (which your Case, according to your
present understanding of the Apostle, seems to imply) Or by Subjection, a
transferring an Allegiance which becomes due only to a Rightful and Lawful
Prince, to another which has no other Right to be so but Power to Crush, etc.
then it is rational to conclude, There never was any such Thing as an
Usurpation in the World; and though some have waded to the Throne in Blood, and
their Crimes have been of a Crimson dye, yet their being but once fixed there,
they become Innocent, and as White as Snow: And being invested with your
Authority must not only be submitted to, but owned as a True and Rightful Liege
Lord and Sovereign. And all for this Reason, (viz.) They that Resist shall
receive to themselves Damnation. And yet, with your good leave, I suppose this
word Resistance is not to be understood in such a Latitude as you would have us
understand that of Power; For then the Refusal of our Prince's Command, let it
be what it will, would entitle a Man to Damnation: For he that refuses the
Commands of his Prince, does resist, Dan. 3 21.
as Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, for which they were all cast into a fiery
Furnace, (which was indeed the height of Passive Obedience;) yet I believe no
Body supposed them to be in that miserable state for disobeying the King's
Command. From which I observe, (as I have heard diverse of your Function say) we
are not in many places of Scripture to take our blessed Savior, or the
Apostles words in a strict literal Sense, but according to the best Exposition
that agrees with the general Scope and Design of the Gospel, and then I am sure
it is both natural and rational to understand that place of St. Paul, viz.
There is no Power but of God, etc. must be all legal and rightful Power, which
must certainly be implied, as your self once thought you had sufficiently
proved.

That there is no Power but of God is true indeed, for God being Omnipotent,
there cannot be any Power but by his permissive, or approbative Will, which was
always allowed of as a Divine Distinction of God's Will; and without it, how
harsh and untunable would several Texts of the Bible sound in the Ears of a
good Christian, as for Instance: Amos 3.16.
Shall there be Evil in the City, and I the Lord has not done it? And now to
take this place in the Sense that you do the Apostle of Power, is certainly to
make God the first and prime Cause of all Evil that shall be done in a City, or
indeed any where else; which Notion may serve well enough for an Atheist, but
how well it becomes any Body that pretends to Religion, do you judge.

I pray how many Rapes and Robberies, and cruel Murders (I pray God they be not
owing to such horrid Notions of Power giving a Right) have been barbarously
committed lately in our City and Liberties of London, which Almighty God has
been pleased to suffer and permit to be done by the powers of Hell and wicked
Men, which the but taking the foregoing Text in your sense of Power, etc. and
it frees them all, by charging the Crimes upon God himself, which to me appears
little less than Blasphemy, and it would make an honest Christian's heart
tremble with the thought of such a Notion.

And then again in the Cases of Pharaoh, where it is said, God hardened Pharaoh
's heart. Now I know not what you may think, but it is the Opinion of great
Divines, that those Words ought not to be taken in a literal Sense, but that
God knowing the baseness and falseness of his heart, did permit the Sorcerers
and Magicians of Egypt to imitate Moses and Aaron with their Enchantments,
which deluded Pharaoh to that degree, that he thought it was nothing but the
pure effects of Magic, only he thought Moses and Aaron to be better Conjurers
than the rest, and so his heart became hardened through the belief it was all
but a Trick. And in like manner it may be said God hardens all our hearts, when
he (through our high Provocations) withdraws his Divine Spirit (which no doubt
was Pharaoh's Case) from us, and delivers us up to strong Delusions, insomuch
that we believe a Lie; though in truth it proceeds from our own wilful
stubbornness, in not being governed by the truth of his Word, which is the
everlasting Rule we ought to be ruled by: And if we once forsake that, it is but
just that God should forsake us, and then it is no wonder if (with Pharaoh) we
cry, Who is the Lord that we should obey his voice? We know not the Lord,
neither will we, etc. Ex. 5.2.
From all which (as one Text explains another) it is reasonable to conclude,
that St. Paul's requiring Subjection to all Powers, his meaning is all lawful
Powers; for if (as no Body doubts) there be any such thing as unlawful Power,
it is Frenzy to suppose he should require Subjection to them any other ways than
it is consistent with common Prudence and Self-preservation. I mean such a
Subjection as our blessed Lord tells us of, which is paid to a Thief if he be
stronger than the strong Man whose House he robs. Mat. 12.29
Besides, there be few but what knows there is a mighty difference between
Subjection and Allegiance, for Example, If a Man lives in France or Spain, or
any other Princes Country, he must, nay ought to be subject to the Customs and
Laws of any of those Princes Countries where he lives; but at the same time his
Allegiance can be due to none but him whose natural born Subject he is.

But the better to understand this place of St. Paul, (and to reconcile you (if
possible) to your own former Notions of it) let us compare it with another to
the same effect, (for Divines tell us we must, for the better understanding the
Scriptures, Prove. 8.15
compare one Text with another) By me Kings reign, and Princes decree justice.
That is, all legal and rightful Kings, and the Words imply as much; for how can
any Body be God's Vicegerent upon Earth without his Authority, and then if so,
it naturally follows; Eccl. 8.4.
That where the word of a King is there is Power; and who shall say to him,
What do thou? And And why Power, because he holds his Authority immediate
from God, and to him only can be accountable for his Faults, as several great
Lawyers and Divines have often told us.

But it may be objected, Has not any Body that can get themselves possessed of a
Crown, and the Regalities thereunto belonging, the same Authority, since the
Apostle says, There is no Power but of God, etc.

To which I answer, That the Apostle means the same thing, viz. Legal and
rightful Power, which is likewise there implied, for Force and Violence are
different things to Power and Authority; for Power implies an Authority for its
being put in execution, which distinguishes it from Force and Violence, which
is naught but to Pikes and Staves commanded by the Knave of Clubs, knock out
Peoples Brains, to inform their Understandings: But Power, we know, supposes
another thing, and acts by a legal Authority, as for Instance: A Constable does
not commit a Man (where there is just Cause) to the Stocks or Prison, by virtue
of the Watchmen and their Staves which attend him; but by virtue of a legal
Power and Authority which he derives from a Superior, and that from another,
till it come to the Supreme, which is under God the King only, whose Authority
cannot therefore be from the People who are subject to his, but he not to
theirs, unless they could prove a legal Right to such a Power, both from the
Laws of God, and the Laws of the Land where such things are done, if not, it
cannot (in the way of speaking) be said to be done at all; for it is very usual
to say such or such a thing cannot be done, when it cannot be done legally, but
in opposition to the Laws of God and Man. And yet by sad Experience we know
such things have been done, nay, to the very Alteration of Through Settlements,
(I presume you will not deny) and that possibly there may be persons in
possession of what you call God's Power (for there is none (as you say) but of
him) without his Authority; if not, the Holy Prophet was mightily mistaken;
Hos. 8.4.
They have set up Kings, but not by me; They have made Princes, and I knew it
not. Now these Kings the Prophet mentions, no doubt were in possession of all
the Rights and Prerogatives, etc. which gave them the Title, (as the foregoing
Text styles them) and yet God himself says, He knew it not. Which from your
Argument of Providence appears very strange, for that Providence should permit
persons to be invested with God's Authority, and he know nothing of the matter,
save only that they were in actual possession, though not by him; which is a
strong Argument of the permissive and approbative Will of Heaven, and none but
what are fit for a dark Room and clean Straw, but will allow it. For how
unreasonable is it to suppose that those Kings or Princes that are made so, and
not by God, (that is, that attains to it by undue Methods) can have his
Authority: And for that Reason God was pleased to show his just Resentment of
the Peoples going contrary to his Rule in those matters, by leaving his
Complaint upon Record, They have set up Kings, but not by me, etc.

And since it appears that Kings may be set up, and not by God, then it
naturally follows there may be two ways that persons may come to the exercise
of the Supreme Authority; that is to say, a right and a wrong, for I know no
other distinction; and I am sure our Savior (though in another Case) says
something to the same purpose, Verily I say unno you, Joh. 10.1.
he that enters not by the door into the Sheepfold, but climeth up some other
way, the same is a Thief and a Robber. And then consequently has but an
indifferent Title, etc. Notwithstanding he may (through Power and Strength) be
in possession, etc. And I do not doubt but what is required in a Priest having
a legal Right to his Office, the same will hold good in his Superior the King.
And so there was the less Reason for St. Paul (speaking of the higher Powers)
to distinguish what sort of Power we ought to be subject to, no more than what
sort of Parents the Fifth Commandment requires us to honor.

But to make (if possible) the Case more plain, we will compare St. Peter with
St. Paul, (and though they differed in some other things of less moment, 1 Fet.
2.13, 14.
yet they both agree as to this matter) Submit your selves to every Ordinance
of Man for the Lord's sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto
Governors, etc. Now there is certainly two Things to be considered before this
Submission can become due. First, The Lawfulness of the Authority that makes
the Ordinances; and Secondly, The Lawfulness of the Ordinances themselves. For
this Place likewise cannot be taken in your Sense; for if it should, then it
would oblige us to look no further, but positively to obey our Prince's
Commands without reserve, let them be what they will, and you know how much
that is against the Grain of this Protestant Kingdom. Then consequently we must
understand St. Peter otherways then you now understand St. Paul, (viz.) a
Submitting to every Ordinance of Man that does not contradict those of God. So
that it is plain that Something is implied in those Words of St. Peter more
than you are willing (in your Case, etc.) to allow, or else they would be a
downright Contradiction to what he says elsewhere. Whether it be right in the
sight of God, Acts 4 19.
to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye. So that if Ordinances (or
Allegiances) of Man be set up contrary to those of God, we are not to take
notice of them, though they had all the Powers of the Earth and Hell joined
with them for their Authority. But Secondly, We ought to consider the Rightful
and Lawfulness of the Authority that commands a Submission to their Ordinances,
etc. unless it can be supposed there was never any but such in the World. Which
I am pretty sure you will never grant, by reason it would condemn both the Law,
and the Sense of all the Judges in England, touching the Rebellion in King
Charles the First and Second's Time; which I perceive cost you some Time and
Pains to get over, and yet could not without Blundering and making a downright
Contradiction. For notwithstanding all those Distinctions you make to show the
Difference between that and the present (as you call it) thorough Settlement,
yet it does not serve your turn; for whatever Cromwell and his Adherents
designed, either to alter or destroy all Laws and Religion, yet (agreeable to
the Principles you go upon) that makes no Difference, but he had (as he was the
Supreme Magistrate) as good a Title to our Allegiance (according to your Sense
of the Higher Powers) as King Charles II. had before he Abdicated the Kingdom
after his defeat at Worcester. All which no doubt God (for the Sins of this
Nation) suffered his Judgments then to begin at his own House, and with his own
People; which brings me to the Approbative and the Permissive Will of God,
which was always by your selves made use of for our not taking Measures by the
prosperous Success of Things, and the Prosperity of the Wicked. The
Consideration of which made the Prophet Jeremiah as it were Reason the Case
with God himself; Jere. 12.1.2.
Righteous art thou, O Lord, when I plead with thee; yet let me talk with thee
of thy Judgments: Wherefore does the way of the Wicked prosper? Wherefore are
all they happy that deal very Treacherously? Thou have planted them, yea, they
have taken root: they grow, yea, they bring forth fruit; thou art near in their
Mouth, and far from their Reins. And this Prosperity of the Wicked had likewise
startled a great many good Men, and David himself was one of that Number, till
he went into the Sanctuary, Ps. 7^.17
and considered there was an After-reckoning to account for. And then he could
tell us of their being set in Slipery Places, and that their Prosperity was
rather a Curse than a Blessing to ripen them for Destruction, in Vindication of
God's Righteous Dealing with Wicked and Rebellious Wretches. A notable Instance
of this, we have in the Case of Absalem, where God permitted his Insinuations (
Oh that I were Judge in the Land, etc.) to prevail so far, as he not only stole
the Hearts but the Allegiance also of his Father's Subjects, and the wisest of
his Father's Counselors went over to him; insomuch that at last he attempted
not only to take the Crown from his Father's Head, but persued him likewise to
take (no doubt) his Life also. And had not God himself stepped in between, by
defeating the Counsel of Achitophel, he had peradventure (being both able and
willing) gained his point. I only hint these Matters, because you lay a great
Stress upon Providence giving a Success, etc. and if he had succeeded (as such
Things has been) I suppose none but what is ripe for Bedlam would have
attributed it to the Will of God any other way, than it is his Will that we
Kill, or Steal, or break any other of his Commandments, which we see he permits
every day to be done. And I could put you in mind of another instance, which
far exceeds that of Absalom, where Almighty God was pleased to permit a Company
of Rebels and Traitors (I may Lawfully so call them, by reason many of their
Names remain still upon Record) to proceed so far as not only Resist, but
Imprison, nay, put (I had almost said Crucify) to Death their true Liege Lord
and King; and then, like wicked Ahab, took Possession of the Vineyard, and all
by such Providential Principles as yours and Hobbs's. It Is true you would by a
nice Distinction make a Difference between his and yours; but it is so much
like all the rest that it will not pass Muster. And therefore all such Loyalty
and Allegiance that is built upon such weak Foundations must needs (like the
House built upon the Sands) tumble down upon the least Storm that shall arise.
Mat. 7.27.
But (to speak in your own Phrase) is not this to build with Stubble, and daub
with untempered Mortar? So that the more that is laid upon such rotten
Foundations, do only serve at last but to make the bigger heap of Rubbish. For
if Power and Success be a sign of providence prospering an undertaking, then
(as to Right) there can be little or no difference between the Thief and the
honest Man; for Providence are as it were alike to both, only She gives one
Money or Goods, but not a sufficient strength to defend them; and gives another
none, but power enough to take them. Ay but say you, this will not hold in
little petty Robberies, (because a Man may be called to an account by human
Laws, that is (you say) the Reason) but you tell us, God is not confined to
human Laws. Ca. Pa 4.
And therefore what he does by Providence, will hold in small matters as well
as great. And I presume if there be any difference in breaking the 8th
Commandment, he that steals the most must be the greater Transgressor, unless
you think that quantity lessens the quality of the Crime. And as to that, I
presume you know what a Pyrate (when accused) said to Alexander the Great; I
(says he) Rob but in a single Ship, but Thou with great Fleets and Armies. For
which bold Answer (as some say) Alexender pardoned him. And it was but
reasonable, for they both acted by one and the same providential Principle, of
Power and Success giving a Right. Ca. pa. 7.
And I am afraid the Golden Farmer might be infected with some such Notions of
Providence, from his being so successful in his undertakings, for almost (as
People say) 30 Years together, which made him (as the Ordinary told us) not
like the Doctrine of Restitution.

But all that think so, and are fond of such (Covenant) Doctrine, and do believe
them true, I would advise them to read and consider well the 21st verse of the
50th Psalm, These things have thou done, and I kept silence: Thou thoughtest I
was altogether such an one as thy self; but I will reprove thee, and set them
in order before thine eyes. Or, Eccles. 8.11. Because sentence against an evil
work is not executed speedily, therefore the hearts of the Sons of men are
fully set in them to do evil. From which it is evident, That Prosperity and
Success is no sign of God's approving the wicked Ways and Designs of bad Men,
especially when his own Sacred Laws are broken to gain their Ends: For if we
will not allow a difference between the permissive and approbative Will of
Heaven, then (as I before observed) God must be the only Author of all Evil;
and how much that borders upon (if not the same thing we call) Blasphemy, I
shall leave it to your self to judge.

There is one place more I remember you quoted to prove your Case, etc. and
that is our Savior's Answer to that ensnaring Question of the Pharisees and
Herodians, Mat. 22.17.
Is it lawful to give Tribute unto Caesar, or not? But our Savior well knowing
their Designs, gave them an Answer according, Render therefore unto Caesar the
things that are Cesars, and unto God the things that are Gods. When they heard
these words, they marvelled, and left him. And well they might, for his Answer
was no more to their purpose than it is to yours: For what relation had this
Answer to your Notion of Possession and Success giving a Right, unless you had
proved Caesar had no legal Right, and so was (according to your own distinction)
but a de facto, and not a legal and rightful Emperor. Besides Tribute may be
paid where Allegiance is not due, (as many in Flanders, and Savoy, and other
places are too sensible of) and therefore our Saviors was a fit Answer to
their own answering the Question our Lord asked them, when they brought unto
him a Penny: And he said unto them, Whose is this Image and Superscription? They
say unto him, Cesars. So that it is plain, our Savior bidding them give unto
Caesar the things that are Cesars, and unto God the things that are Gods, is not
to your purpose, for our Savior we find in lesser matters declines being a
Judge; And one of the company said unto him, Master, Lu 12 14.
speak unto my Brother, that he divide the Inheritance with me. And he said
unto him, Man, Who made me a Judge, or a Divider over you? And so in like
manner in the other Case, without determinating the Point, which indeed was the
only thing that the Pharisees expected, that so they might entangle him in his
talk; and therefore he answered them, v. 18.
Why tempt ye me ye Hypocrites, etc. which was as much as to say, You know well
enough those things before you ask, you have Rules and Laws which I came not to
destroy, but to fulfill, etc. and then gave the aforesaid Answer on purpose to
frustrate their expectations, and to put them in mind of what was due to God,
as well as to Caesar. So that our Lord's Answer was no more a giving of new
Rules to know what are Cesars, and what are Gods, than to what sort of Cesars
they become due, well knowing God's Word is sufficient to instruct us how to
determine that Case.

And so, according to my promise, I have briefly examined those Texts of
Scripture which you urged in favor of your Case of Allegiance, etc. But
having, as you see, compared them with others, they do not appear in my
judgment to favor it all, and therefore what remains, is the third and last
thing, viz. to draw [from your Notion of Providence and Success giving a Right]
some useful Inferences very necessary for practical Reformers both of Church
and State.

And first of all, If Power and Success gives a Right, etc. than those sort of
People we call Grumbletonians, [for I believe there is no Government without]
Heaven permitting them as the Canaanites were amongst the Children of Israel as
Thorns in their sides, may take comfort from this wholesome [and as you call it]
providential Doctrine; for notwithstanding they are in a state of damnation [as
the providential Instruments of our happy by your] all the while they are a
plotting and contriving to resist the higher Powers, etc. Yet if they have the
good Fortune [or Providence should permit them] to get uppermost, I presume
then their Case may be altered, especially as to this World; but what it may be
in the next you have not as yet [in your Case] told them.

But Secondly, this Doctrine promises the like Consolation to all the chief
Heads of all the Mobilees in all Governments [though never so thoroughly setled]
in the World. And a Captain Tom, if he can but preach or persuade [as
Marsinello did] enough of his Gang to espouse his Cause and Interest, he may, for
ought I can see, purchase as good a Title to a Crown, as he has to his
Commission; and if he succeeds [by your Rule] who dare question his Right,
since you have given it the Divine Stamp, which puts me in mind of what a great
Poet said, [in the Character of a Noble Peer who preached to the Mob much such
sort of Doctrin] and I will make bold [they being much to the Point in hand] to
transcribe them, only to let you see how good Wits jump.

He preaches to the Crowd that Power is lent, Midal p. 6.

But not conveyed to Kingly Government;
That Crowns Successive bear no binding Force;
That Coronation Oaths are things of Course.
Maintains the Multitude can never Err,
And sets the People in the Papal Chair.
The Reason's obvious, Interest never lies,
The most have still their Interest in their Eyes;
The Power is always theirs, and Power is ever wise.
Almighty Crowd. thou shortens all Dispute,
Power is thy Essence, Wit thy Attribute.
Not Faith nor Reason make thee at a stay,
Thou leap'st over all Eternal Truths in thy Pindarick way.
Athens no doubt did Righteously decide
When Phocian and when Socrates was tried.
As Righteously they did those Dooms repent,
Still they were wise whatever way they went.
Crowds Err not, tho to both Extremes they run,
To kill the Father, and recall the Son.
Some think the Fools were most as Times went then,
But now the World's o'r-stockt with prudent Men.
The Common Cry is, even Religion's Test,
The Turks is at Constantinople best.
Idols in India, Popery at Rome,
And our own Worshiy only true at home.
And true but for the time, it is hard to know
How long we please it shall continue so.
This side to day, and that to morrow burns,
So all are God Almighty's in their turns.
A tempting Doctrine, plausible and new,
What Fools our Fathers were if this be true.
Who to destroy the Seeds of Civil War,
Inherent Right in Monarchs did declare.
And that a lawful Power might never cease,
Secured Succession to secure our Peace.
Thus Property and Sovereign sway at last,
In equal Balances were justly cast.
But this new Jehu spurs the hot-mouth'd Horse,
Instructs the Beast to know his Native Force,
To take the Bitt between his Teeth and fly
To the next headlong Sleep of Anarchy.
And how agreeable this part of the Peer's Character [of preaching to Mobilees]
was to his Practice, and your new Notions of Allegiance, let the World judge.
It Is easy to draw diverse other Inferences altogether, as useful for the
Enemies of our Israel, as these two I have already named, but they would swell
this Letter beyond its intended Bounds: And therefore I will haste toward a
Conclusion; for by this time, I presume, Acts 26.27.
I may ask you St. Paul's Question to King Agrippa, Believe thou the
Prophets? I know that thou believe, etc. Yet your Case of Allegiance, etc.
would almost persuade a good Christian to doubt it; for your prevaricating,
according to the different Cases which at different times happens to fall in
your eye, gives cause for a just suspicion. And your two last Books has made it
too evident, that you do not (as to what you have formerly told us) believe
your self; which must consequently create in us, poor Laymen, melancholy
Considerations, in that we must venture our very Souls upon the Judgment and
Integrity of such Priests who are as variable as the Weathercocks on the
Steeples of the Churches they preach in. For it is not many Years ago that not
only your self, but the whole University of Oxford rejected such Doctrines as
your Case, etc. is founded on, witness the Judgment and Decree that past in
their Convocation, July 1. 1683. against certain Books and damnable Doctrines,
(as they were pleased to call them) consisting in all of 27 Propositions, the
10th of which I will give you in the very words, etc. because they are the same
on which the whole stress of your Case relies on, and I wonder you did not
place it amongst your own. The 10th Proposition, etc. runs thus:

Possession and Strength gives a Right to Govern. Success in a Cause or
Enterprise, proclaims it to be Lawful and Just. To justify it, is to comply
with the Will of God, because it is to follow the Conduct of this Providence
Hebbs, Owen's Sermon before the Regicide^ Jan. 3^. 1648. Baxter, Jenkins's
Petition, Oct. 1651
.

So you see you do but bring up the Rear to all these famous Heroes who have
marched before you, fighting the good Fight of Faith, (in the Good Old Cause)
some of which have not as yet finished their Course, and so are still but in
expectation of their future Reward, but what that may be is no great matter:
For if they grow Rich, and fill their Bags with Crowns here, they will trust to
Providence for hereafter. And filling of Bags, you know, is such an Epidemical
Distemper, that there are few but what are Infected with it. And Judas himself
possibly had never coveted to have been one of the Twelve, but for the sake of
carrying the Bag; and rather than not have it full, for a Sum betrayed his Lord
and Master. And it is too plain, we all (the Priests not excepted) do much more
mind the things that belong to our Profit and Preferment here, Luke 16.8.
than our Peace hereafter. And our Savior has told us, The Children of this
World are in their Generation wiser than the Children of Light. But it is such
a sort of Wisdom which will turn but to a slender Account at last, and
therefore, as our Lord elsewhere says, Mat. 16.26.
What will it profit a Man to gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul, etc?
But that is not much minded in our days. We may observe from the Universal
Degeneracy of the Age we live in, that Truth and Justice, Religion and Loyalty
are fled from amongst us, 1 Kings 22.23.
and that Almighty God (for our Sins) has (as he once did) permitted a lying
spirit to go forth and possess our Prophets, so that they prophecy falsely,
and we love to have it so, etc. which strengthens the Argument of Heaven's
permissive Will. And that those Texts cannot (without abdicating our
Understandings) be understood in your Sense of Providence and Success giving a
Right, which is the chief Basis on which your new Fabric stands; but how long
it will, Time, and the next change of Stars (if ever there be any) will best
demonstrate. And truly should there be as many in your Time, as happened in the
Life of the Famous Vicar of Bray, the Scheme is so nicely drawn, and your Case
so exactly calculated to the purpose, that you may without Doubt or Scruple
swear Faith and Allegiance to them all; nay, though they were all Competitors
at the same time. And as they happen to be uppermost, you have (as you say)
God's Authority for so doing. So that you are now (Thanks to Providence) pretty
safe: For should our Metropolis be in as much danger by the French (which God
forbid) as Vienna was not long since by the Turks, you (no doubt) would, like a
good Christian, patiently submit, and pay both a cheerful and active Obedience,
(from your Notion of Providence) judging it the Lord's doing, though it appear
never so mavelous in our eyes. For indeed Passive Obedience and Nonresistance
were never more necessary as now in your Case, etc. And yet after all I cannot
but be amazed to see two such Cases as your Resistance and Allegiance come from
one and the same (I will not say Heart, but) Hand, without blushing for the
matter. But though you do not, I am apt to believe there are some (and of your
own Function too, that do for you) not so much for your taking the Oaths, etc.
(as no doubt a great many good Men may) but for your giving such Reasons as
reflect upon the Honor and Reputation of the Church of England, and possibly
may make many of Her weak Sons believe that She now owns the same pernicious
Doctrines that her Clergy have been preaching and writing against ever since
the Reformation, and strictly forbidding their Hearers the practicing under no
less Penalty than Damnation. But I find the Case as well as the Times are
altered; For then was then, and now is now.

But to draw toward a Conclusion, I hope your Christian temper will lead you
to a favorable Construction of this Letter, which I Will assure you was not (as
I said in the beginning) designed to reflect on Persons or Things, but only to
expose (as well as I could) pernicious Principles, which would, if universally
received, quickly throw us from St. Paul's state of Grace, to Hobbs's of
Nature. And what Advantage that would be to preserve Civil Societies, let the
World judge. It Is true, you say God is not confined to humane Laws, but at the
same time it is reasonable to suppose though he be not, you and I, and all
Mankind are; and the acting or doing any thing against humane Laws, (especially
such which do not contradict his) is the same thing as breaking of God's Laws.
And no doubt the doing so, is a Resisting the Higher Power, and they that
Resist shall (as you say) receive to themselves Damnation: And if so, What is
Sauce for a Goose, is Sauce for a Gander. And I know not how any Body (in the
last Reign as well as in this) that have wilfully, or by chance (in keeping ill
Company) fallen into such a miserable state, can get free of it, unless by a
true and hearty Repentance. And Restitution, where it can be done, is (as you
use to tell us) the only Evidence of its being Sincere. And without it, I
cannot be persuaded but that such must remain in that lamentable state let them
be never so prosperous and successful, unless you think Success can alter the
very Nature of Things, which is something difficult to suppose, though your
Case, etc. seems to imply it; which Case had it came out in a time of such a
Through Settlement as where there were no Competitors, or any to make a Claim, I
dare appeal to all Mankind, Whether it would not have been burnt by the Common
Hangman, as a Libel against all Established (and in your own Words, Through
Settled) Governments in the World. And whatsoever your private Advantage may be,
I am sure the Church nor the present State are no great Gainers by it: For I am
of the Opinion your Case of Allegiance will no more preserve either from the
Attempts of wicked and rebellious Wretches in this Reign, than your Case of
Resistance did in the last. And therefore you may spare your pains, (unless it
be to oblige your Bookseller) for you know this is a wicked and rebellious
Nation, which are more apt to follow Example, than Precept. And therefore you
did well in leaping (like the Belweather) over the Hedge, which was (I suppose)
in hopes the rest of the Sheep would follow by the noise only. And truly if
they do not, I can attribute it to nothing more than their being better taught
heretofore by your self and others in those Times, when People generally
thought them both orthodox and honest. And if what was said to St. Paul of
Learning, might be truly said of Honesty, I am persuaded most of our Learned
Clergy are pretty well in their Wits: For if Possession gives a Right, they
ought for that Reason not to Abdicate their Livings (let what will happen) for
fear People should think they were mad, in not acting according to their own
Principles. But as the World goes, we may observe People act not as if
Godliness is great Gain, but as if great Gain is Godliness. And if so, we may
easily then guess who are the Babes of Grace, and the Providential Favorites of
Heaven. For since (as you say) there are Providential Kings, as well as Kings
by Divine and Humane Intail, and (by your Notions) they have Right, or no
Right, but as they shall be (by Providence) in the Possession, then it
consequently follows, that when ever it happens that a Dispute is between a
Legal (which I take to be the same as a Divine) Right, and a Providential, or
an Accidental one, for by your Rule there can be no difference) God is then by
his Providence (if I may so say) fighting not only against his Divine Intail,
but his own Eternal Rule, which distinguishes what is Right and Wrong. And
also the Doctrine of our Lord, and the Apostles, viz. the least evil in the
World ought not to be done, to procure the greatest good: For St. Paul
positively says, Romans 3.8.
They that do evil that good may come of it, their damnation is just. Which is
a dreadful Consideration for all those that act by such pernicious Principles,
and therefore the Apostle does justly style such Enemies to the Cross of
Christ. Phil. 3.8.
And indeed so they are, and to all Religion and Civil Government, that
promotes such Providential Notions, which seems to run counter to the positive
Commands of the Almighty. And your self, and others of your Coat, has often
told us, We are not to follow Providence contrary to Precept. And St. Paul
himself (which I presume was as great and as knowing as any of you) bids us be
followers of him, 1 Cor. 11.1.
no other ways than he was of Jesus Christ. Which I think is a good Argument
for others dissenting from you, when you dissent from your self, and the Truths
which formerly you have taught. But, blessed be God, though you have Recanted,
and as it were taken leave of them, yet they are nevertheless Truths for that,
and we know where to find them; and it is no small comfort to an honest
Christian, that no such Republican Principles are to be found in the Doctrines
of our blessed Savior and his Apostles, nor in the Canons of our Church,
notwithstanding the present Opinion and Practices of many of our Churchmen. And
therefore it is highly rational what St. Paul advises, Romans 16.17, 18.
Now I beseech you Brethren, mark them which cause Divisions and Offenses,
contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them. For they that
are such, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly, and by good
words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple. Which we find too
true, but it is to be feared they will deceive themselves too at the last, and
then how significant and to the purpose will it be to ask the Apostle's
Question, What fruit had ye then in those things whereof ye are now ashamed?
Romans 2.21.
But to draw (as you use to say) toward a Conclusion, I will end where you
began, viz. with one Observation on the Title of your Book, in the following
Words, etc.

The Case of Allegiance to Sovereign Powers stated and resolved according to
Scripture and Reason, and the Principles of the Church of England, etc.

Now as for Scripture, I think I have (and from your own former Sentiments of
it) demonstrated that your Case will not stand that Test. But then secondly,
for it is being agreeable to Reason, I shall (as being no Pretender to it) leave
that to those who think themselves the only Critics and Masters of it. But for
the third and last, it being according to the Principles of the Church of
England, is so astonishing that I know not well what to answer, save only that
if it be, it is a Secret that has lay'n a long time concealed, as if Providence
had not only reserved it for these times, but also designed you the happy
Instrument of discovering so convenient a (Mufftich) Providential Doctrine so
absolutely necessary in a Christian Church.

And now I dare appeal to all the proper Judges of Scripture and Reason, and
the Principles of the Church of England, not excepting your self, (though you
set up for one of the chief) whether your Case, etc. have answered (save only
in the price of the Copy) your own Expectations, which were, I presume, to
convince all Protestants of the Reasonableness of your Providential Hypothesis,
which you indeed take for granted, and drive, Jehu-like, as if you had received
Heaven's Commission to banish all the contrary Opinions out of the World. For
you argue with all the Assurance, as if it was as plain as a Pike-staff, and as
demonstrable as any Point in the Mathematics, and that your self was never in
the Right (as to your Providential Rulers) till this happy Juncture, etc. But
what makes it more acceptable at present is, the advantage the Protestant
Religion has gained by your not complying with the Providential Settlement
(till such time as you were in danger to have lost all) which no doubt was
likewise the Providential Occasion of your more earnest seeking of God, and
making inquiry into (not the revealed, but) the secret Will of God (which is a
Note beond Elah) touching those matters, without which the Church of ENGLAND
perhaps might have continued another Century or two without the happiness of
such a convenient Doctrine. And that which makes it so to you, is worth
observing; for if hereafter some ill Men (which neither understands you nor
Hobbs) should throw it in your Dish that you writ in defense of King William
and Queen Mary's Right, etc. You may truly answer, it was no more for them than
it was for Captain Tom, or any Body else that can get into the Saddle, for
there your Providence centers them. And when they are so fixed, they cannot (as
you say) be without the Divine Authority; so that you need never write more on
that Subject, for it is impossible for any Government to trump up that your
Case, etc. will not as well serve as it does the present, for which I think our
most Gracious King and Queen have no great Cause to thank you. But if they do
not, there are others that will, viz. our Commonwealth Friends, only I must
tell you by the way, they are angry with you for two things: The first is, that
you did not sooner meet with their spiritual Shuff to the heavy A -- Christian.
And the second, for your making it a Church of England Doctrine, when their
Belief of the contrary was one of the chief Reasons of their deserting from it.
But now you have taken down (as to that Point) the Partition Wall, and if you
would be but as kind in other matters (as they think) of less moment, no doubt
you might bring them all within the Pale, etc. And truly since you have been so
generous as to part with your darling, distinguishing Doctrine of constant,
steady, and unsophisticated Loyalty to your Prince, which you learned from the
Principles of your Church, as the London Clergy pleased to say London Gazette,
Febr. 16. 1684.
in their Address to the late King James, I think it would not be amiss (for so
great a good) to gratify them with the rest, without which it is to be feared
they will still stick where they did stick, and you know how closely they
always stuck to the Interest of the Crown and the Church, and therefore it
would be worth while to gain to you so considerable a number of Friends. But
(as our Lord told the Scribes and Pharisees) you are so nice and exact in
paying of Mint and Cumin, that you omit the more weighty things of the Law,
viz. Justice, Mercy and Truth, etc. though indeed neither is to be left undone.
And yet if ever it could be thought convenient, I confess this is the only time
to judge it tolerable, if not necessary, to settle (as in Scotland) a Religion
suitable to the Inclinations of the People, and that may possibly fill up the
Vacancies of those that cannot swallow your Turkish Providential Pill,
notwithstanding its being so nicely and Philosophically prepared and gilded
over by so famous a Christian Doctor. But the Experiment is altogether new, and
till of late hardly amongst us known, but never practiced by good Christians,
and therefore the Apostle may very justly upbraid us, as he once did the
Galatians, Gal. 3.1.
O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you, that you should not obey the
Truth, etc. And truly unless we are so, we could not be so grossly imposed upon,
as to be whiffled about with every new wind of Doctrine. To prevent which,
Solomon, I think, gives the best Advice in the World, Prove. 24.21.
My Son, fear thou the Lord, and the King: and meddle not with them that are
given to change.

But I will conclude all with an Observation of one remarkable Passage in your
Preface, in the following Words, viz. I prayed heartily to God that if I were
in a Mistake, he would let me see it, that I might not forfeit the Exercise of
my Ministry for a mere Mistake, and, I thank God, I have received that
Satisfaction which I desired.

(Which I presume no Body doubts.) And I suppose the foregoing Words are to
satisfy the World, that you received better satisfaction from your hearty
praying to God, than from the Convocation-Book. If not, why is it made use of
as an Argument of freeing you from a supposed Doubt; for you were, or you were
not satisfied before your praying, etc. Now if you were, then it was needless
and impertinent to pray to God to let you see your Mistake, when there was
none. If not, then it is plain your Satisfaction was not owing to B. Overill's
Book, but to your hearty praying, etc. But after all, how shall any other Body
be satisfied that your Satisfaction in that Case was owing to your praying to
God, etc. Or that he was pleased to illuminate your Understanding so, as to
give a better Exposition of Romans 13. than you had done heretofore in your Case
of Resistance. But give me leave to put a Case: Suppose a Man had a mind or
inclination to do some particular thing which is Ill in its own Nature, or
perhaps he is in some doubt whether it be or no; but the better to inform his
Judgment, he goes and prays heartily to God for a Satisfaction touching the
Lawfulness of the Matter, (though possibly he might be resolved to do it
before.) After which, finding his desires more strong, and his inclination to
do it rather increased than abated, is he then to take it for granted, that God
has answered his Request, and that he is sure he is in the Right in doing the
said Ill, or doubtful Thing. If so, then Cromwell, and others of the Regicides
that murdered Charles I. was in the Right also, for diverse of them made use of
the same Plea. And Harrison at his Trial seemed to be angry at those Words in
his Indictment, Of not having the Fear of God before his Eyes, but by the
Instigation of the Devil, etc. For he said, He always had the Fear of God
before his Eyes, and sought him Night and Day with Tears, till he received
(like you) such Satisfaction as be desired. And so consequently it was the
Lord's Work, (as it was called in those Days) though done by the ways of the
Devil. But we all know this ridiculous Plea would be admitted before an earthly
Tribunal, and whether it will before an heavenly one, do you judge: For then I
am afraid it will be to little purpose our saying, We thought, or we believed,
and heartily prayed, and received such Satisfaction as we desired, that we were
in the Right, (though at the same time perhaps we were conscious of breaking
God's positive Commands.) Mat. 7.22, 23.
And though we should press the matter yet further, (as our Lord says) Many
will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy Name, and
in thy Name cast out Devils, and in thy Name do many wonderful Works? And then
I will profess unto them, I never knew you, depart from me that work Iniquity.
From all which it is rational to conclude, That the receiving of such a
Satisfaction as you (and others before you) talk of, after praying, etc. is not
a sufficient Reason for their doing any thing they have a mind to do, unless it
be in its own Nature good, and not contrary to the written Word of God, which
is a better Rule to direct us in those matters, than any such Phanatical,
Enthusiastic Notions. I do not mean of praying to God, which without doubt
nothing, if sincere, can be better; but drawing from thence such unwarrantable
Consequences, which you cannot but know have been made use of as a color for
the worst of Villainies, and I am persuaded there are few but believe you were
as well satisfied (as to your Mistake) before, as after praying, etc. for what
relation had such sort of Cant to Mr. Jenkins, and your Turkish Predestinarian
Hypothesis; for if that were ever true, it will always remain so, if neither ne
nor you had never preachd or prayed in your Lives. And supposing it true in
spite of all your nice Distinctions, there is no successful Villainy that has
been done since the Creation but may be justified. Nay, the very Surrender of
Mons to the French King (by the same Rule) must be thought very just and
reasonable, because he having set down before it armed with your Authority (of
having Power to crush them into Obedience) and by shutting your Reasons into
the Town, Page 6.
gave the Inhabitants a Mathematical Demonstration of his having a Providential
Title to be their Lawful King and Governor, Page 6.
without intrenching upon the K. of Spain's legal Right; for he, as well as the
late King James, may recover it again if he can. From which Argument we may
infer, That the same Providence that removes a Prince from his Crown and Legal
Rights, or Them from him, may (as in King Charles the Second's Case) restore
them again, without Wrong being done to any Body all the while, because (as you
say) it is the work of Providence, and the Person in Possession is always in the
Right. Which I confess is good News for great Princes, though bad for little
ones; for if Strength and Force be the only determination of Right and Wrong,
Religion and Laws will quickly become useless, and then I am sure your
Profession as well as mine will be none of the best: But such wise and great
Men as you may say what they please. But for my part, I could as easily be
persuaded that there is no God, as believe his most holy Commandments may be
broke for the public Good; or that we may follow our own scanty Notions of
Providence contrary to Precept.

FINIS.

