CHOICE OBSERVATIONS AND EXPLANATIONS Upon the Old Testament.

Containing in them many remarkable matters, either not taken notice of, or
mistaken by most, which are Additionals to the large ANNOTATIONS made by some
of the Assembly of DIVINES.

To which are added some further and larger OBSERVATIONS Of his upon the whole
BOOK of GENESIS Perused and Attested by the Reverend BISHOP of ARMAGH, And Mr.
GATAKER Pastor of REDERITH.

By the Learned and Industrious JOHN RICHARDSON, Bishop of Ardagh in Ireland,
one who had a considerable hand in the forenamed large ANNOTATIONS.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for John Rothwell, at the Fountain and
Bear in the Goldsmiths-Row in Cheapside. Anno Dom. 1655.

Reader,
THou art seriously to consider, that the Reverend Author did not cite
Scriptures by number, but weight: He did not jumble Scriptures together
fortuitously, (as too many do, as Democritus did his atoms) but judiciously
selected out those which were most apposite. And surely, nothing is more
helpful to the right understanding of Scripture, then comparing it with it
self: do not therefore slightly pass over his Scriptures, as if they were of
no moment, but diligently peruse them, and let it not be grievous to turn to
the places cited, for the marrow of this Book consists in the Authors
dexterous paralleling of Scriptures together, Farewell.

To my REVEREND and LEARNED Brother, Doctor Richardson BP. OF ARDAGH IN IRELAND
Right Reverend and Worthy Brother,
YOu know that out of that intimacy which has ever been betwixt us from our
youths, I cannot be unacquainted with the course of your studies. And you being
now entered upon the last Scene of your life, as well as I, thereupon I would
willingly become a Perswader of you, not to let your Labors be lost, and die
with you; but to publish some or most of them to the view of the World, for the
benefit of the Church. The last thing I viewed of yours were your Annotations
upon GENESIS, having before perused your other Explanations and Observations
upon the Old Testament, though slight and suddenly done, as you say, yet think
them not unworthy of the Press. For I find therein diverse things of moment,
which I meet not withal in others. And to prevail with you herein, let this
find some place, That it is the judgment and desire of

Your endeared Friend and Brother, JAMES ARMAGH.

The EPISTLE Dedicatory, to the REVEREND BISHOP of ARMAGH.
Most Reverend, and my very good Lord,
YOur word shall be my warrant, and your desire my duty, to publish my
Annotations upon GENESIS, together also with my Explanations and Observations
upon the Old Testament, yet I would be loath your Lordship should bear any
share of the blame, or harsh censure that may hap to pass upon them, Coming
abroad, I know not to whom I may rather dedicate them, then to him who is the
cause that they see the light. And the inscribing of whose name, will bring
luster and credit to the Work it self, however otherways but too weak and
unworthy. To speak much in this kind of your self to your self, suits not so
well, with that humility and modesty which befitteth us both. And in so doing I
should but light a candle before the Sun. Yet you will give me leave to
enjoy, and make this expression of mine own comforts, which I have still
derived from all those endearments, wherewith you have vouchsafed to oblige and
honor me, even from our younger years, in our joint Educations and first
Employments, until now that we both are ready to leave the stage of this life.
My thankfulness for your favors may happily receive some piece of emprovement
hereby. And my Prayers shall still be continued, for the Prolongation of your
days, to the further good and glory of the Church of God. This tribute you may
duly and daily expect from

Your obedient Servant, Suffragane, and Loving Brother, JOHN ARDAGH.

Mr. GATAKER'S EPISTLE to the Bishop of Armagh, wherein is his Attestation upon
the Reverend BISHOP RICHARDSONS Observations and Explanations upon the OLD
TESTAMENT.
Right Reverend,
I Acknowledge my self, besides many other fore-passed real fruits (...)
favor, much beholden to your Lordship, for your late kind (...) and the
addition unto it, in imparting unto me those learned and (...) Observations of
that Worthy Bishop, whose eminent parts I had formerly taken notice of, and
upon occasion given testimony of to others, in his Annotations on a great part
of the Prophets, whereunto he herein sometime refers himself. Now albeit
when your Lordship left them with me, you were pleased to afford me a longer
space of time for the perusal of them, which I was willing to accept, not
knowing what leisure I should have for them in regard of some present
distractions; yet I could not forbear to lay hold on all opportunities, to
enjoy the view of them; which I much thirsted after: which upon serious survey
I found to be answerable to my pre-conceived expectation of them, and
well-worthy their Author, containing in them many remarkable matters, either
not commonly taken notice of, or mistaken by the most. In the Computation of
times, your Lordship well knows, and much better then my self, that there are
diverse difficult points much disputed and debated among the grand Masters of
that part of learning, in which being not so exactly versed in such Accounts, I
dare not take upon me to determine ought. I have drawn up here a short note of
some things of no great moment, which meeting with, I stick at, or have doubt
of, that it may appear to your Lordship, that I have not slighted or laid it by
me, but have advisedly run it over: which having dispatched, I was the rather
willing to return it to your Lordship by the hands of my son Tailor, who was
willing to take thereby occasion to wait upon your Lordship, to present you
with a sorry fruit of my fruitless labors, which I shall entreat your
Lordship to accept, and to look on with a favorable eye. This short list of my
work and undigested thoughts, your Lordship may be pleased, if you shall think
good, and deem them worthy of his consideration, to impart unto the Venerable
Bishop, with recommendation of my due respects, and sincere affection to him,
whom I should be right glad to be better acquainted withal, together with my
humble request to him, that he will pardon my boldness, and bear with my
weakness, which in these scriblings I doubt I have too much discovered. So
with sincere acknowledgement of your Lordships manifold favors, and my deep
engagements; in lieu whereof I have nothing of worth to return, but thanks to
you, and prayers unto the Lord in whose work you labor, for his gracious and
powerful support of you therein, I take leave, craving liberty to subscribe my
self

Your Lordships weak and unworthy, but sincere well-wisher, much obliged in
him, THO. GATAKER.
Roderith, June 1652.
TO THE Reader.
THE first draught of these Observations was ready for the Press before the
Great Annotations upon the Bible, printed in Anno 1651. did come forth.
Afterward perusing them, I found some differences between those Annotations,
and these Observations; which did minister some occasion of enlarging my first
draught; chiefly by noting and insisting upon these differences: yet rarely
naming the said Annotations; but leaving rather the full animadverting,
comparing and judging of them, to the judicious Reader. Thereafter I committed
these to the Press. And after a good progress had been made by it, for some
reasons, not so fit to trouble thee withal, I was again induced, and
overruled, to enlarge my self yet much more; and to descend to very many
Particulars, by way of Exposition and Explanation in some of the ensuing Books
of Scripture, much beyond what was my first Proposal and Intendment. Which
thing, I conceive, will dim the light and luster of those choice places and
Observations, which primarily were my only aim. Yet, I hope, to the Candid
Reader, These larger additions will not seem altogether impertinent, or
improfitable; as to the speedier understanding of Gods Holy Word. Nevertheless
I never undertook or intended to meddle with, or mention all the difficult
places of Sacred Scripture. For them, in general, I refer thee to the said
Great Annotations, as the best extant in that kind. Neither do I here touch
upon the New Testament, save only when, and where, the Text or the Old
Testament does crave for the quotation of it. In this Collection of
Observations and Explanations, I follow the Order of the Books and Chapters of
the Bible. And I heartily wish, that the holy Text were always before their
eyes, who shall vouchsafe to read them; without which the life of them, or of
many of them will be lost. And the numerous quotations therein used will really
appear, specially to Divines, to be of good concernment to them, and who shall
have occasion to use them, and will take the pains to turn unto them. Be
pleased not to think that I am too curious, or thy self can be too ambitious,
of knowing any truth revealed in the Scriptures. Thou can not search them too
much, nor can the Word of God dwell too richly and plentifully in thee. Indeed
the substantial and essential matters therein, must first be known and cared
for. Yet these may help to bring diverse remarkable Places and Passages of
Scripture into more common knowledge, and familiar notion, then I suppose yet
they are. Such as they are, yet now at the last, though the Press much
retarded them, if they may any ways make for thy spiritual use and profit,
that same is the earnest desire of

Thy Servant in Christ J. A.

A TABLE Of such things as are occasionally discoursed of in this Book; But for
the maine things, the whole Book is a TABLE to it self.
For the larger ANNOTATIONS upon GENESIS, the INDEX referres you to the Chapter
and Verse.
A.
THe Ark, its mansions. page 76, 77
B
Baal and Baalim. p. 62, 63 Of Bethel. Genesis 28. 19. Branch taken for the
Messiah. 423
C
Covenant, how it is new under the Gospel. 424 To be cut off, to what sins
threatened, and what it is, Genesis chapter 17. 14. 21
D
Day, when it begins. p. 1. Genesis 1. 5. Christ's Descent into hell, in what sense
it is to be taken. 181
E
Egypt. 5 Ephod. 81 Places of Esaias cited in the New Testament. 352 Evening,
diversely taken. 12 For ever, a phrase diversely taken. 40
F
Solomon's fool, who. 298 The four hundred years of Isreal's bondage, how
accounted. 15, 13
H
God how he hardens, without being the Author of sin. 359 High places. 90, 91
Hyperbolies much used in Scripture. 52
I.
Jacob marries Leah at or before the beginning of the fourteen years service. 8
Of Jerusalem. 50, 51 Of imprecations. 195 Isreal, how four hundred years
strangers, and where 5 Isreal's number when they came into Egypt. 9
K
Kings of Israel and Judah, their names, reigns, etc. 100. to 104
M
Hebrew-measures. 6, 14 Melchizedech, who he was. Genesis 14. 18. 254, 255
Ministers among the Jews, what a liberal maintenance they had. 32
N
Of Names. 3
O
Of Oaths. 138 Of the Oath with the Gibeonites. 50 Oaths are to be kept. 435
P
Passover, whether Christ kept it on the (...) day with the Jews. Passover,
when kept by Christ, when by the Jews, and how the difference of their days
(...) Genesis 1. 5. Of Prophets. 80, 81 Psalms, their division. 172. the music
mentioned in them. 173 Psalms, cited in the New Testament, 175, 176
R
Red sea, why so called. 11 Repentance, how a scribed to God. 422
S
Scribes. 129, 130 Seven years Jacob served for Lea^, and seven for Rachel,
when and how, Genesis 29. 20. Sh^kel. 16 Shihor. 115 Of Christ's sitting at his
Fathers right hand. 251 The Sluggard, how described in the Book of the
Proverbs. 274, 275 Sun, how it returned ten degrees. 389 Of swearing and
forswearing. 434, 435 Genesis 24. 3. Swearing, a duty. 434
T
Temple described. 92, to 96 Tempting* how ascribed to God, how to men chapter 22.
1. Of tithes among the Jews. 31, 32
V
About various readings in Scripture. 106, 107 Of vows, Genesis 28. 20.
Y
Year, when begins. 11, 12
ANNOTATIONS ON Genesis.
CHAP. I.
Ver. 1. IN the beginning,] Of the Creation which God created, Mark 13. 19. and
so in the beginning of the world then not eternal, nor the matter of it, but
God only eternal. And this beginning most probably was at the Autumnal,
Equinoctial, or Spring, and that for the Ecclesiastical account only* upon, and
because of Gods m^raculous bringing them out of Egypt at that season of the
year, from whence Gods people constantly began their year, till the change made
to the vernal Equinoctial.

God] Elohim in the plural number, intimating a plurality, not of Gods, Exodus
12. 2. 23. 11, 16. 34. 22. Lev. 25. 9, 10. Deuteronomy. 16. 13, etc. but therefore of
persons in the Deity. The word Creators, Eccles. 12. 1. has a singular number,
viz. El. Genesis 14. 8. and Eloah, Job. 12. 4. And it signifies Strong,
Almighties, powers. Sometimes it is used, but improperly, to signify false
gods, Exodus 20. 3. Angels, and Magistrates among men, Ps. 8. 5. 82. 1, 6.

created] Bara. This word is proper to God, and a word in the singular number:
importing the singular unity of the Deity. And that God had no Assistants,
Co-adjutors, or subordinate Agents and Instruments in the work of Creation. But
the Angels themselves are his Creatures, Col. 1. 16. A God, and He the Creator
of the World; are acknowledged in a manner by all Heathen Writers, if not by
all men.

the heaven] Or heavens, and the earth,] Heaven and Earth here may be taken as
a summary proposition of the whole Creation; as, chapter 2. 1. and, Exodus 20, 11.
And the rather considering the Hebrew Articles here used, ETH, and HA, as
pointing to these now in being. And yet as probably and more, of the common
Chaos, and Mass, and Stock of both, as seeming to be included within the work
of the first day: and so it will seem to have the best coherence, with the
words next following, and the story ensuing of the Creation of the Heavens and
Earth, the second and third day.

light day] Strictly and usually so taken; otherwise called an Artificial day,
consisting of about twelve hours, John 119 As the natural day consists of 24.
hours. Both there are mentioned, chapter 7. 12, 17.

V. 5. And the evening, etc.] The Evening, which is the beginning of the Night;
and the Morning, which is the beginning of the Day, are called the first day;
largely taken, the Day natural of 24 hours. And here observe, that as
Darkness was before Light, v 2, 3. so the Evening and Night is made, and
reckoned the beginning, and first part of the natural day, or large day of 24.
hours. And accordingly the large Day is called an Evening Morning, Dan. 8. 14,
26. And by Paul, (...), a Night-Day, 2 Cor. 11. 25. And as Moses does here, so
God commanded it, and the Jews observed it, to reckon the beginning of their
large Day at the Evening, Lev. 23. 32. From evening to evening you shall
celebrate your Sabbath. And so for eating unleavened bread at the Passover.
Exodus 12 18, In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month at even,
ye shall eat unleavened bread until the twenty one day of the month at even.
And ye we find in the days of our Savior, the reckoning altered, that they
began their natural and large Day in the Morning, as appears in the
Evangelists, recording the History of our Saviors Resurrection, Mat. 28. 1.
Mar. 16. 1, 2, 9. and chapter 15. 42. Luke 24. 1 John 20. 1, 19. Which alteration
might happily be occasioned by the account of the Romans, and compliance with
them, who then had the sovereignty and dominion over them.

Now these two things well observed, may happily serve to assoyle a doubt, and
clear a difficulty. The case is this; Our Savior did eat the Passover twenty
four hours before the Jews did eat it. And this is clear out of the Gospels,
Matthew. 26. 17, 18, 19, 20, 47. Mark 15. 42. Luke 23. 54. Joh 18. 28. and 9. 14,
31, 42. That our Savior did not anticipate the day by reason of his future
Passion; But kept the right day appointed in the Law, we are not to doubt of
it; Considering the strictness of the Command for the day, Exodus 13. 10. And
Christ's coming to fulfill all righteousness, to keep the Law both Moral and
Levitical. And that he did so in this point and particular, appears also,
Matthew. 26. 17. Mark 14. 12. Neither do those words in Joh. 13. 1, 2. disagree
from it; The words there mentioned, before the feast of the Passover,
appearing to be understood of two days before the Passover, Mat 26. 2. And
being spoken on the Mount of Olives, Mat. 24. 3. And the Supper there
mentioned, being to be understood of the Supper in the night of the Passover,
which was kept in Jerusalem, Mat. 26. 17. And those loavs of bread in the
Gospel, Matthew. 16. 9, 10. could make and multiply the waters of the Deluge, to
rise to such an height; and that as little by miracle, as the other way must
needs imply.

Now the right day was the fourteenth day of the first month, Abib, or Nisan,
in the evening, or between the two evenings, Exodus 12. 6. i. e. between the
two extremities of the evening-tide, whereof the former belonged to the end of
the declining day the ending, which was the thirteenth day, (not the
fourteenth, as in the late learned and large Annotations on Matthew. 26. 17) the
latter belonged to the beginning of the night, when the day following is said
to begin, Genesis 1. 5. which was the fourteenth day, at the beginning and evening
whereof the Passover was to be eaten, as appears, verse 18.

Now how it came to pass, that the Jews kept the wrong day, and why so, is the
question and difficulty remaining. Some speak of a Jewish Tradition; That after
the return from the Babylenian captivity, They ordered and altered the time
so, as the day of eating the Passover might not fall on the Monday, Wednesday,
or Friday; but then they put it off to the day following. The truth of this
Tradition I am ignorant of: much more, of any reason why they should dare to
have such a Tradition and Order. But finding in the Gospels, The Account for
the Beginning of the natural and large day of twenty four hours altered from
the Evening to the Morning, as was formerly observed; I rather conceive that
both our Savior, and the Jews may be said to eat the Passover on the same
day, viz. both on the Friday, and at the evening too; so it be understood
according to their own several minds and meanings, reckonings and accountings:
Our Savior rightly beginning and ending the day, from evening to evening, and
the Jews erroneously, from morning to morning. The issue so, will be this; That
on the thirteenth day, consisting of twelve hours, from morning to evening,
called an artificial day, the Disciples prepared the Passover for our Savior;
which is therefore called the first day of the feast of unleavened bread,
Matthew. 26. 17, 18, 19. And when the ^ven was come, which was the true Beginning
of the fourteenth day, Jesus sat down with the twelve to eat the Passover,
Matthew. 26. 20. according to the Law; The Morning after, and so on till the
Evening, making an artificial day, which indeed was the true later part of the
fourteenth natural day, our Savior was examined, condemned, and at last
suffered. And that time is called the Jews Preparation, Luke 23. 54. John 19
31, 42. the Preparation of their Passover, John 19. 14. the Preparation before
the Sabbath, Mark 15. 42. And the Evening following, which was the later part
of their fourteenth day in their account, they did eat their Passover. And the
day following, which was the Sabbath, is called the day after the Preparation,
Matthew. 27. 62. And whereas, to countenance that pretended Jewish Tradition, for
putting off the eating of the Paschal Lamb from the Friday, to the Saturday,
which was their Sabbath Day, those words of John are alleged, for that Sabbath
was an high day, John 19. 31. I answer, That it is called an high day, because
it was the Sabbath that fell within the compass of that high and solemn
Feast. But all this I propound and submit to the judgment of the learned.

And again, This Observation of the true Beginning of the day at the Evening;
Together with the Alteration of it from the Evening to the Morning in the days
of our Savior, may help to quiet that controversy which of late, has
troubled too many, about the Beginning and Ending of the Christian Sabbath, or
Lords day rather. For, if we will begin it as the Jews began their Sabbath, by
Gods own appointment; and as the Beginning of the natural day of twenty four
hours was reckoned from the Creation, Then sure we must begin it at the
Evening. But if we will begin it, according to that alleged Alteration we
find in our Saviors time, Then we must Begin it in the Morning, which later
is favored the more by our Saviors Resurrection very early in the morning,
Matthew. 28. 1, 6. Mark 16. 2, 6. Luke 24. 1, 6. John 20. 1. To the memory and
honor of whose Resurrection as the day of Rest was changed, so it accords
well, and suitably seems to require the same change for the beginning of that
day; agreeing therein with the aforesaid Alteration. However, the Point Material
is, That it must comprehend twenty four hours.

V. 6. Firmament] By Firmament here generaly by all is understood whatsoever is
to be seen in that vast space above the earth, from the surface of it, to the
uppermost visible Orbs: As conceiving, and that justly, That the Air, or
lowest region of it, betwixt the Earth and the Clouds, were alone too small a
thing for the whole work of the second day. In the midst of the waters, and let
it divide the waters from the waters: the waters which are under the firmament,
from the waters which are above the firmament;] Diverse ancient and learned
Fathers have conceived hereupon, and upon the words of the Psalm 148. 4. That
a great, or the greatest part of those waters that covered the face of the
(...), verse 2. were lifted up and spread as an Orb of waters above, and about
the highest part of the starry heavens, and so there remain. And from those
windows of heaven opened some would fetch the greatest part of those waters in
the Deluge, that covered all the high hills that were under the whole heaven
fifteen cubits upwards. Yet all this seems too weak a foundation whereon to
build that Orb of supercelestial waters. For plain it is, that the lowest
region of the air is called heaven, and the firmament of heaven, even that
wherein the winds, clouds, and fowls do fly, verse 20. Jer. 51. 16. Dan. 7.
2, 13. And indeed as every part of the water is truly called water, so every
part of the heaven, and firmament may be, and is called heaven, as well as the
whole, or the highest parts of it the starry heaven, and the third heaven, chap
1. verse 14, 15, 16, 17. Genesis 22. 17. 2. Cor. 12. 2. And if such a division
were meant, as they pretend to, where then would be the division between the
waters of the seas, and the watery clouds; without which division, and the use
of it, the earth could not bring forth sustenance for Man, or Beast? And as for
the windows of heaven, they are understood of the region of the air, as Psalm.
78. 23. Mal. 3. 10. And the same God who rained down fire and brimstone on
Sod^m, and made or multiplied the widows oil, 2, Kings 4. 2.

V. 8. the firmament heaven] All above us so called. And the Angels this day
most likely were created: considering the words of the Lord, Job 38. 4, 5, 6,
7. that all the sons of God shouted for joy, when he laid the foundations of
the earth. Though Moses mentions not their creation, as puposely intending to
relate only the creation of things corporal and visible; and that happily a
having regard therein to the rudiments and weakness of that Infant-Church of
the Jews, to whom immediately he wrote this History.

second day] Without that approbation, And God saw that it was good, which yet
is doubled, on the third day: (happily because the separation of the waters begun
this day, was not perfected till the third day) And it is once repeated on each
of the other four days with the addition of very good, in the end of all.

V. 20. and fowle] Out of the waters, and the ground also, chap. 2. 19

V. 26. Let us] Intimates a Plurality of Persons in the Unity of the Divine
Essence. And so pluraly, chap. 3. 22. 11. 7. Esaias 6. 8.

V. 27. created he them] Both this day, chap. 5. 2. though the manner of her
creation, be more fully related, chap. 2. v. 18, to 23.

V. 29. to you it shall be for meat] Living things are not here mentioned for
meat* till after the flood, anno mundi, 1657. and no more are corn, bread,
drink, and other things named, which yet no doubt were in use before the flood,
Cain being a tiller of the ground; And ^el being a keeper of sheep, was not
likely to leave their flesh to be devoured of wild beasts, or to rot, either
above, or under ground: And man's body being in a dying condition since the
Fall, stood in more need of nourishing meats, then whiles he abode in
Innocence. Neither were the herbs, trees, ground after the Curse, of that
virtue and vigor for his nourishment and sustenance, as formely. It is nothing
likely then that man should want so needful a nourishment as flesh or fish for
so long a time, so many ages of the world; because they were not happily so
necessary for him in the time of Innocence; or not expressed by name for food
at the time of his Creation. But after the Fall, being killed for clothing;
and offered in sacrifices to God, even by Abel himself; It is not to be
imagined but that they did eat of the flesh of them, as in sacrifices was ever
usual. And therefore also, for those ends and uses the distinction of them,
into clean and unclean, was made, even before the flood; And seven of the
Clean reserved, for sacrifice, and food, whereas two sufficed, as in the
Unclean, for preservation of Seed, Genesis 7. 2. And the words of our Savior
noting the old world for their eating and drinking before the flood came on,
Matthew. 24. 38. implies rather an abuse in the excess, then an abstinence from
the use of flesh and other delicacies.

V. 30. Every green herb for meat] But after the Fall of man, beasts, and birds
of prey, and fishes eat and devour one another.

CHAP. II.
Ver. 3. BEcause that in it] This being alleged as the Reason of the Sabbath,
Exodus 20. 11. 31. 17. shows it to be here instituted before the Fall And then
no doubt but Gods people had more need or the same Ordinance and Help in
Religion ever since the Fall. And the Rulers Narrative to Moses speech or
question Exodus 16. 22, 23. seems to me to imply the keeping of the Sabbath by
the Jews before the giving of Manna in the Wilderness, Exodus 16. 5. not
appearing to be made known to the people till after the Rulers relation of sin;
And Gods direction to Moses* And apparently it was kept before the giving of
the Law on Mount Sinai.

V. 4. the Lord God] Here first the word Jehova is used. And after often in
this Chapter, Genesis 15. 7. 22. 14. 26. 24. 27. 20. 28. 13. and in many places
more. And therefore, Exodus 6. 3. But by my Name Jehova was I not known to them,
is spoken comparatively; not known so fully, in making good my promises by
answerable effects, as now I will be, in my bringing of them out of Egypt,
notwithstanding all Pharaohs obstinacy.

V. 7. breathed] To show that man's spirit is not of the earth. as his body; but
of nothing by the insufflation of God: and so differing from the spirit of
beasts, Job 33. 4. Eccles 3. 21. It has i^s immediate original from the Father
of spirits, who did by creating infuse it, or by infusion create it.

V. 8. planted] On the third day, chap. 1 11, 12.

Eastward] From Moses, in the wilderness, where he wrote this History.

in Eden] A part of Mesopotamia.

V. 9. tree of life] Because naturaly much; but sacramentaly more, it conduced
thereunto.

tree of knowledge] From the event, in respect of our first parents.

V. 10. went out of Eden] Flowing into it from above.

V. 11. Pison] A part of Tygris, Pa^itygris, or Pisotygris.

Havilah] From Havilah the son of Cush, Gen 10. 7. 25. 18 1 Samuel 15. 7.

V. 13. Gihon] The lower part of Euphrates.

Ethiopia] Cush, i. e. the Western Ethiopia, adjacent to the Desert Arabia.

V. 14. Hiddekel] The upper part of Tygris.

Euphrates] Called the river, the great river, Deuteronomy. 1. 7. 11 24. Rev. 9. 14.

V. 17. Thou shall not eat of it] The thing in it self indifferent; but made
unlawful to him by Gods command; both she^ the Lords absolute dominion over
him; and his sin to be the greater and more notorious, if he disobeyed it.

surely die] Be subject to mortality, misery; death, and to him which has the
power of death that is the Devil, Heb. 2. 14. A man sentenced to death we count
him a dead man, dead in Law, though he and his execution be reprieved for a
time. If he had not sinned, he had continued in a safe and blessed condition,
free from death, and all manner of evil.

V. 19. and brought them unto Adam] Genesis 7. v. 8. 9.

V. 20. And Adam gave names] Not that the names must needs be given according
to their natures,

V. 21. ribs] With the flesh, v 23. The want of which rib, God could, and
easily did sufficiently supply, by closing up the flesh instead thereof.

V. 22. made he a woman] 1 Cor. 11. 8.

brought her to the man] As to her husband. Thus the married estate honorable
in the state of Innocence, Matthew 19. 4, 5, 6.

V. 23. This is now bone etc.] He knew it partly of himself; but more by divine
revelation.

V. 24. Therefore shall a man leave, etc.] These seem to be rather the words
of God, Matthew. 19. 4. 5. then of Adam or of Moses. And are spoken both simply,
Genesis 24. 58, 59. and comparatively; rather leave the duty of children to
parents, then of husband to wife, when any such case of necessity shall fall
out.

And they] Explained by twain, Matthew. 19. 5, 6. by two, 1 Cor. 6. 16. Against
Polygamy; and unlawful divorces; and carnal copulation out of marriage.

V. 25. both naked etc.] That shameful through sin since the Fall, Romans 6. 21.
which was not so before: not shall be after the Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. 43.

CHAP. III.
^^rs. 1. SErpent] Diverse sorts are of them Some specious, and beautiful to the
eye.

subtil] Prudent, Matthew. 10. 16. crafty, 2. Cor. 11. 3. and so the fitter
instrument for Satan.

he said] Many Angels fell, Mar. 5. 9, 12. 2 4. Pet. 2. Jude v. 6. having one
for Principal, Matthew. 25. 41. And they fell from the beginning, 1 John 3. 8.
Now they are called Devils or Demons, of their knowledge and cunning still
remaining. One of them, if not the Principal, opened here the Serpents mouth,
and caused it to speak with man's voice, 2 Cor. 11. 3. as the Lord did with
Bala^ms Ass. And the Devil did this speedily after man's creation: Whence he is
called a Murderer from the beginning, Joh. 8. 44. and that old Serpent, which
deceives the whole world, Rev. 12. 9.

yea, has God] This would be an abrupt beginning. But it seems to presuppose
a Precedent parley in a more cunning and winning way.

V. 2. And the woman said] She wonders not at the Serpents speaking: and
speaking so, or it may be, she did at the first, for a while at least; though
it be not here expressed: yet happily conceiving that her knowledge in some
things was to increase by experience, as our blessed Savior did, Luke 2. 52.
He came to find fruit on the fig tree, when the time of figs was not yet, Mar.
11. 13. And she being not apt, b^ able to suspect any evil or sin, as not
knowing the fall of the Angels; or any evil to be in the world, she might the
rather entertain this conference.

V. 3. Neither shall ye touchit, lest ye die] These words may be uttered with a
good intention, and receive a good interpretation, in answer to the Serpents
question: she hereby heightening Prohibition to the utmost, to put the greater
^ie upon her obediente; and averring, and ascertaining the danger and death,
which otherwise would ensue; as, Matthew. 15. 32. compared with, Mark 8. 3.

V. 4. ye shall not surely die] Thus the Devil is a liar, and the father of it,
John 8. 44.

V. 5. as Gods] Satan might be pretend to mean it of the Angels. But the woman
conceived it of the true God, in plurality of persons, as appears, v. 22.

Knowing] Satan abuses the name of the tree^ to a wrong sense: pretending all
good, but intending all woeful knowledge of sin and misery by it,
experimentally.

V. 6. And when the woman saw, etc.] Here was the lust of the flesh, the lust
of the eyes, and the pride of life, 1 John 2. 16. And thus through his eating,
by one man sin and death entered into the world: In Adam all his posterity
sinned, being then in his ^oines, Romans 5. 12, 19. And in Adam all die, 1 Cor*
15. 22. Rom* 5. 15, 16, 17, 18.

and he did eate] Yet it is said Adam was not deceived, but the woman being
deceived, was in the transgression, ^ Tim. 2. 14. She first and deepest in the
transgression; and she, not the Devil immediately, the means to induce her
husband to sin, she giving the forbidden fruit to him; with words to persuade
him, v. 17. though she did not purposely deceive him, as the Devil did
purposely deceive he.

V. 7. And the eyes of them both] Small distance then between the time of both
their eating.

naked] In body before, without shame, while without sin, chap. 2. 25. But now
experimentally they know that they were naked, both in body and soul; with
shame; as, Exodus 32. 25. through guilt of sin, and sting of conscience.

they sewed] A silly shift. And therefore notwithstanding this, they seek to
hide themselves, v. 8. But for their souls, they did not, nor indeed could make
any shift at all.

aprons] To cover especially those parts, of all most uncomely now, which serve
for generation; By which sin has its derivation to all mankind.

V. 8. voice of the Lord God walking] Either in an humane shape, or otherwise
without that, making this voice, and noise by his Almighty power.

in the cool of the day] Cool wind, at evening tide; which brought the voice
and noise to their hearing.

hid themselves] With as much folly as faultiness: through the horror and
amazedness wherewith they were stricken at Gods approach.

V. 10. I heard] He touches not, but dissembleth the true and maine cause.

V. 11. have thou eat^n, etc?] q. ^ I appeal to thy conscience, whether this
be not the true cause of thy fear, and present shame at thy nakedness now.

V. 13. What is this, etc?] How heinous an offense? as, chap* 44. 15.

V. 14. unto the Serpent] Curses him, as the Devils instrument. Such is Gods
hatred of sin, punishing the bare instruments of it: as in Exodus, 32. 20.
Levit 20. 15, 16. as a father breaks the sword wherewith his child was shine.
Yet this curse upon the Serpent is so expressed, as fitly in a Mystical sense,
relates to, and includes the curse inflicted on the Devil, the chief agent and
author.

upon thy belly] This going on his belly, and feeding on dust, was not the
natural gate and food of the Serpent before. For he is numbered among the
beasts, chap. 3. 1. distinguished from creeping things, chap. 1. 25. And the
green herbs was given him for meat, chap. 1. 30. But now he is adjudged to go
on his belly and breast; and that with more pain and difficulty, then other
creeping things: As to Adams labors, and Eves conception, and sujection to her
husband, pain and ^orrow were added for their sin. And for meat, he must
lick the dust, Mi^^h 7. 17. Esaias 65. 22. Whence they are called Serpents of the
dust, Deuteronomy. 32. 24. The Sovereignty of Gods power and authority over all his
creatures does clear the justness of his proceeding and doom here against all
Serpents.

V. 15. enmity] A natural antipathy between Mankind and Serpents. A greater
enmity between Mankind and the Devil; His enmity to Mankind is too apparent;
And man's to him, so far as he is rightly known and discerned to be the
Devil: though by his cunning* conveyances, as here with Eve, he reigns since
the fall, as a God over a great part of Mankind, 1 Cor. 4. 4.

It] Or, He; the World for Seed, and the Verb for shall break, being both in
the Hebrew of the masculine gender, pointing to Christ, the Seed of a woman,
Gal. 4* 4. Luke 1. 42. 2. 7. the promised Seed, Gal. 3. 16. who destroyed the
Devil, Heb. 2. 14. John 12. 31* and his works, 1 John 3. 8. triumphing over him
on his Cross, Col. 2. 15. And in Christ our Head, we resist and overcome the
Devil, 1 Pet. 5. 9. 1 John 2. 13, 14. The God of Peace bruising Satan under our
feet, Romans 16. 20.

V. 16. thy desire] Shall be subject to thine husband, as, Genesis 4. 7. As Abels
to Cain, as the firstborn.

and he shall rule over thee] By Creation she was to live in subordination to
man, 1 Timothy 2. 13. 1 Cor. 11. 9. But now a further rule in the man, and desire
of subjection in the woman is required here, as a punishment or chastisement on
her then he had over her by Creation; and with more grief unto woman-kinde, 1 Timothy 2. 12. 1 Pet. 3. 1, 5, 6. 1 Cor. 14. 34. Tit. 2. 5.

V. 17. Cursed is the ground] The earth which he gave to the children of men,
Psalm. 115. 16. and to their use, is now by Curse made more unprofitable to them
and their use, verse 18, 19. chap. 5. 29. Yea, the Creature was made subject to
vanity by man's sin; subject to a vanishing, flitting, and perishing estate;
subject to the corruption and abuse of man; subject to serve for the object and
instrument of sin, Esaias 24. 5. And therefore the heavens and the earth, which
are now, are reserved unto fire against the day of judgment, 2 Pet 3. 7, 10.
And the whole Creation groaneth, and travelleth in pain together until now:
The earnest expectation of the creature waiting for the manifestation of the
sons of God; that it may be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the
glorious liberty of the children of God: that all the steps and traces of that
malediction put upon it for man's sin, may be utterly rased out of the world;
and new heavens, and a new earth created, as the Scripture phraseth it; every
creature according to every ones degree and nature partaking of that glorious
liberty of the children of God; being fully delivered from all vanity, slavery,
abuse, and evil, Romans 8. 19, 20, 21, 22.

V. 18. the herb of the field] Not the herbs and fruits of Paradise, v. 23, 24.

V. 20. Eve] Here first so called. God calls her Adam, chap. 5. 2.

because she was] To be; thus Propheticaly he foretells it: else it is Moses
that gives the reason of the name.

V. 21. coats of skins] In likelihood of the skins of beasts, which God taught
him to kill for sacrifice: being that Abel did so soon sacrifice, chap. 4. 4.

V. 22. And now lest, etc.] Spoken by an ironie. For it was not the eating of
the fruit, that could recover him, or preserve him from the sentence of death,
whereunto God for his sin had now doomed him? Both the Trees were Sacraments of
the first Covenant of works to confirm the Promise, and threatening there unto
appertaining; which Sacramental tree of Life he had now nothing to do withal,
no right to it, having broken the Covenant, and incurred the Curse; no more
then he ought to have meddled with the other Tree, in the state of innocence.

V. 24. drove out] The day not so certainly known; But in all probability, the
same day of his creation. For Satan would omit no time. The woman, if she had
been better practiced, and not taken at the first, would not so soon have
^r^ed: or if she had known the Fall of the Angels, she would have suspected
the more. Her speech, v. 2. We may eat seems to show, that no fruit had been
eaten before. And doubtless she fell a Virgin. And accordingly Jews,
Caldeans, A^abians, Greeks, Latins, Barbarians, hold that they fell the day
they were created.

at the East] Where the entrance was into Paradise.

Cheru^ims] Angels. Moses in the use of this word applying himself to the
capacity of the people, to whom the Cherubims in the Tabernacle were well
known, representing the Angels. In Ezekiels Vision, we read of Cherubims as
living creatures, with wings, chap. 1. 5. and 10. 1, 15. In Daniel, the Angel
Gabriel flying.

and a flaming sword] Happily to each, if there were more Angels then one,
Cherubims being of the plural number. We read of an Angel with a drawn sword in
David's time, 1 Chronicles. 21. 16.

which turned every way] All for the more terror, that^ man should not dare to
attempt re-entrance.

CHAP. IV.
Verse 2. ABel] So the New Testament writes him, Matthew. 23. 35. Luke 11. 5^.
Heb 11. 4. and 12. 24. The Hebrew still is Hebel. Says David, Psalm. 39. 5.
Verily every man at his best estate is altogether Abel, i. e. vanity. And so
indeed Abel was, being slain by his brother.

V^ 3. of the fruit of the ground an offering] An Oblation, or Meat Offering of
fine flower, or first fruits in the ear, in Levit. 2. and chap. 22. 14. Exodus
22. 29 23. 19. The Heathen Greeks and Romans, in their times did likewise:
Likely by an imitation of the Jews.

V. 4. firstlings] This afterward by a special Law, upon a special reason,
prescribed to the Jews, Exodus 13. 2. Number. 3. 13.

and of the fat thereof] In Moses time this expressly commanded, Exodus 20. 13,
22, 25. Levit. 3. 3, 4, 5, 9, 10, 11, 14, 15, 16, 17. The fat is the food of
the offering made by fire, for a sweet favor unto the Lord. All the fat is the
Lords: neither Offerer, nor Sacrificer; nor yet in Civil use was any Jew to
eat of it; at leastwise of the fat of such clean beasts as were fit for
sacrifice, Levit. 7. 23, 24, 25. The fat of the oil is mentioned, Number. 18. 12.
meaning the best of it; And so of all things offered to the Lord, the best is
required, which it seems also that Abel here performed. Not as those did, Mal.
1. 13.

By Faith Abel offered this Sacrifice, Heb. 11. 4. And therefore it was no
will worship, but grounded on Gods Word for his warrant; revealed to Adam, and
by him likely to his sons.

had respect] This was seen of Cain. It is likely therefore that God showed it
by some visible sign, as by fire from heaven consuming the Sacrifice; as,
Levit. 9. 24. Judge. 6. 21. 1 Chronicles. 21. 26. 2 Chronicles. 7. 1. 1 Kings 18. 38. or
it might be by some other ways.

unto Abel, and to his offering] To the man first, to the Offering for the man's
sake, as a fruit of his faith. He righteous, Matthew. 23 35.

V. 5. not respect] Through his want of faith and sincerity in this service of
God, 1 John 3 12.

very wroth] At God, and Abel both.

V. 7. Sin lieth] Sin is anom^e, or enormity; and the punishment of sin,
which like a Sergeant, or they, is couching, and lies watching, ready to seize
upon thee, and tear thee.

And unto thee shall be his desire] Subject to thee, as to the firstborn, as,
chap. 3. 16. This is to allay his wrath and incensed spirit.

V. 8. talked] In a brotherly manner, dissembling his hatred, that he might get
the better opportunity to kill him, when Abel should not think of it. See the
Annotations on chap. 35. 22.

V. 11. Cursed from the earth] The earth shall plague thee, that received thy
brothers blood; as is showed in the next words.

V. 12. when thou tillest] A punishment, the more proper, because he was a
tiller of the ground; and proper to Cains portion, where ever he was; not a
second general curse upon all the earth.

a fugitive] Cast out from society with thy kindred and acquaintance; from Gods
presence, and the communion of his Church, and pursued still with a guilty
conscience. So in ver. 14, 16.

V. 14. Of the earth] Of this earth where I now dwell with my Parents and
Kindred. Else he speaks like a man distracted by a guilty conscience. He
dilates his punishment that denied his sin.

Every one that finds me shall slay me] There might be many living by this
time of Abels murder, of whom he might stand in fear, yea, of them as yet
unborn. And his guilty conscience now fears every one, as having made himself
odious to every one. And such flee when none pursues; yea, the sound of a
shaken leaf does chase them: And he might justly fear the beasts of the field.
Amongst the ancient Romans, Greeks and others, such notorious offenders,
whosoever would, might surely kill them. And what large power is given to the
revenger of blood by Gods Law, we may see in Numb. 35. 19, 21.

V. 15. Seven fold] God would have him preserved alive, (though a life likely
worse then death,) as a monument of his justice against murder and tratricide,
Psalm. 59. 11. Not for love to Cain, but to prevent future murder.

Mark] a mark of protection, and of ignominy too; likely a kind of palsy and
ghastly look; or some worse mark, that made him an horrible spectacle of Gods
vengeance against so heinous a crime.

V. 16. From the Presence of the Lord] not of his general Providence, but of
his special Presence, by grace, in the place of his Worship and Service; of
which place, and the Presence of the Lord there, with Adam and his godly seed,
it might be said, as, Genesis 28. 17. This is no other but the House of God, and
this is the gate of Heaven.

Nod] so called by Anticipation, from his wandering there.

V. 17. Builded a City] at last; builded, or rather was building, began to
build, as the builders of Babel, Genesis 11. as in many hundred years after he and
his posterity well might, and yet he be a vagabond in body and mind
nevertheless.

V. 19. Two wives] The first bigamist, and corrupter of wedlock.

V. 23 I have slain, etc.] Beastingly he speaks of his valor and wrath, to
asray and appease the brawles of his wives between themselves, and the vexing
of him; that he was a man that would not suffer the least injury of them, or of
any man, but he would avenge himself, and that fully: Or vaunting himself to
his wives of his valor, to appease their fear of him, lest hurt should come
to him from others, through his fierceness and boisterous violence; bragging
what heavy vengeance he would take of him that should set upon lamech, many
times more then God himself appointed to be taken for the avengement of Cain.
Or, if he had slain a man, and was wounded himself, and thereupon his wives
afraid of his life, he seeks to appease them, but in a fierce and insolent
manner, as scorning their fear of his danger, and thinking it a disparagement
to him and his valor, and upon this reason too; That he had a juster cause for
what he had done, then Cain had, and therefore might be the more secure, that
if Cains death should be avenged, much more his; or rather in an Atheistical
scorn, vaunting, That if God did set such a guard upon Cain, surely Lamech
they needed not to doubt, should escape well enough; Cains impunity might well
serve for his security. Thus variously may these vaunting words of this
wrathful, lustful man, be understood and taken; bearing himself happily the more
proudly upon his sons inventions, v. 20, 21, 22.

V. 25. Seth] borne, when Adam was 130. years old, chapter 5. 3. Therefore in all
probability Cain slew Abel, not long before that time.

For God] Eve rejoices, that her whole number of children in him was filled up
again. For it is not imaginable, that she had no more then Cain and Abel in all
that time And it might be she foresaw by the Spirit of God, that Seth should be
like righteous faithful Abel, and the roo^ of that holy progeny, wherein the
Church was afterward established.

V. 26. Enos] Sorrowful, Psalm. 9. 20. that the Nations may know themselves to
be but Enos, i. e. woeful men. (...)

Then began men to call] the Worship of God grew more public and solemn, and
in a sort restored and revived again, in the persons and families of Seth and
Enos, having bin almost buried in the paucity and privacy of the godly before
this time; a separation now being made by them from the profane society of the
wicked; such as were generaly the posterity of Cain.

CHAP. V.
Ver. 3. IN his own likeness after his image] such as he was now sinful; not
as he was created Holy. Yet still God was the Father of spirits, the God (and
Creator) of the spirits of all flesh, Heb. 12. 9. Numb. 16. 22.

V. 4. And he begat sons and daughters] after Seth; yet not excluding some to
be begotten before Seth; as Cain and others. And the same is likely to be
understood of the rest of the ten Patriarchs in this chapter before the flood;
That they begat sons and daughters, as well before as after the birth of those
Patriarchs, by whom the line of the Genealogy and Chronology is drawn. For it
is scarce probable, that in this first Age of the world before the flood,
wherein mankind had most need of multiiplication, the Patriarchs should be so
old, as the half of them above 100. yea, Jared 162, Lamecb, 182. Methusalah
187. Noah 500. before they had any children: though indeed Noah for his part,
had no more then three, when the flood came, 1 Pet. 3. 20. But so old they were
before that son was borne who was the Progenitor of our Savior, and in whose
race the main progress and succession of the true Church did consist.

V. 5. All the dayes] Adam was living in Lamechs days.

V. 21. Enoch walked with God] the seventh of Adam followed not the wickedness
of his age; But pleased God, prophesied, saying, Behold, the Lord comes with
ten thousands of his Sants, to execute judgment upon all, and to convince all
that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly
committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken
against him, Jude ver. 14, 15. And Henoch was not; died not as others: but was
translated by faith; God took him, body and soul, as after he did Elias, that
he should not see death, and he was not found, Heb. 11. 5. after he had lived
on earth so many years as there are days in our year; Thus was he a pledge
and pawn of the Resurrection, and life eternal and celestial, and prophesied
of the last and general judgment; Adam and Methusalah, and five Patriarchs
between them were living witnesses of his Translation.

V. 27. All the days of Methusalah] the longest liver, and died the last of
the nine Patriarchs, in the beginning of the year of the flood.

V. 29. Noah] Thus Lamech his father prophesied of him at his birth, presaging
comfort and rest by him, in the midst of all miseries, in those evil and
uncomfortable times.

V. 32. And Noah begat] i. e. began to beget. So, chap. 11. 26. and, chap. 7,
10. Japheth the eldest, Sem the second, Cha^^ youngest.

Of the LXX-Chronology in this Chapter. They extend the age of Methusalah
beyond the flood, contrary to Scripture, and add almost 1600. years, to the
true Chronology, in this and the eleventh chapters. Happily out of some
considerations touching the Heathens, for whom that Greek Translation was made.
But the LXX. now is no where extant, but patched infinitely.

CHAP. VI.
Ver. 1. WHen men began to multiply] very greatly; and specially Cains wicked
progeny, and wickedness with them.

and daughters] the occasion both of the corruption and calamity set forth in
the ensuing story.

V. 2. That the sons of God] Professors of the true Worship of God, Deuteronomy. 14.
1. 2 Cor. 6. 18. 1 John 3. 1. Which here grew remiss in Religion.

Daughters of men] of the profane race of Cain, that had little of God or his
image in them, in their minds or manners, but were mere men, 1 Cor. 3. 3.
natural men, unregenerate, and out of the Church; and such these their
daughters were.

Faire] without respect to spiritual beauty, not minding at all what they were
for Religion and manners. Thus beauty intangleth the fond and fleshly affection.

Wives] Loved, liked, and chosen only for Beauties sake. Gods Law after forbade
such marriages with those out of the Church, Deuteronomy. 7. 3, 4. Exodus 34. 16. 2
Cor. 6. 14.

V. 3. My spirit] In the Patriarchs, and specially in Noah, a Preacher of
righteousness, 1 Pet. 3. 19, 20. 2 Pet. 2. 5. And by good motions and checks
of conscience in the men of these times. As, Nehem. 9. 30.

For that he also is flesh] even my people also; all mankind, v. 12. are
fleshly, not having the Spirit, Jude v. 19 Romans 8 8, 9 Gal. 5. 16, 17.

120 years] granted for trial of their repentance, the long suffering of God
waiting, whether in this space of time, while the Ark was a preparing they
would repent, 1 Pet. 3. 20. by mortification of the flesh, and vivificati^ of
the Spirit, or, as St. Peter expresses it, be judged according to men in the
flesh, but live according to God in the Spirit, chapter 4. 6. agreeing with that of
Paul, 1 Cor. 5. 5.

This was twenty years before the birth of Japheth.

V. 4. Giants] Men of huge stature and strength, beyond others in those days,
such as Og was, of the race of giants, and the Anakim^ in Moses time, Numb. 13.
33. Amorites, Amos 2 9 Deuteronomy. 3. 11. Goliath, Isbbi-benob, Saph, Lahmi in David's
time, 2 Samuel 21. 16, 18. 1 Chronicles. 20. 5, 6, 8 Men, who in the pride and
confidence of their bodies greatness, were apostates from God, oppressors of
men, fierce and cruel.

And also after that] After those unlawful mixtures and marriages, v. 2. many
of their seed became such Giants: and after that destruction threatened, v. 3.

V. 5. Every imaginari^n] This heightens the sinfulness of this age, Mic. 7. 3.
But Genesis 8. 21. More strongly proves the universal corruption of man's nature by
the fall.

V. 15. 300 cubits] The length is ten times the height, and six times the
breadth; resembling for the fashion of it a man's coffin.

V. 16. In a cubit shall finish it] The Ark, not the window.

Doore] Wide, to receive an Elephant, closed up, and pitched belike, when all
were in, and that by God himself. chapter 7. 16.

With lower, second and third stories] These stories, considered with the
quantity and kind of the cubits, a common cubit then being longer then our
cubits, now and the sacred cubit being double to the common cubit, as appears
by comparing 1 Kings 7. 15. with 2 Chronicles. 3. 15. (not to speak of a Geometrical
cubit, six times, as some allege, as great as a common cubit;) we may easily
conceive the capacity of the Ark, to be fully sufficient to hold whatsoever was
required to be contained in it; specially if we understand here, where no kind
is nominated, the sacred cubit.

V. 18. My Covenant] For thy preservation, Typifying our spiritual preservation
and salvation by Christ, from the deluge of Gods wrath, 1 Pet 3. 21.

Thou] Eight in number, 1 Pet. 3. 20.

V. 19. Two of every sort] Paires of every sort. And here only the kinds are
named, the number in chap. 7. v. 2, 3.

V. 20. Shall come unto thee] Of their own accord, by my instinct, not else so
freely, as, chapter 2. 19.

V. 22. Thus did Noah] By faith Noah being warned of God of things not seen as
yet, moved with fear, prepared an Ark to the saving of his house, by the which
he condemned the world, and became heir of the righteousness which is by
faith, Heb. 11. 7. So, Exodus 39. 43. and, 40. 16.

CHAP. VII.
Verse 1. ANd all thy house] Thy children; specified, v. 13. No doubt, but he
had more of his family; menservants and maidservants. But they, and the
Shipwrights all drowned.

in this generation] Called by St. Peter, the world of the ungodly, 2 Pet 2. 5.

V. 2. Of every clean beast] Here is the distinction of clean and unclean
beasts, and fowls in Noah's time and before, even soon in all likelihood after
the fall of man. Long then before Moses time. In Moses time the distinction of
beasts and fowls, clean and unclean for sacrifice was this, that of all
beasts, only Beeves, Sheep and Goats were counted clean for sacrifice; and of
Fowls only the turtle-Doves and Pigeons, Levit. 1. And the Sparrow was used in
the clensing of the Leper and Leprous house, Levit. chapter 14. 4, 5. But for meat
to the Jews there was a further distinction of clean and unclean beasts,
fishes, fowls and creeping things, Lev. 11. The distinction here at the flood
is not particularized; and therefore we cannot be so certain, but guess only
by Moses, which were clean, which unclean.

by sevens] Not two sevens. The use of the seventh is set down for sacrifice,
chapter 8. 20. of other four, likely for meat; and of the other two, for
preservation of seed, as is here commanded, concerning the unclean beasts and
foul. Or more then two of the seven, might be for the greater increase of
those which were of most use and comfort to mankind, and the rest, for present
food and for sacrifice.

V. 10. Were] Began to be.

V. 11. In the second moneth] Bull; about our October, 1 Kings 6. 38. which is
the eighth month of the year, according to the Ecclesiastical account, first
commanded by God to the Jews, at his miraculous bringing of the children of
Israel out of Egypt, Exodus 12. 2. The civil account, and the civil year, even
then and still after continuing with them, the same beginning, as it ever had
from the beginning; in the month Tizri or Ethanim, about our September, 1
Kings 8. 2. I can see no just cause why we should not follow the civil Account
of the year here in Noah's time. Though the other reckoning of the months be
most followed in Scripture, after the time of the change aforesaid, 1 Kings 6.
1537, 38. Nehem. 2. 1. 6. 15. Esther 2. 16. 3. 7. 9. 15. Zach. 1. 7. 7. 1.

V. 17. And the flood was forty days, etc.] It rained so long, till the
twenty seventh day of the third month Chisleu: which is the nineth month
according to the Ecclesiastical Account, Zach. 7. 1. and falls in, with, or
about the middle of our December; and it prevailed upon the earth 150 days, v.
24.

V. 20. Fifteen cubits upward] Above all the high hills that were under the
whole Heaven; whatsoever we hear true or fabulous by Writers, or reports of
the height of the hills of Olympus, Atlas, Athos, Caucasus, Pike in Tenerif, or
any other.

V. 22. Died] But yet small charity to judge the Infants, and all of them to be
damned. Cham in the Ark cursed: and many out of it in the time of the lingering
deluge, might repent and be saved; though not from the temporal death, yet from
that which is eternal.

V. 24. One hundred and fifty days] Reckoning from the first day of the rain
falling, viz. seventeenth day of the second month, to the seventeenth day of
the seventh month, whereon the Ark rested on the mountains of Ararat, chapter 8.
4. are one hundred and fifty days.

Heathens in the deluge of Deucalion, show they had some inckling and hint of
this sacred history.

CHAP. VIII.
Ver. 1. A Winde] To assuage; not inrage.

V. 4. Rested in the seventh moneth] Called Nisan by the Chaldees, and Abib by
the Hebrews, answering to part of our March and April.

On the seventeenth day] About the beginning of our April; where ended the one
hundred and fifty days.

mountains of Ararat] An hilly tract of land in Armenia the greater, not far
from the Caspian sea, and near to Assyria and Mesopotamia, 2 Kings 19. 37. Esaias
37. 38. Jer. 51. 27. Some take these for the Gordean or Cordean mountains.
Some for the hills of Taurus or Caucusus.

V. 5. In the tenth month, on the first day] Called Thamus, answering the
middle of our June, beginning still the reckoning from September, the beginning
of their civil year. Thus after seventy three days since the Ark first
rested, and two hundred twenty three days since the flood first began, were
the tops of the mountains seen. To determine the gradual abatements of the
waters day by day, is vain curiosity, and foolish presumption, upon uncertain
grounds.

V. 6. At the end of forty dayes] After the mountainetops were first seen.
This makes up the number of two hundred sixty three days since the flood
began, and one hundred and thirteen days since the Ark first rested; and falls
on the eleventh day of their eleventh month, called Ab, and toward the end of
our July and not as the great Annotators have it on this place, on the eleventh
day of the eleventh month, called Sebat, Zach. 1. 7. the same which we call
January. But to reckon thus were to reckon the year according to the
Ecclesiastical Account, contrary to their own mind set down in their
Annotations, upon the fourth verse of this same chapter.

V. 8. A Dove] seven days after the Raven, v. 10. on the eighteenth day of
their eleventh month, about the beginning of our August. The sending out of
the Dove is mentioned in Dcucalions history.

V. 9. Found no rest] Though the tops of the mountains were seen forty seven
days before.

V. 10. And again he sent] On the twenty fifth of their eleventh month, called
by some Ab, about the tenth of our August.

V. 11. In the evening] Spending the day abroad.

plucked off] Not floating on the waters; so now growing trees were discovered.
The Dove found a place of rest to her feet; but not yet food fit for her.

V. 12. Yet other seven dayes] On the second day of the twelfth month, called
Elul, Nehem. 6. 15. About the seventeenth of our August. She met with her mate
after. Thus there are twenty one days from the opening of the window, for the
sending out of the Raven, and the Dove.

V. 13. First month, first day of the moneth] Twenty nine days after the last
sending forth of the Dove, to this time. This month is the month Tizri or
Ethanim, 1 Kings 8. 2. though there called the seventh month, according to the
Ecclesiastical Account. And the first day if it is about the sixteenth of our
September: but we must not here make this the first month, according to the
Ecclesiastical account; which would be the month Nisan or Abib; the first day
of it answering to the middle of our March.

covering of the Ark] v. 6. He opened the window of the Ark.

was dry] Yet soft and muddy.

V. 14. Second moneth] Not Jiar or Zif, the second month according to the
Ecclesiastical Account, 1 Kings 6. 1, 3, 7. answering to part of our April, and
part of our May: but the month Bull, according to the Civil Account and year;
according to the Annotations on the fourth verse of this chapter. And answering
to part of our October, and of our November.

Twenty seventh day] The second of our November. And thus there are fifty seven
days from the first month, first day to this time. And here is the end of the
flood, continuing from first to last, one year and ten days. The Account
whereof must no wise be cast, as in the said Annotations on this fourteenth
verse: But thus, beginning on the second month, seventeenth day, thence to the
seventh month, seventeenth day, are one hundred and fifty days, reckoning in
them the forty days of rain, as is confessed on chapter 7. ver. 24, and as
according to the truth it must needs be. And the Ark then rested on the
mountains of Ararat. Thence to the tenth month, first day, whereon the tops
of the mountains were seen, are seventy three days. Thence forty days, at
the end whereof Noah opened the window of the Ark. Thence twenty one days of
the sending out of the Raven and the Dove. Thence twenty nine days reaches to
the first month, first day, when the ground was dry. Thence fifty seven days,
to the second month, twenty seventh day, when Noah came out of the Ark. The
total sum of this reckoning arises to three hundred and seventy. And the
compass of the year, reckoning twelve months to the year, and thirty days
to the month, arises to three hundred and sixty days. And the other ten
days were those ten, wherein he continued in the Ark more then one year.

V. 20 And offered burnt-offerings on the Altar] In this verse is an Altar
first nominated, and burnt-offerings, or whole burnt-offering, Lev. 6. 9. And
this so long before Moses and the Levitical Law, an Altar likely of earth or
turf.

V. 21. In his heart] After spoken to Noah, chapt. 9. 11.

not again curse the ground] This is opened more in this and the next verse,
not as formerly, with an universal deluge. Though particular inundations may be.

for the imagination, etc.] This in part moved God to destroy the world, chapter 6.
5, 6. This here is brought in as a motive to mercy, as, Psalm 103. 13, 14. A
like plea David makes, Psalm 25. 11. and God himself, Esaias 48. 8, 9. Though sin
abound, Gods mercy superabounds, mercy rejoices against judgment.

V. 22. While the earth] God restores and repaires the natures of things
corrupted by the flood. This hinders not Peter's fiery Prophecy of the end of
the world, 2 Pet. 3. 7. Esaias 54. 8, 9, 10.

Seed-time, etc.] Generaly so, which hinders not particular judgments upon
particular places to the contrary, as, 1 Kings 17. 1. God will henceforth deal
more particularly with men, and not overturn the general course of nature any
more.

CHAP. IX.
Verse. 1. BE fruitful, etc.] Though we read not of any more children of Noah
after this time: yet it is not likely but he had more; Gods Word and his Work
go together. In three hundred fifty two years; viz. from the flood to the
birth of Abraham mankind was wonderfully multiplied, and yet man's life in that
time mightily shortened.

V. 2. The fear of you] Though not your dominion over them, as it was before
the fall; yet the fear and dread of you shall upon them: even to the taming, or
overawing at least, of the wildest, fiercest and strongest of them by force or
cunning, Psalm 8. 6, etc. 104 20, 21, 22, 23. Jam. 3. 7. Though God can arm
even the least of them, to execute his judgments upon man.

V. 3. That liveth] Likely, not dying of it self, or torn by beasts, as,
Levit. 17. 15. and 22. 8. Exodus 12. 31. For many of the Mosaical Laws were in
use long before.

meat for you] See Annotations on ch 1. 29.

meat] Such as were fit for meat: and even those that were not fit for meat and
sustenance, yea, poisonous, yet might serve for Physic or otherwise, for the
maintenance and preservation of the life of man

V. 4. But flesh with the life thereof, the blood] The blood of these creatures
in called the life of them; and their life is said to be their blood, and in
their blood, Lev. 17. 11. 14. because the spirits, which are the most lively
parts of them, are produced of the purest part of the blood, and with it
diffused in arteries throughout the whole body: without which vital spirits,
though blood be in the body, yet the body may be dead, as in things strangled.
Now with the blood, or in the blood, the flesh was not to be eaten; but first
it must be killed and cleansed of the blood. A restraint, no doubt, to make
them the more fearful of shedding man's blood, as the words following do
declare. But yet thus the sense of the place seems not so full, as when the
blood is forbidden, not only with the flesh in the veins, (for who desires so
to eat it) but also poured out by it self alone. And thus the prohibition was
given by Moses to the Jews, who declared at large the various manner of the
use of blood, in their several kinds of sacrifices; but inhibits the eating of
it, rather then, or at any other time. In their sacrices, sometimes some of it
was sprinkled upon the side of the Altar, and the rest of the blood wrung out
at the bottom of the Altar; as when turtle-Doves or Pigeons were sacrificed,
Lev. 1. 15. and 5. 9. sometimes it was sprinkled round about upon the Altar; as
in the burnt-offerings, and peace offerings, Lev. 1. 5, 11. and, chap. 3. 2, 8,
13. sometimes with the finger dipped in it, some of it was put upon the horns
of the Altar, and the rest poured out at the bottom of the Altar; as in the
sin-offering for the Ruler, and for any one of the common people, Lev. 4. 25,
30, 34. sometimes with the finger dipped in it. some of it was to be sprinkled
seven times before the Lord, before the veil of the Sanctuary. And then some
of it to be put upon the horns of the Altar of sweet incense before the Lord,
and the rest of the blood to be poured out at the bottom of the Altar of the
burnt-offering; as in the sin-offering of the Holy Priest, Levit 4. v. 5, 6, 7.
And of the whole Congregation, chapter 4. v. 16, 17, 18. Sometimes it was to be put
upon the tip of the right ear, and upon the thumb of the right hand, and upon
the great toe of the right foot; and some of the blood upon the Altar was to be
sprinkled upon the garments, as Moses did at the consecration of Aaron and his
sons, Levit. 8. 23, 24, 30. all which was typical and ceremonial. In sum,
it was given upon the Altar, to make an atonement for souls; for it is the
blood that makes an atonement for the soul, Lev. 17. 11. and almost all
things are by the Law purged with blood, and without shedding of blood is no
remission, Heb. 9. 22. But with them blood was never at any time, or upon any
occasion to be eaten, Lev. 7. 26, 27. 1 Samuel 14. 32, 33, 34. And the Apostles
make a decree for the forbearance of eating things strangled, and blood, Acts
15. 20. yet now the ceremonial Law being expired; and the restraint in this
text, not so clear and full, or, not reaching to all people in all ages; out of
the case of scandal, which occasioned the Apostles necessary, 1 Cor. 8. 13.
though temporary decree; I see no necessity enforcing the contrary, but that
Christians may use their Christian liberty, knowing that to the pure all things
are pure, that meat commends us not to God, that whatsoever is sold in the
shambles, that we may eat, asking no question for conscience sake.

V. 5. And surely your blood of your lives] Your lifeblood. The reason of the
former prohibition.

Of every beast] Exodus 21. 28.

man's brother] All men are brethren, Act. 17. 26.

V. 6. Whosoever sheddeth] Wittingly and wilfully, Numb. 35. 31. else Cities of
Refuge weee appointed, as may be seen, Numb. 35. 11, 15, 22, 23. Deuteronomy. 29. 3, 6.

by man] Magistrate. Revenger of blood, Numb. 35. 19, 21, 27.

for in the image] This reason shows death to be due for murder before the
flood, and from the beginning, though God extraordinarily suffered Cain to live
(a life likely worse then death) as a spectacle of his wrath all his age. To
deny the legal and military use of the sword to Christians, is an
Anabaptistical faucie.

V. 10. And with every living creature] For man's sake, for whom they were made,
and in the flood for his sin destroyed.

V. 11. All flesh] No universal deluge, though particular countries may be
drowned.

by the waters of a flood] Yet in the end by fire, 2 Pet. 3. 7, 10.

the earth] As, chapter 6. 11.

V. 13. My bowe] Wittily say some, bended upwards; and witho^t any arrow in it.
This was in the clouds before, naturally; But now significatively instituted to
this use, to be a token of this Covenant, for the assurance of the truth, and
performance of it, and Gods oath annexed to it, Esaias 54. 9.

V. 14. When I bring a cloud] At sometimes.

V. 18. And Ham is the father of Canaan] So again, v. 22. To imply the reason
why Canaan is cursed, v. 25, 26, 27. And that the Israelites, who in Moses time
and after, were commanded to root them out, might know, that they were of an
accursed race and offspring.

V. 20. Began] In the new world a new beginner, yet some years after the flood.

V. 21. Uncovered] Likely wearing long and loose garments, without breeches. As
likely David did, when Michal mocked him, 2 Samuel 6. 20. To prevent which,
linen breeches were commanded to Priests, Exodus 28. 42. Ezech. 44. 19. and
Gods Altar was to be builded without steps, Exodus 20. 26.

V. 22. And told] He should have concealed it from his brethren, and covered it
himself.

V. 24. And knew] Upon enquiry, or otherways, by relation or revelation.

V. 25. Said] Prophetically, both in his cursing and blessing, by warrant of
Gods Spirit.

V. 25. Cursed be Canaan] Not naming Cham. But showing thereby the curse to be
entailed on him, and on Canaan his fourth son, chapter 10. 6. then borne, and
happily a Partner in his fathers sin, and on his posterity after him, Prove. 30.
17.

a servant of servants] Thus fore-doom'd to a most servile slavish estate and
condition. This most seen long after in the Gibeouites, Josh. 9. 21. and in the
Canaanites.

As the blessing on Japhet was long after fulfilled, when the Gentiles became
Christians.

V. 26. Blessed be the Lord God of Shem] Shem blessed; because God is called
his God, Psalm. 144. 15. He named before Japheth his elder brother, in covering
his fathers nakedness, v. 23.

and Canaan shall be his servant] So to Chador^aome^^ of Shems progeny, being
King of Elam; chapter 14. 1, 4, etc. and; chapter 10. 22. so in the times of Joshuah,
Judges, and Kings of Judah and Israel.

V. 27. In the tents of Shem] In the Church, become Converts and Christians,
Ephesians. 2. 13, 14, 19. 3. 6. even when Shems posterity, the natural branches, was
much out off, Romans 11. 11.

and Canaan shall be his servant] Alexander the Great, and the Romans subdued
them.

V. 29. And he died] living almost to the birth of Abram.

CHAP. X.
Verse 1. JAphet] He is renowned, in the ancient Greek Writers, called Iupetos.

V. 2. Madai] Of him the Medes.

Javan] Of him the country Ionia, the Grecians.

V. 5. Isles] Properly; or improperly such countries, whereto the Jews from
their land could not pass but by shipping: the Province of Europe here meant.

every one after his tongue] As it fell out after that division of tongues, chapter
11. 9.

V. 6* Cush] Cushians, or the Ethiopians near the Arabian sea.

Mizraim] Egyptians. Mizraim in the Old Testament is always called Egypt in
the New Testament.

V. 7. Seba] Whence came the West-African-Ethiopians, and likely the Queen of
Shebah, 1 King. 10. 1. called the Queen of the South, coming from the uttermost
parts of the earth, Matthew. 12. 42. And the E^nuch of Candac^, Acts 8. 27.

Havilah] In Arabiah.

V. 8. And Cush begat Nimrod] Reserved here to the last place, because Moses
meant to speak most of him.

a mighty one] Usurped by violence a more imperious Power and Government, then
formerly was used, and enlarged his dominions.

V. 9. A mighty Hunter] Hunter of men, Tyrants and Oppressors are called
Hunters, Jer. 16. 16.

before the Lord] Openly, without fear of God.

V. 10. Babel] chapter 11. 9. Semiramis, then the wife of Ninus son to this
Nimrod or Belus, as profane Authors have it, founded not this City, but
repaired it. After Nimrods time it seems, the seat of that Monarchy (being the
first,) was translared to Nineveb in Assyria, Micah 5. 6. And after many ages
Babylon rebuilt by Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4. 30.

Shinar] Comprehending Mesopotamia, situate between the two rivers Tygris and
Euphrates, and the countries adjacent, chapter 11. 2.

V. 11. Out of the land went forth Ashur] He Shents son, v. 22. went out of
Shinar by Nimrods invasion, and built Nineveh, and gave the name to the
Assyrian Monarchy. Or else Nimrod enlarging his Conquests and Dominions, went
from Shinar to Ashur, and built Nineveh.

V. 12. The same is a great city] Not Calah, but Nineveh, Jonah 1. 2. 3. 2. 3.
4. 11. specially in the Prophet Jonahs time, who lived in the days of Jeroboam
the second, the son of Joash, 2 Kings 14. 25.

14. Out of whom came Philistiim] The Philistines, not of the offspring of
Canaan, but expelling some of them, made room for themselves in part of the
land of Canaan, Amos 9. 7. Jer. 47. 4.

V. 15. And Heth] Whence come the Hittites, chapter 23. 3, 5, 7, 10.

Girgasite] Mat. 8. 28, 34. Gadarenes, Luke 8. 26.

V. 16. Jebusite, 2 Samuel 5. 6. 1 Chronicles. 11. 4.

V. 19. The border of the Canaanites] Set down particularly, because it was
promised to Abraham, and his seed the Israelites.

V. 20. These are the sounes of Ham] Many more of them are set down here, then
either of Shem or of Japheth. But most likely it is, that all these children or
Grandchildren of Shem, Cham and Japheth, are not here set down, but only such
as were famous, and by their several Plantations gave names to several Nations
descending from their loins.

V. 21. Unto Shem also the father of all the children of Eber] Great
Grandfather to Eber; yet Eber thus mentioned, because of him afterward they
were called Hebrews; so Abraham, chapter 14. 13. so, chapter 40. 15. Phil. 3. 5. and
so frequently.

of Japhet the elder] Because Shem was begotten in the five hundred and second
year of Noah's life, he being one hundred year old, two years after the
flood, chapter 11. 10. Therefore Japhet was two year older.

V. 22. Elam] Hence came the Elamites or Persians, Acts 2. 9.

Aram] From him came the Aramites, Syrians. There is Padan-Aram, chapter 25. 20.
Aram-Naharaim chapter 24. 10. Aram-Dammesek, 2 Samuel 8. 5, 6. Ara^-Zobah, Psalm. 60.
tit. Aram Maachah, 1 Chronicles. 19. 6. Aram-Beth-Rehob, 2 Samuel 10* 6. all these
being several Provinces of Syria.

V. 23. Uz] Job 1. 1. There dwelt the Edomites or the Idumeans, Lam. 4. 21.

V. 25. For in his days was the earth divided] About the time of his birth was
the division of tongues, at the building of Babel, which occasioned their
dispersion into several parts of the earth for habitation. And the language
before used of all, continuing in Eber the father of Peleg, might occasion his
posterity to be distinguished from all others by the name of Hebrews.

V. 29. Ophir] From this man's land in India, it is likely Solomon's ships
fetched fine gold, 2 Chronicles. 9. 10. called also gold of Parvaim, 2 Chronicles. 3. 6.
This is supposed to be in Havilah near Ophir. See the Tree in the beginning of
Speeds Genealogies.

CHAP. XI.
Ver. 1. OF one language] Since the flood, no doubt. Whether the Hebrew
language, which was Adams continued the same among all men, for the space of
one thousand six hundred fifty six years before the flood, may be more
questionable.

And it came to passe] One hundred years after the flood, v. 10, 11, 12, 13,
14. and chapter 10. 25.

V. 2. They journeyed] Nimrod and his company. Not Noah, Shem, Arphaxad, Salah,
Eber, and their godly posterities.

from the East] Likely from about the mountains of Ararat; which parts are
much North-eastward from Shinar, or Chaldea, or Mesopotamia. Or from other
Eastern parts.

Shinar] Contains Babylon, Mes^potamia, and the Countries adjacent, four
Cities, afterward built there by Nimrod, chapter 10. 10.

V. 3. Slime] A pitchy slime.

V. 4. Unto Heaven] An Hyperbole, for the chief, happily to escape another flood.

lest we be scattered] Lest this company be the sooner dispersed. Or when by
multiplication they should in aftertimes be scattered, yet this might remain
as an honorable monument and memorial of their former co-habitation.

V. 6. And now nothing] Ironically, as, chapter 3. 22.

V. 7. Let us go down] See, chapter 1. 26. God speaks of himself after the manner
of men, for man's better understanding. A while he suffered them to go on in
building.

and confound their language] The number of the several languages now made is
uncertain.

V. 8. Scattered them] The thing they sought to prevent by their proud project,
v. 4. God for it brings upon them presently.

V. 10. Generations of Shem] Those, chapter 10. 22, etc. were without any mention
of the age of the Patriarchs descended from him, when they begat their eldest
sons, or those by whom the holy line is drawn, and of whom our Savior
descended. And if they had been passed over so, the Chronology of the world had
beed lost. But now here they are resumed, and the chain of Chronology
carefully continued. And as there were ten Patriarchs before the flood,
counting in Noah, so there are ten after the flood, from Shem to Abraham
inclusively. The years of the world, in the former ten to the six hundredth
year of Noah, when the flood came, amounted to the number of 1656. The years
from the flood, which was in the ninety eighth year of Shems age, to the birth
of Abram the tenth Patriarch after the flood, came but to the number of three
hundred fifty two years: For man's age was shortened about the half at the time
of the flood. And again shortened about the half in Pelegs time, at the
building of Babel. And yet the third time shortened somewhat near the half in
the time of Nahor, as may be seen and observed in the ages of the Patriarchs at
their deaths in this chapter.

Arphaxad] The third son of Shem, 1 Chronicles. 1. 17.

V. 12. Arphaxad begat Salah] Betwixt these is inserted Cainan, as the son of
Arphaxad, and father of Salah; Luke 3. 35, 36. which would break the chain of
Chronology, and leave unknown the age of the world. The LXX-Translation has
here in Genesis put in that Cainan. And that Translation was much more known,
and much more in use in public Synagogues, in private Libraries and Houses in
our Saviors time, then the Authentical Hebrew Text was; yea, thereupon the
Holy Writers of the New Testament, in their quotations out of the Old
Testament, do follow much the said Translation, even with some variation from
the Hebrew Text, though not in any material thing, as the learned well know.
This may seem to occasion St. Luke in this of Cainan, to follow the LXX.
Translation, though he knew that this Cainan was never in the world,
condescending so to the times and weakness of men therein, lest otherwise he
might have given occasion of offense, or rather they have taken it.

V. 22. Nahor] The first idolater of the line, ch 31. 53. Josh. 24. 2. And so
after him were Terah and Abraham, till God called him out of that place, chap.
11. 31. 12. 1. Romans 4. 2, 5.

V. 26. Begat Abram, etc.] Began to beget, as, Genesis 5. 32. For Abram was borne
in the one hundred and thirtieth year of his father Terah; Terah dying at the
age of two hundred and five in Haran, chapter 11. 31, 32. and Abram being then
seventy five years old, as appears, chapter 12. 4. Acts 7. 4. Likely Haran was the
eldest, Nahor the second, and Abram the youngest; as the eldest likewise is
named last, chapter 5. 32.

V. 28. In Ur] Nehem. 9. 7. Acts 7. 4. Ur signifies fire, which likely was
worshipped by the idolatrous Chaldeans; and some place or city received
denomination from that idol. Heathen Writers call it Orchoe, it is the Eastern
part of Mesopotamia, when Mesopotamia is taken in a large sense, comprehending
^haldea in it.

of the chaldees] Given much to Astrology, whence such are called Chaldeans,
Dan. 2. 2, 4, 5.

Ur of the Chaldees] Called Mesopotamia, Acts 7. 2.

V. 29. Milcah the daughter of Haran] Not another Haran, but Abrams eldest
brother, as appears by the next words. He was elder then Abram sixty years.

the father of Milcah, and the father of Iscah] This Milcab was Grandmother to
Rebecca Isaacs wife, Ge^. 22. 2^, 22, 23. great Grandmother to Rachel and Leah,
Genesis 29. 10, 12, 13, 16. This Ischa is Sarai the daughter, i. e. the
Grandchilde of Abraham's father, but not the daughter, i. e. the Grandchilde of
his mother, Terah having Haran her father by another wife then he had Abraham,
Genesis 20. 12. Nahor and Abraham marry their Neeces, their brother Harans
daughters, and so Amran takes Jochebed his father Kohaths sister to wife, Exodus
6. 20. Such marriages are forbidden, Lev. 18. 12, 14. however here by divine
dispensation tolerated, or not condemned.

V. 31. And Terah took Abram] Abram first motioned this remove; God having
appeared to him in Ur of the Chaldees, Acts 7. 2. Genesis 15. 7. And here begin
the four hundred and thirty years, at the end whereof the Israelite, came
out of Egypt, Exodus 12. 41. Gal. 3. 17. Nahor came too, though not mentioned
here. For he settled in Haran, whence it is called Nahors City, chapter 24. 10. 29.
4. 28. 2, 10.

to Haran] A City of Mesopotamia, but not taking Mesopotamia in a strict sense,
as it is taken, Act. 7. 2, 3. Genesis 24 10. 28. 2, 7, 10.

and dwelt there] Likely, through Terahs old age and sickness so long, till
they got substance and souls there, chapter 12. 5. See, Judeth 5. 8, 9. even five
years, as may be gathered out of the thirty years, between Abrams calling out
of Ur, and the birth of Isaac. See, Annot. on chapter 15. v. 13.

CHAP. XII.
Ver. 1. HAd said] For this seems not to be a second Call; But the Narration
of the first Call out of Ur, and the cause of their going forth of Ur, ch, 11.
31.

and thy kindred] If they had rather stay behind thee then remove with thee.

will show thee] As he raised this righteous man from the East, so he called
him to his foot to follow him and his direction, Esaias 41. 2. Likely, God bade
him go to Canaan, but told him not that that was the land intended for him,
till he came thither, Heb. 11 8 Genesis 12. 7. And this was for the greater trial
of his faith.

V. 2. A great Nation] Yet Sarah now at sixty five was barren. And under this
is also a spiritual seed promised, Romans 4. 11, 12. Gal. 3. 7.

bless thee] Spiritually also, Gal. 3. 14.

thou shall be] Or be thou a blessing. God will command a blessing, as, Ps. 42.
8. 44. 4. and so, 133. 3.

V. 3. And I will blesse] Like to this is that of Isaac to Jacob, Genesis 27. 29.
and that of Bala^m to Israel, Numb. 24. 9.

in thee] In thy seed Christ, Genesis 18. 18. 22. 18. Acts 3. 25, 26. Gal. 3. 8,
14. Thus the Gospel was preached unto Abraham, Gal. 3. 8. From this Promise and
Covenant made in Ur of the Chaldees, to the giving of the Law which could not
disannul it, were four hundred and thirty years, Gal. 3. 17, 18.

V. 4. Departed] Went out by faith, not knowing whither he went, Heb. 11. 8.

and Lot went with him] Terahs family and Nahor stayed here. See Annotations on
chapter 11. 3^. Here they left following God, and fell again to idolatry, chapter 31.
30, 53. Josh. 24, 2.

Seventy five] He lived one hundred years after, chapter 25. 7. And Isaac his
son, then seventy five years old, being borne in the one hundredth year of
Abraham's age, chapter 21. 5. is left heir of Canaan.

V. 5. Soules] Likely diverse were converted Proselytes, considering his care of
his family, chapter 18. 19. and their ready obedience to him, chapter 14. 14. and to
Gods Ordinance of Circumcision, chapter 17. 23.

Canaan] Deuteronomy. 8. 7, 8, 9. This was the type of an Heavenly, which Abraham
looked for, Heb. 11. 9, 10.

And in Salem a City of Canaan, Melchisedech dwelled, and reigned a Priest of
the most High God.

V. 6. Sichem] Where after the City Sichem was, chap. 33. 18. about the midst
of the country called Sichar in our Saviors time, Joh. 4. 5

unto the Plaine] Set with a grove of oaks, Deuteronomy. 11. 30.

the Canaanite] When God promises the cleansing of his Church, he says, the
Canaanite shall be there no more, Zach. 14. 21.

V. 7. Unto thy seed] Here he tells him this is the land intended for him, and
now does promise it; whereupon it is called the Land of Promise, Heb. 11. 9.
the Lords Land, Hos. 9. 3. the Holy Land, Zach. 2. 12. the Land of Immanuel,
Esaias 8. 8.

thy seed] When as yet he had no child, Acts 7. 5. an Altar] As, Genesis 8. 20.

V. 8. Bethel] After so called, at this time Luz, chapter 28. 19. Moses calls many
places by the names which were afterward given to them, sitting his speech to
the men of that age wherein himself lived.

West] Sea is here put for the West, as Desert for the South, Ps. 75. 6.

V. 9. South] Next Egypt.

V. 10. Into Egypt, Ps. 105. 13.

V. 11. Faire] Very fair, v. 14. in her self, but more comparing her with the
Egyptian women, though now she was sixty five years old.

V. 13. My sister] Niece; she being his brothers daughter, his fathers
Grandchild, persons so near of kin are usually called brothers and sisters,
sons and daughters, Genesis 31. 28. Exodus 2. 18. which makes him say to Abimelech,
chapter 20. 12. Indeed she is my sister. But Abram, praying her to conceal part of
the truth, and purposely that the Egyptians might not conceive her to be his
wife, bewrays weakness of faith and humane frailty, fearing perhaps, that if
he should die without issue, Gods Promise should not have taken place, and
therefore he exposes her to danger to save himself, though withal he might
have some hope that God would prevent that mischief.

V. 15. The Princes] Courtiers.

Pharaoh] The common name of the Egyptian Kings, as Abimelech of the
Philistines, and Caesar of the Roman Emperors. They had other proper names, as
Pharaoh Neco. 2. Kings 23. 29 Pharaoh Hophra, Jer. 44. 30. In the Grecian
Monarchy they were called Ptolemies. Pharaohs house] Likely stayed there a
while.

V. 17. Plagued.] Psalm. 105. 14. 1 Chronicles. 16. 21, 22.

V. 20. And Pharaoh commanded] The King being angry, expects no answer.

sent him away] Happily with Honor, as, Exodus 18. 27. and safe conduct.

CHAP. XIII.
Verse 1. SOuth] Canaan is South from Egypt.

V. 2. Very rich] Chapter 12. 2. 24. 35. Prove. 10. 22.

V. 5. And Tents] Which implies also many servants that dwelt in those tents.

V. 6. To bear them] But they wanted pasture and water for so many flocks and
herds, whence the strife rose, v. 7.

V. 7. And the Canaanite] Had taken up the better part of pasturage; neither
were they to have a scandal given them by any dissensions and discords between
Abram and Lot.

V. 8. And Abram said to Lot] The Uncle and Superior condescends herein, and
chooses rather to take wrong then to contend, 1 Cor. 6. 7.

V 9 If thou will take] By consent of the Canaanites. Abram had no inheritance
in it, no, not so much as to set his foot on, Act. 7 5 Nor did he, or could he
give to Lot any title to the land, but such an use of it, as upon fair and
reasonable terms he might obtain and enjoy. Abram after bought a burial place,
ch 23, 11, 12, 13.

V. 10. Zoar] Afterward so called, but then called Belah, ch 14. 2, 8. 19. 22.
The meaning is, all the Plain of Jordan, even to Zoar was such.

V. 13. Sinners] chapter 19. 5. Ezech. 16. 49, 50. Lot thinking to get Paradise
found hell.

V. 15. Which thou seest] Part whereof each way thou see. So Moses viewed the
land, but possessed it not, Deuteronomy. 34. 1. 4.

and to thy seed] For thy sake. The heavenly Canaan to thy spiritual seed,
Christ's mystical body for Christ's sake, Gal. 3. 16. Romans 9. 6, 7, 8. Gal. 4.
22, 23.

for ever] if they obey and keep my Covenant, Esaias 65. 9. Psalm. 69. 35, 36.
degenerate not, John 8. 39 But else not. Deuteronomy. 4. 25, 26. Lev. 26. 33. 18. 28.
Ezech. 33, 24, 25, 26.

But I will give the heavenly Canaan, typified by this, Heb. 11. 10, 16. to thy
spiritual seed to all eternity, Gal. 3* ^6, 26, 28, 29.

V. 16. as the dust] Chapter 28. 14. 32. 12. so Balaam said* Numb. 23. 10.

V. 18. Plain of Mamre] Chapter 14. 13, 24. The Plain of Morch differs from this,
and joy^es to Shechem, chap. 12. 6.

which is in Hebron] It had this name afterward, before it was called
Kiriath-Arba, chapter 23. 2. 35 27. Josh; 14. 15. 15. 13. It was after a famous
burial place, chapter 49. 31. sometime possessed by Gaints, Numb 13. 22. and driven
out by Caleb, Josh, 15. 13, 14 and given to him, Josh. 14. 14. a City of Refuge
in the Tribe of Judah, Josh. 15. 54. 20. 7. David first reigned in it. And
thither most likely went the blessed Virgin to visit her Cousin Elizabeth, Luke
1. 39.

an Altar] To sacrifice thankfully to God, and to sanctify his viewed heritage.

CHAP. XIV.
Verse 1. IN the dayes] This falling out a little before Abram took Hagar, as
the sequence of the story shows, and he taking Hagar in the tenth year after
he left Haran, and came into Canaan, chapter 16. 3. He being then seventy five
years old, chapter 12. 4. must be now eighty four at the time of this battle.

Shiaar] Chaldea. chapter 10. 10.

Chedorlaomer] The chief in this expedition, though two other Kings named
before him, v. 4, 5.

Elam] Or Persia, chapter 10. 22. And so Chedorlaomer of Shems Progeny, had Chams
and Canaans posterity for subjects and servants, chapter 9. 26. who these Kings
were, and what their Kingdoms cannot certainly be determined.

V. 2. With Bera King of Sodom] These following were but petty Kings, Kings of
Cities: which were burnt, chapter 19. Deuteronomy. 29. 23. except Zoar, fifteen years
after, when Sarah was with child of Isaac, as appears, chap. 18. 10, 20, etc.

V. 3. The salt sea] Josh. 3, 16. called so afterward, the dead sea, or ^ake
Asphaltites, of which many strange things are reported by Authors.

V. 5. Rephaims] Chapter 15. 20.

in Ashteroth] A City in Bashan, where Og after reigned.

Emims] Where the Moabites after dwelt, Deuteronomy. 2. 9, 10, 11.

V. 6. Horites] In Mount Seir, till the Edomite^ drove them out, Deuteronomy. 2. 22.

Elparan] Genesis 21. 21.

V. 7. Kadesh] So called in Moses time, it was in the desert of Zin, Numb. 20.
1, 14, 16. 13. 26. 33. 36. Deuteronomy. 1. 2, 46.

Amalekites] The people of that country, where afterward the Amalekites did
dwell. For Amalek the Grandchilde of Esau was yet unborn, Genesis 36. 12.

Hazezon-Tamar] Which is Engedi, 2 Chronicles. 20. 2. which fell afterward to the
tribe of Judah, Josh. 15. 62.

V. 10. Fell there] Their armies, rather then their persons. For the King of
Sodom escaped, meeting Abram, v. 17.

V. 13. Confederate] So Abimelech and Phicol with Abraham, chapter 21. v. 22, 23.
and after with Isaac. chapter 26. 26, etc. Such confederacies with Infidels, not
simply in themselves unlawful, Though specially forbidden with the Canaanite,
Exodus 34. 15. Deuteronomy 7. 2. And Jehoshaphat justly reproved for his needless
familiarity and association with wicked Ahab, 2 Chronicles. 19. 2.

V. 14. Brother] Being his brothers son, v. 12.

trained servants] In militaty and religious discipline.

three hundred and eighteen] A mighty Prince, chap. 23. 6.

pursued] Justly for Lots sake, though happily Chadorlaomers cause and quarrel
might be just, v. 4.

unto Dan] One of the two springs of Jordan, at the foot of Lebanon, in the
North of Canaan, where was a town of that name, called Leshem or Laish, Josh.
19. 47. Judge. 14. 29.

V. 15. Unto Hoba] Thus God gave the Nations before him, and made him rule over
Kings: He gave them as the dust to his sword, and as driven stubble to his
bow, he pursued them and passed safely, even by the way which he had not gone
with his feet, Esaias 41. 2, 3.

V. 17. The Kings Dale] So called in aftertimes, where likely Absalom set up
his pillar* 2 Samuel 18. 18.

V. 18. Melchisedech] That this Melchisedech had father and mother, descent or
pedigree, beginning of days, and end of life is not to be doubted. But the
Scripture presents him to us as such, no where telling us of his Parents,
descent, birth or death: and so in this, and in his name Melchisedech, and in
his title of Office, King of Salem; and in his Offices themselves, being both
King and Priest, the Priest of the most High God, and that without being
successor to any, or having any successor to him, and so as one that
typically abides for ever; and as one that is far superior to Abraham, who
blessed Abraham, and to whom Abraham the Patriarch gave tithes; therefore in
regard of all these, the Apostle makes him a notable type and figure of Christ,
of his Person and Offices, of his Kingdom and Priesthood especially, as we see
at large, Heb. 7. and David did so before him, Psalm. 110. 4. Now who this
Melchisedech should be, whether Shem, who being borne before the flood, lived
seventy five years after Abrams coming into Canaan, and about sixty five after
the time of* history of his meeting Abram, who though his Parents, Birth and
Death be known to us, yet not as here brought in under the name of
Melchisedech; or whether it were some neighboring King of Canaan, of another
Kindred from that of Abraham, Heb. 7. 6. extraordinarily raised up and
sanctified by God to this purpose, though happily it may be probably, yet it
cannot certainly be defined.

Melchisedech King of Salem] Heb. 7. 2. Thus righteousness and peace do kiss
each other, Psalm. 85. 10. Esaias 32. 17.

Salem] Not Salim, mentioned, John 3. 23. But Salem, Ps. 76. 2. Jerusalem.

brought forth] Not for sacrifice, but to refresh Abram and his army, as, 2 Samuel 17. 27, 28, 29, The neglect whereof was punished in the Moabites and
Ammonites, Deuteronomy. 23. 3, 4.

and he was the Priest] King and Priest; both offices concurring in one Person.
It was an ancient manner among Heathen Nations, Rex Anius Rex idem hominum,
Phoebique sacerdos. And how much short was it with the Patriarchs, and
firstborn in Israel, before the Levites supplied their place?

V. 19. And he blessed him] A part of the Priests office, Numb. 6, 23, 27. 1 Chronicles. 23 13. Heb. 7. 6, 7. The less is blessed of the greater.

V. 20. Blessed be God] Thanked and praised.

and he gave him tithes of all] Abram gave Melchizedech, Heb. 7. 2, 4. 9, 10,
11. And Levi in Abr^ms loins. Tithes are due as an homage to God: as tribute
is to Kings. They are called holy, an heave offering to the Lord, Lev. 27. 30
Numb. 18. 24. As here Abram, so Jacob also paid them to the Lord, before the
Levitical Law, Genesis 28. 22. In the Law of Moses they are strictly enjoined,
Numb. 18. 20, 21. yea, if redeemed, a fifth part must be added to it; if
changed, both it and the change thereof shall be holy, Lev. 27. 31, 33. yea,
Heathen paid tithes both Greek and Latin. And here, being paid to
Melchizedech, a type of Christ, they are not abolished by the Gospel.

of all] Of all the spoils, of Sodoms too, and of all the vanquished. So of
the Midianites, Numb. 31. 28, 29, 30. 37, 38, 39, 40, 41.

V. 22. I have lifted up my hand] He had sworn or vowed, when he went forth to
this war, and implored Gods aid, Deuteronomy 32. 40. Dan 12. 7. Rev. 10. 5, 6.

V. 23. Lest thou should say] Thou or any man should say, that covetousness
of the prey drew me to this war, or that this victory, or any thing else
enriched me, but Gods extraordinary blessing, Esther 9. 15, 16.

CHAP. XV.
Ver. 1. AFter these things] Spoken by Abram to the King of Sodom.

in a vision] Of the night, v. 5. Numb. 22. 19. 20, There are nightly visions
by dreams in sleep, chapter 31. 11. 46. 2. 1 Kings 3. 5. And so God came to
Abimelech in a dream by night, Genesis 20. 3. and secret revelations came to
Eliphaz, Joh 4. 12, 13. whereupon the false Prophets counterseited false dreams
and visions in them, Deuteronomy. 13. 1. Jer. 23. 25, 28, 32. And there are also
visions to men waking, as, Ezech. 1. 1. Dan. 8. 2. 10. 4, 7. 2 Cor. 12. 2. Acts
2. 17. Both ways God made himself known to his Prophets, Numb. 12. 6. whence
Prophets were called Seers, and Prophecy is named a vision, Esaias 1. 1. Here is
meant an open apparition, which Abram a Prophet, ch 20. 7. beheld waking with
the eyes of his body. For v. 9, 10. shows, he was waking, and a deep sleep is
said to fall upon him after this vision, v. 12. In what manner, and how
glorious this vision was is not set down particularly.

fear not] The Prophets were sometimes terrified with visions, at the visible
appearance of the Majesty of God So, Dan. 10. 7, etc.

fear not] For the presence of my glory, for thine enemies, for any discomfort
whatsoever.

I am thy shield] Against thine enemies, those vanquished Kings, and all else.

reward] Beyond all merit and measure.

I go] Am going on, going away, mine age going on toward mine end.

V. 2. Childlesse] Yet he rejects not the Promises of God concerning his seed,
but as perplexed between fear and hope he bemoanes his sad state and
condition, intimates and commends his desire to God, that he would at length
remember his Promise made to him concerning his seed.

and the steward] He most likely mentioned, chapter 24. 2. He now is the guide and
stay of my family. Here Abram complains not of his steward, but commends him
rather.

of Damascus] By his Ancestors, though he borne in Abrams house, v. 3.

V. 3. Is mine heire] Likeliest for the present, in my thoughts, if I go on and
die childlesse, my Nephew Lot having no sons but daughters: and Eleezer
having all under his charge.

V. 5. And tell the stars] This rherefore was in the night.

if thou be able to number them] Now at this view: though happily it were
possible for Astronomers by much Art, to attain to the number of the visible
stars. God speaks, as often, according to common account. Jer. 3^. 22.

so shall thy seed be] Innumerable, Deuteronomy. 1. 10. specially counting his
spiritual seed, children by faith, according to the Promise, Romans 4. 11, 12,
13. Romans 9. 8 Gal. 3. 7, 29. innumerable as the dust of the earth, chapter 18. 16.
as the sand on the seashore, chapter 22. 17.

V. 6. And he believed in the Lord] For the innumerablenesse of his seed, and
principally for the promised seed, wherein all the Nations of the earth should
be blessed.

Believed] Here is belief or faith first named in the Old Testament, whence
Abram is called the Father of all Believers, Romans 4. 11, 16, 17. And this
before either Circumcision was ordained, or the Law given, Romans 4. 9, 10 Gal.
3. 17. Now the word belief or faith signifies a lively motion of the heart and
spirit, firmly resting in the things spoken. For which this belief or faith in
Abram is much commended, Romans 4. 18, to 22.

Counted] Imputed, thought, esteemed.

for righteousnesse] Ps. 106. 31. Romans 4. 3, 9. Now of this the Apostle
infers justification by faith without works, both to Abram, Romans 4. 4, 5. as
having been an idolater, Josh. 24. 2. and still without glory of works before
God, Romans 4. 2. and also to all believers, Romans 4. 23, 24.

V. 8. Whereby shall I know?] This he asked to be strengthened against humane
infirmity, and to know somewhat more particularly of the manner of performance:
and likely it was by a special motion of Gods Spirit, as that also of Gideon,
Judge. 6. 17, 37. and of Hezekiah, 2 Kings 20. 8. And others like by divine
instinct, Genesis 24. 13, 14. 1 Samuel 14. 9, 10. without which such qaestions are
not so lawful, Luke 1. 18.

V. 9. Take me an heifer] Not for sacrifice, though all sorts here commanded to
be used were fit for sacrifice; But for confirmation of this Promise and
Covenant, as, Jer. 34. 18.

V. 12. And when the Sun was going down] By comparing this with the fifth
verse, it seems the day was spent by Abram in preparing and doing according to
that command, v. 9.

a deep sleep] As, chapter 2. 21. ecstasy or trance.

an horrour] See, Dan. 10. 8, 9. Here shadowing out the great distresses Abrams
children should have through vexation of their enemies.

V. 13. In a land that is not theirs] In Canaan and Egypt.

and they shall afflict them] Not all that time, nor the greater part, but
upward of the last hundred years.

Four hundred yeares] Acts 7. 6. From the birth of Isaac to their going out of
Egypt: Thus, From the birth of Isaac to the birth of Jacob sixty years, Genesis
25. v. 26. Thence to the birth of Joseph ninety years: Jacob being so old at
Joseph's birth, which is collected thus; Jacob was one hundred and thirty when.
Joseph was forty, viz. thirty when Pharaoh advanced him, chapter 41. 46. after
which passed seven years of plenty, and three of famine, when Jacob came down,
chapter 47. 9. Now Jacob was fourteen years with Laban before Joseph was borne,
chapter 30. 25. deducting then those fourteen years before Joseph was born, and
forty years of his age out of Jacobs one hundred and thirty, and so will
remain seventy five or seventy six, for the age of Jacob when he came to Laban,
and so ninety years old he was when he had Joseph. Now Joseph lived in Egypt
after his father came thither seventy years, Genesis 50. 26. Between the death of
Joseph and birth of Moses were sixty years, as the undoubted beginning, and
undoubted end of the four hundred years, do clearly and necessarily evince
and enforce. Thence to the Israelites going out of Egypt, in the eightieth
year of Moses age, eighty years, Acts. 7. 23, 24, 30 Now these several sums
cast up come to four hundred 60 90 110 60 80 400.
In Exodus 12. 40, 41. and Gal. 3. 17. are four hundred and thirty years
reckoned. But that is from the first giving the Promise and Covenant to Abram,
which was in Ur of the Chaldees, to the foresaid time of their coming out of
Egypt, which thirty years are thus made up; viz, five years in Haran, at the
end whereof Abram was seventy five, chapter 12. 4. Thence ten years to the taking
of Hagar, chapter 16. 3. Thence fifteen to the birth of Isaac when Abram was one
hundred years old, chapter 21. 5. And thus from the first Promise to their coming
into Egypt were two hundred and twenty years. And their time in Egypt two
hundred and ten years. And this I take to be the true and clear Account of
these times. The particulars wherein I differ from the great Annotations and
others, in this Account I do willingly submit to the judgment of the learned.

V. 14. Will I judge] Exodus 7. 8, 9, 10, 12, 14. chapters, and Psalm. 78. 43, to
52. and 105. 27, to 37.

with great substance] Exodus 3. 21, 22. 12. 35, 36. 38.

V. 16. In the fourth generation] Caleh the son of Hezron was the fourth
generation from Judah, 1 Chronicles. 2. and Aaron and Moses were the fourth from
Levi, Exodus 6. 16, 18, 20.

V. 17. A smoking furnace, and a burning lamp] By which God did pass between
those pieces, Jer. 34. 18, 19. happily shadowing hereby their afflictions in the
furnace of Egypt, Deuteronomy. 4. 20. and the burning bush, Exodus 3. 2.

V. 18. Have I given] By Promise already, or this shows the certainty of the
Promise.

from the river of Egypt] Sichor, Josh. 13. 3. Jer. 2. 18.

Euphrates] The Lands so far became Tributary in David's and Solomon's days, 2 Samuel 8. 3, etc. 1 Kings 4. 21. 2 Chronicles. 9. 26. If they possessed not all that
was promised, the cause was in their breach of Covenant with God, not in Gods
with them.

V. 19. The Kenites, etc.] Here are ten Nations reckoned. After usually reduced
to seven, Deuteronomy. 7. 1. Acts 13. 19.

CHAP. XVI.
Verse 1. NOw Sarai] Being seventy five years old, and Abram being eighty five
when he took Hagar, chapter 12. 4. chapter 16. 3, 16. Fifteen years after, Sarai beiug
then ninety, and Abraham one hundred they had Isaac, chapter 17. 17.

an handmaid] Or bondmaid, chapter 21. 10, 12. Opposed to a freewoman, Gal. 4. 22.

an Egyptian] Of Chams posterity.

Hagar] The Apostle allegorically makes her a figure of the Covenant of the Law
on Mount Sinai, and of the earthly Jerusalem, gendring to bondage; and Sarah of
the Covenant of the Gospel, and of Jerusalem which is above, gendring to
freedom, Gal. 4. 22, to the end of the chapter. Gal. 3. 12, 14, 18, 22, 29.

V. 2. Restrained me] Chapter 20. 18. God had promised a seed to Abram, but not as
yet unto Sarai; therefore doubting whether she should be the mother, she sets
on foot this course; not lawful in it self, Mal. 2. 15. The impediment she
alleges, why she was out of hope of bearing child, chapter 18. 11. was fifteen
years after.

it may be] No certainty. But after Sarah had a Son by Promise. chapter 18. 10.
Gal. 4. 23. Romans 9. 9.

I may obtain] Thus Rachel and Leah did, and said, chapter 30. 3, 6, 9. by the Law,
Exodus 21. 4. Bond-servants-children were their Masters.

V. 3. Ten yeares] Since he left Haran.

to be his wife] A secondary wife, a Concubine, chapter 25. 6. so Keturah, Genesis 25.
1. 1 Chro. 1. 32. so Bilha and Zil pa, Genesis 35* 22. yet called wives, chapter 37.
2. inferior to a lawful wife. This a fault and infirmity of faith in Abraham
too.

V. 4. Conceived] Quickly, v. 16.

despised] Prove. 30. 21, 23. it seems by Saraies words, v. 5. in an high degree.

V. 5. My wrong] Likely Abram bear too much with Hagars insolency, and was the
more tender of her because she was with child by him. So the Israelites too
passionate against Moses and Aaron, Exodus 5. 21. and Zipporah against Moses,
Exodus 4. 26. either right thou my wrong, or bear the punishment thereof from
God, yet otherwise she made a pattern of wively obedience, 1 Pet. 3. 6.

V. 6. Thy maid] So he calls her still, and so Hagar calls her Mistress, v. 8.

in thine hand] To correct her for her fault.

V. 7. And the Angel] Christ the Angel of the Covenant, Mal. 3. 1. called here
Jehovah, v. (...) speaking as God, v. 10. called an Angel, Exodus 14. 19. 13.
21. 23. 20, 21, 22, 23. Esaias. 63. 9.

Shur] Toward Egypt her country, Exodus 15. 22. In this wilderness her
posterity after dwelt, chap. 25. 17. 18.

V. 8. Whence] As, chapter 3. 9.

V. 11. Thy affliction] Though her self the cause of it.

V. 12. A wild man] He after dwelt in the wilderness as a Salvage, and was a
warlike man, fierce and unruly, rough and rude, of such courage, as to match
all his opposers, chapter 21. 20.

his hand] A quarrelsome man: he for booty by prey and pillage, they most to
defend themselves.

and he shall dwell] His seed be a several Nation from his brethren, border
upon them, and they not able to overbear him, chapter 25. 9, 18. 37. 23.

V. 13. Have I also, etc.] Magnifying Gods mercy, for his careful eye and
providence over her, for vouchsafing her so clear a sight of him, and that even
here in the desert, which was more marvel then if it had been in her holy
Masters family, and that after her so ill carriage of her self, and letting her
yet live after it; many after the sight of God were afraid, yea, some that they
should die, Genesis 3. 10. 32. 30. Exodus 3. 9. 24. 12. 33. 20. Deuteronomy. 4. 33. and,
5. 24. Judge 6. 22. 13. 22, Esaias 6. 2. 5. Luke 5. 8.

V. 14. Beerlehai-roi] i. e. The Well of him that lives and sees me.

Kadesh] Kadesh-barneah, Numb. 32. 8. 13. 26. Deuteronomy. 1. 19. 9. 23. Josh. 14, 6,
7.

V. 15. Abram called his name] Therefore Hagar returned as the Angel commanded.

Ishmael] Likely upon Hagars relation.

V. 16. Eighty six] See Annot. on v. 1. For the space of thirteen years after
this God keeps silence, and speaks not to Abram, chapter 17. 1.

CHAP. XVII.
Verse 1. APpeared] In a visible form, v. 22.

before me] As always in my presence, Genesis 5. 22. 48. 15. 1 King. 2. 4. 3. 6.
2 Kings 26. 3.

V. 2. Make] Renew or stablish, it being made, as, v. 7. multiply] chapter 12* 2,

V. 3. Fell on his face] v. 17. In way of fear and reverence of gratulation
and rejoicing.

and God talked with him] After he had lifted him up, as may appear out of the
seventeenth verse, where he is said to fall upon his face again.

V. 4. My Covenant is with thee] Chapter 12. 2.

a father of many Nations] Romans 4. 16, 17. even all believing Christians, Gal.
3. 28, 29. following Abraham's doctrine and example.

V. 5. Abraham] i. e. a high father of a multitude, Nehem. 9. 7. so Jacobs name
changed to Israel, chapter 32. 28. Esaias 6^. 2. Rev. 2. 17.

a father] Romans 4. 17. Genesis 17. 6.

have I] Chapter 15. 8.

V. 6. Kings] As Saul, David, Solomon, etc. of the Ishmaelites, Midianites, and
Idumeans. Also the faithful Kings of the Gentiles, Rev 21. 24.

V. 7. And thy seed] Specially Isaac, v. 19. chapter 21. 12, 22. 7. 18. Romans 9. 8.

everlasting] In respect of the long continuance of the outward ceremony of
Circumcision; but for the spiritual part literally everlasting in Christ, Heb.
13. 20. 9. 15. Luke. 1. 71, 73. 1 Pet, 1. 4.

a God unto thee] Herein consists the sum and substance of all; God himself
wholly being applied to man for blessing and salvation. Ps. 144. 15. exercising
his perfections for man's happiness.

V. 8. Wherein thou art a stranger] Acts 7. 5. Hebr. 11. 9.

everlasting] So, Esaias 60. 21. which for the earthly Canaan is to be understood
conditionally, if his seed keep the Covenant, which they brake, and so kept it
but for a time; Though the outward sign is changeable, yet the Covenant it
self remains one in substance for ever, Esaias 63. 18. Lev. 18. 28. 20. 22.

V. 10. My Covenant] Token of it, v. 11. so Covenant of Circumcision, Acts 7.
8. so the Lamb is the Lords Passover, Exodus 12. 11* the bread the Lords body.
It is called the seal of the righteousness of faith, Rom 4. 11. sealing on
Gods part, that he would give them that promised seed the Messiah, and in him
accept them, pardon and cleanse them; and on their part, that they would
believe in the Messiah, and as Gods peculiar people, mortify their ^usts, and
be new creatures.

Everyman-childe] The man is the head of the woman, from him the generation
proceeds, 1 Cor. 11. 3, 8. women are baptized, Act. 8. 12.

Circumcised] With shedding of blood, with shame and much pain, Exodus 4. 25,
26. Genesis 34. 25. It figured mortification, Deuteronomy. 10. 16. 30. 6. Romans 2. 25, 29.
4. 11. Phil. 3. 3. Col. 2. 11, 13. See, Lev. 26. 4I. Esaias 6. 10. Jer. 4. 4. 6.
10. Lev. 19. 23. Heb. 9. 22.

Circumcised] By whom it is not specified. Abraham did it, v. 23. And likely
the Parents, Masters or Magistrates did in case of neglect Zipporah did it,
Exodus 4. 25.

V. 12. Eight days old] Though it fell on the Sabbathday, Josh. 7. 22.
Creatures till eight days old were unclean, not fit for sacrifice, Lev. 22.
27. And so in mankind, Lev. 12. 2. The same number of days in many other
Levitical rites, Lev 8. 33, 35. 9. 1. 14. 8, 9, 10. 15. 13, 14. Numb. 6. 9, 10.
Ezech. 43. 26, 27. And yet we read, Josh 5. 2. etc. the day and Sacrament it
self neglected; and the Lord commanding Joshuah, to circumcise all the males
borne in the wilderness, in that space of forty years wandering, at Gilgal.
And happily sickness might put off circumcision till time of health, Hos. 6. 6.

V. 13. Bought with thy money] Heathen Proselytes and their Infants, were
hereby made capable and partakers of Gods Covenant.

in your flesh] Genital part. To teach regeneration of nature, Psalm. 517. to
make an holy seed, Ezra 9. 2. 1 Cor. 7. 14. Thus honoring that uncomely part,
to bear the mark of the heavenly Covenant. Thus the foolishness of God is
wiser then men, 1 Cor 12. 23. 1 Cor. 1. 23, 24.

V. 14. Cut off from his people] The Infant here can be in no fault, as not
capable either of the command or contempt; He cannot be said to break the
Covenant, in the end of this verse) that can do nothing that belongs to the
keeping of it. Neither was Moses child in danger of it, but the father, Exodus
4. 24. neither was the want of Circumcision so p^rillous, except in case of
contempt or wilful neglect, Josh. 5. 7. As likewise it was with the Passover,
enjoined upon the same danger and penalty, Exodus 12. 14, 15. And yet omitted in
the wilderness, and put off upon occasions to the second month, Numb. 9. v
10, 11. 2 Chronicles. 30. 2, 3. The penalty here then is laid upon that man, who not
being circumcised in his Infancy, should afterward also wilfully and
contemptuously neglect it; and upon those by whose default Circumcision of the
Infant is omitted, as Ezech. 18. 20 Now the penalty of cutting off from his
people here; is elsewhere in Scripture expressed in other cases, with this
variety; shall be cut off, Lev. 17. 4. utterly cut off, Numb 15. 31. cut off
from Israel, Exodus 12. 15. cut off from my presence, Lev. 22. 3. from the
Congregation of Israel, Exodus 12. 19 from among the Congregation, Numb. 19. v.
20. from the midst of my people, Ezech. 14. 8. in the sight of their people,
Lev. 20. 18 as in the case of Moses before mentioned, cut off from the earth.
And it is used as a threatening and penalty against diverse sorts of sins and
sinners, against such as eat leavened bread in the feast of the Passover,
Exodus 12. 15, 19. or forbear to keep that feast, Numb. 9. 13. or that eat fat,
Lev. 7. 25. or blood, Lev 7. 27. 17. 10, 14. or that eat of the flesh of the
peace offering on the third day, Lev. 19. 8. or that eat of the flesh of
sacrifice, having their uncleanness on them, or being unclean, do not purify
themselves, Numb. 19. 13, 20. or having touched any unclean thing, Lev 7. 20,
21. 22. 3. or that bring not their sacrifice to the door of the Tabernacle of
the Congregation to be killed there, and not elsewhere, Lev 17. 4, 9. or that
shall not afflict his soul on the fast day, the tenth day of the seventh
month, Lev. 23. 29. or does any work in that same day, or that defiles the
Sabbath to do any work therein, Exodus 31. 14. or that lies with a woman in her
sickness, Lev. 20. 18. or with a sister, Lev. 20. 17. or an idolater, Ezech.
4. 8. or that gives of his seed to Molech, Lev. 20. 2, 3, 4 or that turns
after wizards and such as have familiar spirits, ^ev. 20. 6. or that does ought
presumptuously, Numb. 15. 30, 31. All these are expressly threatened with, and
sentenced to this punishment. And the meaning of the phrase is most usually
taken to signify a cutting off by death, and it is so expressed, Exodus 31. 14.
Lev 17. 4 20. 2, 3, 4. 5. And must needs be so understood when it is used
against grievous sins and crimes, as against idolatry, witchcraft, incest, and
sins done presumptuously, despising the Word of the Lord, and reproaching him.
This penalty is to be inflicted by the Magistrates power no doubt: And in case
of his fail, God himself threatens and undertakes to do it, Lev. 17. 10, 20.
2, 3, 4. 5, 6. 23. 30. And for the lesser offenses mentioned, they being
wittingly and wilfully done in Gods Worship and service, and against his plain
and peremptory command; I see not how they come short of sins of presumption,
Numb. 15. 30. which are doomed to death in the judgment of the learned upon
that place. I conceive therefore that they fall short, that by this penalty
here, will understand no more, but that such an offender is to be cast off, and
held for no Jew, but as an Heathen man. And they also that would apply this
phrase here, and in other places of the Old Testament, for the maintenance of
Ecclesiastical Excommunication among the Jews. The doubtfulnesse of the
meaning of the phrase has made me the more inquisitive into it, I confess, if
not too tedious in it. However I leave all to better judgments. And for my
part like not in things dubious to be too definitive.

V. 15. Sarah] Yet in the New Testament it is written Sara, without the [ h]
the Greek tongue having no [ h] at the end of words.

V. 16. Nations] 1 Pet. 3. 6. Jerusalem, which is above her answerable type, is
the mother of us all, Gal. 4. 26.

V. 17. Laughed] For joy and wonder, Romans 4. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. as over-joyed
and amazed at the promise which he believed, Heb. 11. 12. rejoicing even at the
promised seed, Joh. 8. 56.

an hundred years old] Romans 4. 19, 20. he did hope against hope. If Abraham
married Keturah thirty seven years after this time, and had six children by
her, then surely God showed his power in renewing Abraham's vigor and strength
of body as the Eagles, Psalm. 103. 5. or it may rather seem that Abraham took
Keturah in Sarabs lifetime, within those thirty seven years between the birth
of Isaac and her death, seeing Keturah is called his Concubine, 1 Chronicles. 1. 32.

V. 18. Oh that Ishmael] Chapter 16. 10.

V. 19. Isaac] Laughter, Chap. 21. 6.

V. 21. My Covenant] Thirteen times named in this chapter, Luke 1. 72, 73, 74.

with Isaac] Chapter 21. 12. Romans 9. 7, 8. Gal. 3. 29.

at this set time] Ch, 18. 10. This was just a year before Isaacs birth.

V. 22. Went up] Ascending, vanished out of his sight; so from Jacob, chapter 35.
13. so from Manoah and his wife, Judge. 13. 20.

V. 23. In the self-same day] Of the command, not eight days after.

V. 24. When he was circumcised] By whom Abraham was circumcised is not set
down. But he is said to circumcise the rest, v. 23. some say that now the Jews
use Chirurgions in this service.

CHAP. XVIII.
Verse 1. PLaines] O. Oak-grove.

of Mamre,] Chapter 13. 18. 14. 13. 23. 19.

V. 2. Three men] So* in his thought, and in appearance. But thus he
entertained Angels at unawares, Heb. 13. 2. But one of them is called Jehova,
13, 14, 17, 20, 22. And after Abraham so acknowledges him, v. 25, 27. The
other two were created Angels, Ch 19. 1.

V. 3. Lord] Speaks to one of them, in show, the chief.

V. 6. Three measures] Jews write that their measure, which they call Seah,
the Greeks Saton, contains as much as one hundred forty four Hens eggs,
about two gallons and 1/2 of our measure, three of these measures make an
Ephah, containing about seven gallons, and 1/2

V. 8. And they did eate] Chapter 19. 3. They had true bodies for the time, and did
truly eat. Though a Spirit has not flesh and bones. Luke 24. 39. yet Spirits
may, and by Gods dispensation sometimes do assume humane bodies.

V. 9. Where is Sarah thy wife] Thus they begin to manifest themselves to be
more then men.

V. 10. He said] Jehova, v. 13.

returne] Not by apparition again, but by performance of promise, chapter 21. 1.

according to the time of life] From this time, according as the time of life
is between conception and birth; so many months as a woman goes with child,
Romans 9. 9. This Promise argued more then men.

V. 11. After the manner of women] Rom 4. 19. Heb. 11. 11.

V. 12. Laughed] Not as Abraham, chapter 17. 17. but through weakness of says,
and therefore it is reproved, v. 13. yet commended, Heb. 11. 11. after sure she
did better recollect her self, Luke 1 45. after she laughed for joy, chapter 21. 6.

within her self] Not outwardly and openly, which happily made her the more
readily deny it.

V. 13. And the Lord said] Jehova said, Christ, so, v. 17. He knew her thoughts
themselves.

f^ying, shall I, etc] She used, if not the very same words, yet to the same
sense.

V. 15. Denied, for she was afraid] Weaknesses and failings in Saints.

V. 16. Toward Sodom] As going thither, the two Angels did so, chapter 19. 1.

V. 17. Shall I hide] Amos 3. 7. Joh. 15. 15. Abraham a Prophet, chapter 20 7. and
a friend, 2 Chronicles. 20. 7.

V. 19. He will command] Duty of Parents, and Masters of families, and example
to them, Genesis 28. 1. Deuteronomy 6. 7. 11. 10. 32. 46. Job 1. 5. Prove. 6. 20.

V. 20. Sodom and Gomorrah] Admah and Zeboim, Deuteronomy. 29. 23. Hos. 11. 8.

V. 21. I will go down and see] God speaks after the manner of men, as, chapter 11.
5, 7.

V. 22. And the men] Two of the three, chapter 19. 1.

stood yet before the Lord] Jehovah. This Abraham now knew.

V. 23. Drew near] A sign and fruit of says in prayer, Heb. 7. 19. 10. 22.

V. 24. Within the City] Implying the like for the other three Cities.

V. 25. That be far from thee] That the righteous should be as the wicked,
taken away in justice, wrath and vengeance, as the wicked Sodomites here were;
though in public calamities they are sometimes taken away, as the wheat is
thrashed with the chafe, yet it is in mercy to them.

V. 32. Ten] Jer. 5. 1. God offers mercy if there were but one, Esaias 65. 8.
sometimes again he forbids his Prophets to pray for such, Jer 15. 1. Ezech. 14.
14.

CHAP. XIX.
Verse 1. TWo Angels] Two of the three, chap. 18. 2, 22.

in the gate] As Abraham in the tent door, chapter 18. 1. Both entertain Angels at
unawares, Heb. 13. 2.

V. 2. Behold now] Now that the night is come on.

Nay] To try his affection, and happily they would have done so otherwise, to see
the behavior of the people, and their carriage, chapter 18. 21.

V. 3. They turned in] Upon his pressing of them. A slight invitation may be
seriously refused; and yet that which is pressing be accepted afterward; so,
Luke 24. 28, 29. and this without Popish equivocation, or mental reservation.

unleavened] For haste. And so unleavened is to be understood, chapter 18. 6. See,
Exodus 12. 39.

V. 4. But before they lay down] Likely the rare beauty of the two men (Angels)
being soon noted and spread abroad occasioned this.

all the people] So vile were they all.

V. 5. called unto Lot, Esaias 3. 9. proclaim their sin, impudence.

know them] Hence that sin is called Sodomy or Sodometry, as from Simon is the
name Simony, Acts 8. 18. Jude v. 7. Romans 1. 23, to 27.

V. 7. Brethren] In nature, Act. 17. 26. Esaias 58, 7 Genesis 29. 4. 1 Samuel 30. 22,
23. And in neighborhood.

V. 8. Two daughters] Virgins; yet betrothed, v. 14. This sinful in Lot, Romans
3. 8. Neither had he such power over his daughters, nor ought they to have
yielded to him herein. Happily he might think and hope by this strange offer, to
take off their minds, qualify their present heat by some delays, and alter
them from their whole purpose by degrees. As Reuben sought by his strange
offer, Genesis 42. 37. to alter his fathers mind, and so indeed brought him at
last to let Benjamin go with them, chap. 43. 9, 10.

V. 9 Stand further] Spoken in disdain, as, Esaias 65. 5.

needs be a Judge] Now and heretofore, 2 Pet. 7. 8.

pressed sore] To impudence they join violence, as, Judge. 19. 22. 20. 5. Their
other sins are mentioned elsewhere, as, Ezech. 16. 49.

V. 11. With blindnesse] Such, as they could not see the door, though likely
the house, and the way to their own houses; so dazzled, such a blindness
likely as that of those Aramites, 2 Kings 6. 18. which could see to follow the
Prophet, though they could not distinctly discern who he was, nor the way they
went, nor the City whereto they came, v. 20. Mar. 8. 24. Luke 24. 16.

wearied themselves] Infinite impudence in sin.

V. 14. Which married] Shortly should, being about to marry them, and already
betrothed, Deuteronomy. 22. v. 23, 24. Mat. 1. 18, 20, 23, 24, 25.

V. 15. Which are here] Possibly he had other daughters which were married, and
were dead, or else refused and perished with their husbands. But this not so
likely.

V. 16. Laid hold] John 6. 44.

V. 17. That he said] Jehovah; most likely, by the passages in the ensuing
verses. He had now left Abraham, met them, and made himself known to Lot.

Look not] Thou, or any in thy company, v. 26. Luke 17. 22. See, Luke 9. 62.
Mat. 24. 16, 17, 18. Phil. 3. 13, 14.

V. 19. I cannot escape to the mountain] In so hasty a flight make so long a
journey, lest ere I get thither the judgment poured out should overtake me.
His infirmity of faith and fearfulness, out of which he left Zoar also, v. 30.

V. 22. I cannot] Mar. 6. 5. Exodus 32. 10. Deuteronomy. 9. 14. Genesis 32. 26.

Zoar] Little, before Bela, chapter 14. 2.

V. 23. The Sun was risen] Hasty flight from break of day, v. 15. to Sunrising
and speedy execution of justice.

V. 24. Then the Lord] Jehovah from Jehovah. Suites well with a plurality of
persons in the unity of the Deity.

brimstone and fire] Luke 17. 28, 29, 30. Fit judgment for their stinking
burning lusts, and fire unnaturally descending, to punish their unnatural
lusts. And this but a forerunner of their everlasting punishment, in that lake
which burns with fire and brimstone for ever, Rev. 21. 8. Jude v 7.

V 25. Overthrew these Cities] Deuteronomy. 29. 23 Esaias 13 19. Jer. 50. 40. Amos 4. 11.

V. 26. From behind him] Either Lot going before, and she following behind
him, looked back; or Lot coming hindmost to haste them forward, she looked
back, behind and beyond him.

a pillar of salt] A statue of salt; not such salt as will melt with rain, and
turn into water, but a kind of rockie mineral salt, which will endure all
weathers, and serve for a lasting monument, Numb. 18. 19 2 Chronicles 13. 5. This
place of this Plain is called the salt sea, chapter 14. 3. Salt to season us with
better wisdom, Luke 17. 32. 9. 62.

V. 27. Stood] Chapter 18. 22.

V. 28. The smoak] Before it was as the Garden of the Lord, chapter 13. 10. but now
fearfully destroyed, Psalm. 107. 34.

V. 29. Remembered Abraham] Chapter 12. 1. 14. 14. 16. 18. 23, etc. yet this
excludes not a regard had to the righteousness of Lot, 2 Pet. 2. 7, 8.

V. 30. In the mountain] Whare the Lord appointed him first, v. 17. so now he
finds it had been best to have followed Gods Will at the first.

feared to dwell in Zoar, and he dwelt in a cave] Weakness of faith and other
causes might occasion this fear.

two daughters] Maidens, v. 8.

V. 31. In the earth] She knew there were people in Zoar: and saw the judgment
to be particular, not universal over the earth or Canaan: and that Abraham and
his family were not far off. But she complains, as for the present mured up in
a cave, and in this solitary life, without society of any but themselves, like
to be deprived of all hope of marriage; and this fear and passion blinding
her, drives her to this desperate damnable course.

V. 32. Wine] Which they had brought from Zo^r, conceiving, that unless drunk
he would never sin so foully.

perceived not] Drunkenness drownes all understanding, sense and conscience.
He did prostitute their chastity, v. 8. They overthrow his. This just, as from
God, though evil in them. He righteous in Sodom, and almost Sodomitical here.

seed of our father] They seem to be greedy of having children of their own
kin, and not of the faithless and cursed Nations. And by giving the names of
Moah and Ben-ammi, v. 37, 38. even to boast of it.

V. 37. Moah] The Moabites idolaters, neighbors and enemies to the Israelites,
yet Ruth a Moabitesse and our Savior came of her.

V. 38. Ben ammi] Son of my people. Ammonites like the Moabites to the
Israelites. Many foul faults and infirmities in Lot, and yet pardoned upon
repentance, and he commended, 2 Pet. 2. 7.

CHAP. XX.
Verse 1. THence] From the Plains of Mamre, chapter 18. 1. There it is likely he
had now lived about fourteen years, chapter 13. 18. 14. 13.

between Kadesh and Shur] Chapter 16. 14, 7.

Gerar] Chapter 10. 19. Hither Isaac came to sojourne, chapter 26. 1, 6. and after went
from Gerar to the valley of Gerar, v. 17.

V. 2. She is my sister] Abraham falls into the same sin the second time, chapter
12. 13. And so Jehoshaphat in joining with Ahab, and after with Ahaziah,
reproved both times, 2 Chronicles ^9. 2. 20. 37.

Abimelech] The common or usual name of the Kings of the Philistines, chapter 26.
1. Psalm. 34. title. See, Anno^. on chapter 12. 15.

V. 3. God came] Psalm. 105. 14.

in a dream by night] Dreams natural are not much to be heeded, as being full
of vanities and deceits, Eccles. 5. 3, 7. Esaias 29. 7, 8. Job 20 8. Dreams are
sometimes by the illusions of Satan, as to the false Prophets, Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 3,
5. Jer. 23. 25, 27. 27. 9. 29. 8. Zach. 10. 2. Jude v. 8. Dreams are sometimes
supernatural, sent of God, and bring their evidence and assurance with them:
God thereby signifying what he would, or what men should do. And thus God sends
dreams sometimes upon extraordinary occasions to wicked men, as here to
Abimelech; and so to Laban, Phara^h, and his butler, and baker, to the
Midianite, Judge. 7. 13. to Nebuchadnezzar, to Pilates wife, Mat. 27. 19. And
all these, for the good of his own servants and people. And chiefly God sends
them to his choice servants themselves, as to Jacob, to Solomon, to Daniel, to
Joseph the son of Jacob, to Joseph the husband of the blessed Virgin. And
this was one of the ordinary means whereby God revealed his Will unto his
Prophets. Numb. 12. 6. Joel 2. 28 Acts 2. 17. Under which color Saul
complains of the want of them, 1 Samuel 28. 15.

a dead man] A condition and exception is implied, v. 7. So, Jonah 3. v. 4.
John 3. 18. The Lord had now struck him and his, v. 17, 18. And here tells him
the cause.

V. 4 Near her] Nor touch her, v. 6. being hindered by Gods plague and
sickness, v. 17, 18.

a righteous Nation] Seeing it on his family, v. 17, 18. and fearing it on all
his people and subjects. As they sometimes smart for the Princes sin; so chapter
34. 24. 2 Samuel 24. 17. so threatened here, 27.

V. 5. Even she her self said] It was even Sarahs sin also.

integrity] Yet he had a wife, v. 17 but happily he thought Polygamy no sin.

V. 6. Withheld thee] Gods restraining grace in the wicked, giving means to
stay from evil, Genesis 31. 7. 1 Samuel 25. 26. Genesis 35. 5 Exodus 34. 24. And again
sending delusions when it pleases him, for the punishment of sin, 2 These. 2. 7.

against me] Though wronging in it both Abraham and Sarah, Psalm. 51. 4.

V. 7. A Prophet] Psalm. 105. 15. To whom God familiarly revealed himself and
his Will, and who foresaw Christ's day, chapter 18. 17, 18, 19. John 8. 56. Some
Prophets foretell this to come; some only interpret Scripture, as, 1 Cor. 14. 3,
29. 31, 32. Romans 12. 6. Aaron is called Moses Prophet, i. e. Interpreter, Exodus
7. 1.

and he shall pray for thee] Prayer for others is the work of a Prophet, Jer
14. 11. 15. 1. 27. 18.

V. 12. Indeed she is my sister] See, Annotat. on chap. 11. 19.

V. 13. When God caused me] In the Hebrew it is, when they, even God, or the
gods caused errare facerent Deus, So, 2 Samuel ^. 23. Here Elohim is coupled with
a word plural, expounded singularly, Josh. 24. 19.

V. 16. Thy brother] As thou call him. This sum is 62. li. 16. sh.

a thousand pieces of silver] i. e. shekels usually where silver is set down,
and not the kind, shekels are understood, as, Numb. 7. 13. where in the end
shekels are named. And where shekels are set down, and the metal not expresed,
there silver is understood; so, Exodus 30. 13, 15. compared with Exodus 38. 25,
26. The common shekel is 1. sh. 3. d. The shekel of the Sanctuary 2. sh. 6. d.
i. e. ounce. In gold 15. sh. shekel is a Bekah, Exodus 38. 26. is mentioned, 1 Samuel 98. which is the Roman penny, and Grecian dram, our 7. d. ob. (still
counting upon the sacred shekel) A common shekel is ten Gerahs, our 1. sh. 3.
d. The Kings shekel 1. sh. 10. d. ob. The sacred shekel is 2. sh. 6. d. Shekel
comes of Shakal, weighs; whence happily come our skole, or skase to weigh; they
used of old to weigh money. A sacred shekel is twenty Gerahs, Exodus 30. 13. A
Gerah weighed sixteen barley corns, and is our 1. d. ob. Of shekel or the
Chaldee Selang, our shilling seems to come. The Greeks translate shekels
didrachmaes, or double drams

a covering of the eyes] Covering of the eyes and face with a veil, is a sign
of the wives subjection, and of the husbands power, Genesis 24. 65. 1 Cor. 11. 3,
6* 7, 10. He is the Guardian of thy chastity to cover thee from the eyes and
lusts of all others.

Thus she was reproved] These are rather Moses words, then Abimelech; here a
Heathen King schools her, to her greater shame.

V. 17. Healed Abimelech] Therefore there was some further punishment, then the
closing up of the women's wombes by barrenness, which was a thing that could
not in so short a time, either be perceived as a judgment, or discerned as a
cure upon Abraham's prayer.

CHAP. XXI.
Ver. 1. VIsited] This word signifies Gods remembrance, care, providence,
performance of what he has spoken, be it good or evil, in justice, as, Exodus
20. 5. or in mercy, for blessings temporal or spiritual. Here, for performance
of his promise of a child to Sarah, chapter 17. 19, 21. 18 10, 14.

V. 2. Conceived] Hereupon her faith commended, Heb. 11. 11.

at the set time] Chapter 18. 10, 14. Hereupon Isaac is said to be borne by
promise, Gal. 4. 23, 28. Isaac borne at Gerar.

V. 3. Isaac] So appointed by God, chapter 17. 19.

V. 4. Being eight days old] On the eighth day, chap. 17. 12.

V. 5. An hundred years old] Chapter 17. 1.

V. 6. Laugh] For joy now, Esaias 54. 1. 66. 10. Gal. 4. 27. not out of
diffidence, as, chapter 18. 12, 13, 15. Laughing is taken for mocking, or laughing
to scorn, v. 9.

V. 7. Who would have said] So, Esaias 49. 21. Romans 4. 18.

children] As daughters for daughter, and sons for son, ch 46. 7, 23.

V. 8. Weaned] So Samuel 1 Samuel 22. 23, 24. It is not said at what year of his
age.

feast] Fitter at that time then at the time of birth or Circumcision.

V. 9. Mocking] Laughing to scorn, mocking him as their young Master, and he
that must forsooth be heir of all. And likely his mother Hagar had some hand
in it, as being not free from an envious eye, and repining at the jollity of
this feast; and therefore she is cast out too. So, ch 19. 14. Ezech. 23. 32.
Nehem. 2. 19. 4. 1. This mocking here was in some malignant bitter way, which
so highly incensed Sarahs wrath. St. Paul calls it a persecution, Gal. 4. 29.
So Cham his mothers Progenitor derided his own father, chapter 9. 22.

V. 10. She said] By the Spirit of God, and God confirms it, v. 12. And Paul
says not that Sarah, but the Scripture speaks it, Gal. 4. 30. Her saying was
not only passionate, but prophetical.

this bondwoman and her sonne] Gal. 4. 22, 23, 24, 25, 30, 31.

not be heire] Under this inheritance Heaven was figured, Gal. 3. 18, 29.

V. 12. And God said] By night, v. 14. God approves Sarahs mind and Will, it
was not then only her passion that ruled her.

the lad] Ishmael was now about seventeen or eighteen years old, chap. 17. 24.
25. 21. 5.

in Isaac shall thy seed be called] And not from Ishmael. The promised seed and
spiritual prerogatives shall be entailed upon him, Romans 9. 7, 8.

V. 14. Bottle of water] Scant in those dry deserts.

and the childe] See Annot. on v. 12

wandered] Lost her way in those deserts toward Egypt.

of Beersheba] So first called, v. 31.

V. 15. Cast the childe] Being sick and fainting for thirst.

V. 16 The death] Such extremity they were come unto in the wilderness.

V. 17. And God heard] In accomplishment of his Promises, chapter 16. 10, 12. 17.
20.

where he is] Though he be cast out of his fathers house, and here in such
misery.

V. 18. And ^old him in thy hand] Not lay him on thy back.

V. 19. Opened her eyes] Withheld before from seeing it, by grief or some other
reason; or as it was with the two disciples going to Emmaus, Luke 34. 16, 31.
and Elishaes servant and the Aramites, 2 Kings 6. 17, 18, 20.

V. 20. Dwelt in the wildernesse] Chapter 16. 12.

archer] And so a Warrior, shooting with the bow being used in war, chapter 48.
22. 49. 23, 24. Psalm 44. 6. Josh. 24. 12. 2 Samuel 1. 22. 1 Kings 22. 34.

V. 21. Paran] Nigh to Sinai, through which the Israelites went, Numb. 10. 12.
A part of that wilderness is called Kedar, from one of Ishmaels sons of that
name, chapter 25. 13. Ps. 83. 6.

his mother] The mothers right in marrying her child; she chose an Egyptian as
her self was one.

V. 22. At that time] While Abraham dwelt at Gerar, chapter 20. 1. and after Isaacs
weaning.

that Abimelech.] Chapter 20. 2.

V. 23. If thou shall lie unto me] Genesis 14. 23. An imperfect speech, implying
an imprecation if he should deal deceitfully with him. For an oath calls God
both as a witness of the truth, and an avenger of the untruth. This
imprecation is sometimes expressed, as, Ruth 1. 17. 2 Cor. 1. 23.

V. 24. I will swear] He^. 6. 16. Abraham's right to the land of Canaan, was but
for the future, after four generations, chapter 15. 13, 16.

V. 25. A Well of water] Of great use in that dry Southern part of Canaan. And
therefore such strife about them, v. 30. ch 26. 15, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 2^, 32.

V. 27. And Abraham took sheep] Likely gifts were in use at the making of
Covenants Or he did it in requital of Abimelechs gifts, chapter 20. 14.

V. 30. That they may be a witnesse] To prevent future controversy about this
Well, v. 25. so an heap of stones is made a witness, chapter 31. 46* 48.

V. 31. Beersheba] The Well of the oath, or of seven, with relation to the
seven lambs. It was afterward in the Southern part of the lot of the tribe of
Judah, toward the coast of Edom, Josh. 15. 21, 28. 1 Xings 19. 3. Nehem. 11.
25, 27. yet seems to be allowed to the tribe of Simeon, which was within the
inheritance of the tribe of Judah, Josh. 19. 1. 2. 1. chapter 4. 24, 28. It is often
opposed to Dan, as to the Northern part of Canaan. There is a Well,
Wilderness and City of this name, all joining together. As Abraham dwelt here,
and made this Covenant, and dug this Well: so after Isaac dwells there,
makes a Covenant, and digs again the Well, and renewes the name, chap. 26. 23,
33. And Jacob dwelling there with his father, went thence to Laban in Haran:
and going into Egypt, with all his family comes thither, there sacrifices and
has a vision. And yet at last in the days of King Uzziah or sooner, it became
a seat of some solemn idolatry, Amos 8. 14. 5. 5.

V. 32. a Covenant] Such Covenants lawful with Heathens and Idolaters; so, chapter
31. 44.

V. 33. Grove] Of Oaks, as intending long to dwell here. Abraham dwelt under
the shadow of trees in the Plain of Mamre, chapter 18. 4, 8. Here it seems he
intends it for a religious use, for the place of prayer and exercise of Gods
Worship, as not being a thing yet forbidden. But after in Moses time, when God
had chosen a place of Worship, God strictly forbids this, not to plan^ a grove
of any trees near the Altar of the Lord, and commands such groves to be cut
down, and threatens grievously such offenders; yet hardly were Gods people kept
from this sin and idolatry, but they planted groves, placed their idols, served
them, even as the Canaanites and other Heathens did, Deuteronomy. 12. 2. Thus it was
in the times of the Judges, chapter 3. 7. In the times of the Kings of Israel
throughout, 2 Kings 17. 16. specially in the reigns of Joroboam, 1 Kings 14.
15, and of Ahab, whose Queen Jezabel had four hundred Prophets of the groves,
that did ear meat at her table; yea, and in the reigns of some Kings of
Judah, specially of Ahaz and Manass^h. But the godly Kings of Judah cut them
down, plucked them up, or burnt them, as Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah and Josiah. And
Asa put down his Grandmother Maachah from being Queen, because she had made an
idol in a grove.

V. 34. Many dayes] Till Isaac was offered, chapter 22. 19. And how long after we
know not.

CHAP. XXII.
Verse 1. AFter these things] How long a time it is not certain. But that Isaac
was then able to bear the wood of the burnt-offering, v 6. I know not why any
can fix it upon the thirty third year of Isaacs age.

God did tempt Abraham,] Not by seeking to seduce him to evil, so God tempts no
man, Jam. 1. 13. But so our own lusts and Satan do, Jam. 1. 14. 1 Cor. 7. 5.
who is therefore called the Tempter, Mat. 4. 3. 1 These. 3. 5. God does it to
try by experiment what is in man, what faith in Gods Promises, what obedience
to his Will; as men sometimes use to make experiments of the faithfulness of
their friends. Not yet that God is ignorant of what is in man, but to make it
the better known to himself and others. So, Exodus 15. 25. 16. 4. Deuteronomy. 8. 2,
16. 13. 3. Indeed God and Satan may both have an hand in one and the same
tentation, as in David's numbering the people, 2 Samuel 24. 1^. 1 Chronicles. 21. 1. But
to far different ends; both Satan and wicked men tempted our Savior often in
the Gospels, with an evil mind, to an evil end. And the sinful Israelites are
said often to tempt God, by making doubt and trial of his presence, Providence,
Wisdom, Power, and so by unbelief and murmurings, tempting and provoking him
to wrath. And so Ananias and Sapphira tempted the Spirit of the Lord. And Paul
gives the caveat that we tempt not Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 9. And again tentations
are taken for troubles, afflictions, persecutions, which try the truth and
strength of Gods graces in his children. And so if God lead into temptation,
Matthew. 26 13. he will with it give you the issue and outgate, 1 Cor. 10. 13.
Here God does so wi^h Abraham, in a mavelous trial of his faith and obedience.

V. 2. And he said] In such a manner, as he could not doubt but it was God, and
no Satanical illusion.

thy only (son) Isaac] Only in thy family, Ishmael was gone, and we never
read he returned, but to the burial of his father, chapter 25. 9. And it seems at
this time Abraham had not taken Keturah, or had no children by her. Thy only
Isaac that child of Promise, Heb. 11. 18. Thy only begotton son* Heb. 11. 17.
namely of Sarah, thy lawful wise, the free^woman.

w^om thou lovest] Above all; and that for many good reasons.

land of Moriah] Here afterward Solomon built the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 3. 1.
Moriah had this name afterward, upon the occasion in the fourteenth verse.

a burnt-offering] Not that God intended he should do it. But this was for
trial of his rare faith and obedience, and that in a most extraordinary way and
manner. For indeed here all that was in Abraham as a Man, Father, Husband,
Believer, Professor of Religion, were put to trial, Heb. 11. 19.

one of the mountaines] It was a mountainous country, Psalm. 125 2. The
mountain or hill Sion was close by it.

V. 3. Rose up early] It seems the command was given in the night* Here in
this strange trial is his strange and ready quick obedience.

and went] From Beer-sheba, in the land of the Philistines, ch 21. 31. 33, 34.
and v. 19. of this chapter.

God had told him] More particularly then at first, v. 2. 4, 9.

V. 4. The third day] Either he went leisurely, or some occasions might let and
hinder him in his travel.

V. 5. Abide you here] Lest they should hinder him.

lad] The same word used of Joshuah when he was thirty years old, chapter 41. 12.
and of Joseph when he was fifty three years old, as appears in that he lived
forty years in the wilderness, and seventeen years after Moses death, and
his whole life was one hundred and ten, Josh. 24. 29. and so of Benjamin, Genesis
43. 8. when at that time he had nine or ten sons, chapter 46. 21. And so of Absalom
at the time of his death, 2 Samuel 18. 29.

and come again to you] He speaks this as a man astonished and amazed, or in
humane frailty, or as Prophet, (as Caiaphas did, John 11. 49. 50, 51. not
knowing or meaning what his words would bear, Heb. 11. 19. and so, v. 8.

V. 6. And laid it upon Isaac] Isaac a type of Christ in many things. Christ
the only Son of his Father, Well-beloved Son in whom he is well-pleased, the
promised seed, bore his Cross, was bound, sacrificed, meekly submitted, being
obedient unto death, rose again, as Isaac from the Altar.

V. 9. And bound Isaac] Telling him, no doubt, at this time Gods whole command:
and he having only his fathers word for it, yet readily submits and obeyes.

V. 10. To slay his sonne] Heb. 11. 17, 18. James 2. 21, 22, 23.

V. 11. And the Angel] Christ the Angel of the Covenant, who speaks of himself
as God, v. 12. swears by himself, and promises as God, and is called
Jehovah, v. 16, 17, 18.

Out of Heaven] So to Hagar, chapter 21. 17.

V. 12. Lay not thine hand] Heb. 11. 19. God accepts the Will for the deed, 2
Cor. 8. 12. Against idolaters sacrificing their children, both Jews and
Gentiles happily upon this pretended example.

V. 13. Behind him] Likely that way the Angels voice sounded.

aram] This is for the Lamb mentioned, v. 7, 8. This he to^k as sent from God,
1 Pet. 1. 19.

V. 14. Jehovah Jirch] The Lord will see, or will be seen, answerable to that,
v. 8. Mori-Jah is of the same signification, so Jehovah-Nissi, Exodus 17. 15.
Jehovah Shammah, Ezech. 48. 35.

in the Mount of the Lord it shall be seen] The meaning of the proverb is, that
in due time and place God will help and provide for his children, and they
shall see it.

V. 16. By my self have I sworne] Heb. 6. 13, 14, 17, 18. Sometimes God does
swear by his Soul, Jer. 51. 14. by his Holiness, Amos 4. 2. by his Name, Jer.
44. 26. And all this is to swear by himself.

says the Lord] Thus says Christ of himself. In like manner, Ps. 2. 7.

for because] Not for the merit of this prompt obedience. The Promise was
freely made before. chapter 12. 2. 13. 16. 15. 5. 17. 2, 4, 5, 6, 16. But as an
occasion of repeating and confirming the Promise, finding him rightly
qualified, and to encourage him and others to the execution of faith and
obedience.

V. 17. In blessing] Surely under the name blessing is meant the Promise of
eternal salvatation.

thy seed] Isaacs posterity, chapter 21. 12.

possess the gate] Chapter 24. 60. where all public places were for consultation,
for judgment, Job 31. 21. Deuteronomy. 22. 15. 21. 19. Amos 5 12, 15. and which were
the strongest fortifications. The meaning is, thy seed shall subject them, and
bring their strength and government under command; their holds and cities, Mat
16. 18.

V. 18. In thy seed] Christ. So the Apostle applies it, Gal. 3. 16, 18. Jer. 4.
2. Ps. 72, 17.

Beer-sheba] Chapter 21. 31, 33, 34.

V. 20 Milcah] Chapter 1. 29. Abraham sends thither for a wife for Isaac, chapter 24.
15, 47.

V. 21. Uz] In this land Job dwelled, Job 1. 1. There is another Uz, chapter 10.
23. and another, chapter 36. 28.

Buz] Job 32. 2. dwelt by his elder brother Uz in Arabia, Jer. 25. 20, 23, 24.

Kemuel the father of Aram] Aram throughout the Bible, is turned in Greek Syria
and Syrians, as Mizraim is Egypt, and Cush Ethiopia.

V. 22. Bethuel] Chapter 24. 15.

V. 23. Rebekah] Isaacs wife, chapter 24. 15, 67* For this cause chiefly is this
Genealogy here set down.

V. 24. And his Concubine] An half wife, sometimes called by the name of a
wife, yet not solemnly betrothed, nor taken with dowry, nor Partner in the
Government of the family, but subject to the lawful wife, and whose children
did not inherit, chapter 16. 6, 9. 25. 5, 6. 21. 10. 1 Kings 11. 3. yet Bilhahs and
Zilpahs did extraordinarily, becoming Heads of Tribes.

CHAP. XXIII.
Verse 1. THese were the years of the life of Sarah] How long any other woman
lived is not recorded in Scripture. She lived sixty years in Ur, five in
Haran, twenty five in Canaan, (almost all) before she had Isaac, and thirty
seven after in Canaan, most at Geraa and Beer-sheba, until her death in
Kiriath-arba or Hibron.

V. 2. Kiriath-arba, the same is Hebron] V. 19. Judges 1. 10. This city was
first called Mamre, chapter 13, 18. Here Abraham and Isaac sojourned; and hither
Jacob came to his father Isaac, after his return from Laban, chapter 35. 27. This
afterward fell by lot in the tribe, and mountain or hill-countrey of Judah,
Josh. 15. 54. And was given to the Priests for a City of Refuge, Josh. 20. 7.
But the fields of the City (excepting the subuths,) and the villages thereof
were given to Cale^, Josh. 21. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.

and Abrahem came] Out of his own Tent into Sarahs Tent, for they had several
Tents, separated from each other, chapter 24. 67. So, chapter 31 33. It is possible
that Abraham had not removed his dwelling from Beer-sheba to Hebron, but that
Sarah upon some occasion traveling thither, there from home fell sick and
died. And that from Beer-sheba Abraham should come and mourn for her, and take
order for her burial. But it is not likely she should so travel in her extreme
old age, nor so likely he would have in that manner buried her there, if they
both had not removed and dwelled there, it being their ancient place of
habitation. And wherever Abraham had been, as at Beer-sheba, as at Hebron, he
must have bought an inheritance, if any he would have for any use, he being but
a stranger and sojourne^ in the land, Acts 7. 5.

to mourn and to weep] So our Savior wept for Lazarus, John 11. 35. but it
must be with moderation, as in hope and belief of the Resurrection, 1 Thessalonians. 4
13. A little letter is here in the Original to note his moderation in weeping
without excess.

V. 3. Stood up from before his dead] Where likely he had sitten awhile on the
earth, Job. 2. 12, 13. Esaias 47. 1.

the sons of Heth] The Governors and Elders of the Hittites, the inhabitants
of Hebron, of the progeny of Cham, chapter 10. 15.

V. 4. Sojourner] He^. 11. 13, 14, 16.

a possession] Leave to purchase it.

burying place] Abraham having lived sixty two years in this land, yet never
purchased foot of inheritance, till now a burying place. This was a kind of
taking possession of this promised land, Esaias 22. 16. or a kind of pledge or
prophetical sign that his posterity should come and inherit the land, as
Jeremies buying his Uncles field was a sign of the Jews return into the
possession of this land, Jer. 32. This made Jacob give charge to be buried
here. And Joseph to have his bones carried into this land, not a foot; by Gods
gift, Acts 7. 5.

bury my dead] Sow it as seed in the ground, till the Resurrection, where they
rest, as in their beds, till their change come.

out of my sight] Death makes lovely Sarah, the desire of his eyes, now
^athsome to his sight.

V. 6. A mighty Prince.] chapter 2 1. v. 22.

V. 9. For a possession] Though they offered him the free use of the choice of
their sepulchers, v. 6. yet he had rather pay for a propriety, then hold such a
community with the heathen.

V. 9. Machpelah] Before Kiriath-arba, or Hebron, or Mamre, v. 17, ^9.

V. 10. And Ephron dwelt] Or sat, being present in that assembly, though
likely not known by face to Abraham. v. 8.

at the gates of the City] There Assemblies used to be and places of
Judicature, v. 18. chapter 34. 20. Deuteronomy. 17. 5. 21. 19. 22. 15, 24. 25. 7. Ruth 4.
1, 11. and in many other places, Prove. 31. 23.

V. 13. If thou Will give it; or be that Ephron.

I will give^ v. 9 The like strivi^g in kindness is between David and Araunah,
2 Samuel ^4. 21, 22, 23, 24.

V. 15. Shekels of silver] See, chapter 20. 16. The common shekel little more then
our shilling, viz. three pence, four hundred common shekels come to twenty
five pounds; some make the common shekel to be one shilling eight pence; and
the Royal or Kings shekel to be one shilling three pence, 2 Samuel 14. 26.

V. 16 Weighed] Money paid by weight, not by tale, so, chapter 43. 21. Esaias 55. 2.
Jer. 22. 9. Zech. 11. 12.

V. 17 And the field of Ephron] This is not that mentioned, Acts 7 ^6.

were made (...)] By payment and Witnesses, without Deeds and Writings; after
Writings were used, Jer. 32 Now hardly will skilful Writings serve the turn.

V. 18. For a possession] And monument to posterity, without distrust of Gods
Promises, or a renunciation of his own right, he buyeth a parcel of the land
for his present necessity. The time of possession, according to the grant and
promise being not yet come.

V. 19. Buried Sarah] And so after himself was buried there: and Isaac and
Rebecca. Jacob and Leah, chapter 25. 9, 49. 31. 50. 13. They testifying hereby
their faith in Gods promises, for the inheritance of this land, and of the
heavenly Canaan figured by it, Mat. 27. 7.

V. 20. A burying place] A seemly care is to be had of burial places.

CHAP. XXIV.
Verse 1. WAs old] One hundred and forty years old, as may be gathered out of
chap. 25. 20.

V. 2. His eldest servant] Most likely his Steward Eleezer, chapter 15. 2. And this
not without Isaacs consent, he being now forty years old.

thy hand under my thigh] So Jacob required of Joseph, chapter 47. 29. It is a
sign of subjection, 1 Chronicles 29. 24. yet in Scripture the most frequent
ceremony used at swearing, is the lifting up the hand, as chapter 1^ 22. Exodus 6.
8. Numb. 14. 30. Deuteronomy. 32. 40. Ezech. ^0. 15. Dan. 12. 7. Rev. 10. 5, 6. The
custom of several countries and religions has been, and is very various for
rites and gestures in this case. That Abraham by this gesture here should have
any relation to the promised seed, to proceed out of his loins, is a reach, I
fear, too far fetched.

V. 3. Sweare] A thing lawful; forbidden in vain* and light causes, and such
was Herod's oath to the dancing dam^sel, Mar. 6. 23. forbidden in ordinary
communication, Mat. 5. 34, 37. James 5. 12. But in weighty causes we may swear,
and being thereunto lawfully called and warranted; so here. And so for
ratification of Covenants and Promises of importance, so did Abraham and
Abimelech swear, chapter 21. 31. so Isaac and Abimelech, ch 26. 31. so Jacob and
Laban, chapter 31. 53. so David and Jonathan. 1 Samuel 20. 17. And ^o God commands
it, for removal of suspicions of jealousy, N^mh. 52^. of theft, Exodus 22. 11.
1 Kings 8. 31. 2 Chronicles. 6. 22. And so many men in Scripture, upon weighty
causes did lawfully require an oath; so did Abraham of his servant, Jacob of
Esau, Genesis 25. 33. and of his son Joseph Genesis 47. 31. Rahab of the spies,
Josh. 2. 12. Samson of the men of Jud^h, Judge. 15. 12. Saul and the Egyptian of
David, 1 Samuel 24. 21. and 30. 15. Nebuchadnezzar of Zedekiah, 2 Chronicles 36. 13.
And many in like cases freely and voluntarily gave their oaths; so Moses to
Cal^b. Josh. 14. 9. David to Bathsheba, 1 Kings 1. 13. Gedaliah to the ^emnan^
of ^udah, 2 Kings 25. 24. King Zedekiah to Jeremy, Jer. 38. ^6. The reason and
end of all is, to assure men the more of faith and truth in words and promises;
for in an oath men call God to be both a witness of the truth, and an avenger
of the lie, and breach of promise. And so an oath binds the soul with a bond,
Numb. ^0. 2. And hereupon the godly, to bind themselves the more to God, and
his service, and good duties, have sworn to ^he Lord, so David to find out an
house and place for Gods habitation, Psalm. 132. 2. so the Priests, Levites and
all Israel, to reform the strange marriages, Ezra 10. 5. so King Asa and all
the people entered into a Covenant to seek the Lord, and they swear unto the
Lord with a loud voice, and with shouting, and with trumpets, and with corne^s*
2 Chronicles. 15. 12, 13, 14. yea, God himself is mercifully pleased so far to
condescend, as to swear unto men for their better assurance, and the
confirmation of their faith in the truth of his promises, Heb. 6. 12, -- 18. so
he swear to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, Genesis 24. 7. 26. 3. Exodus 6. 8. Luke 1.
73. so to David, Psalm. 89. 49. And sometimes in wrath, to ratify his
threatenings against sinners, so, Psalm. 95. 11. Heb. 3. 11. In sacred account
then is the bond of an oath, Heb. 6. 16. it must be carefully taken, in truth,
in righteousness, and in judgment, Jer. 4. 2. Not vainly or falsely, Gods
wrath is great against such oaths and oath-breakers, Exodus 20. 7. Levit. 19.
12. Hos. 4. 2. 10. 4. Jer. 23. 10. Ezekiel. 17. 15, -- 21. Zech. 5. 3, 4. Mal. 3.
5. It was Peter's sin for which he wept so bitterly, Matthew. 26. 74. 75. we
must fear an oath, Eccles. 9. 2. though it be taken to men, yet it is called
the oath of God, Eccl. 8. 2. Ezekiel. 17. 10. and therefore the godly man, though
he swears to his own hurt, yet changes not* Psalm. 15. 4. Though the
Gibeonites beguiled Joshuah, and the Princes of Israel, yet say they, we must
let them live, lest wrath be upon us, because of the oath which we swear unto
them, Josh. 9. 15, 19, 20.

by the Lord] It is a part of our duty, and Gods Worship, to swear by Gods
Name, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. 10. 20. Esaias 45. 23. 65. 16. Jer. 12. 16. Psa^. 63. 11. so
Jacob swear to Laban by the fear of his father Isaac, Genesis 31. 53, 42. we must
not swear by false gods, Josh. 23. 7. Jer. 12. 16. not by Baal, by the sin and
idol of Samaria, the manner of Beer-sheba, by Malcham. Against such Swearers
God threareneth his judgments, Jer. 5. 7. Amos. 8. 14. Zeph. 1. 5. nor must we
swear by the creatures as if they were God, or we had power over them as our
own, to pawn them on the truth of what we say, Mat 5. 34, 35, 36. and chapter 23.
16, 18, 20, 21, 22. James 5. 12.

of the daughters of the Canaanites] chapter 9. 25. 10. 15. 15. 16, 21. such was
the sin of the old world, chapter 6. 2. This was Rebekahs grief at Esau, and fear,
lest Jacob should do the like, chapter 27. 46. 28. 1, 2. Lest by marrying with
idolaters his son or seed should be drawn from God, Deuteronomy. 7. 3, 4. And
specially he would not have his seed and blood mixed with that cursed Nation,
whose blood his posterity was to shed without pity, and to succeed in their
place according to Gods Promise. Therefore Moses forbids any Covenant wi^h
them; neither would Abraham bu^y with them, chapter 23. 6, 20.

V. 4. Unto my Countrey] the City of Nahor in Mesopotamia, v. 10. Haran or
Charran (not Ur) chapter 29. 4. Here was the truest Worship of the true God, next
to that in Abraham's family, though indeed v^ry much corrupted. Laban being an
idolater, chapter 31. 30, 53. and after Jacobs marriage there also, some of that
race in his family were not altogether free, chapter 31. v. 19, 32. 35. 2, 3, 4.

V. 5. Must I needs bring] In case the woman will not yield to marry Isaac, to
leave her country and come dwell in Canaan, but that he must yield to go and
dwell there, in that case he des^res direction, and to know what his oath
binds him unto.

bring] Isaac having undertaken to his father to be guided by him, and this
servant in the business of his marriage bring him by persuasion.

again] Not that Isaac had been there before, but Abraham, as, chapter 15. v. 16.

V. 6 Beware] Yield not to any such condition. They there are too corrupt in
Religion; and my son must not by going to dwell elsewhere, in a kind,
renounce so the land of Promise. He must live here rather as a stranger and
sojourner by faith as himself had done, Hebrews 11. 9.

V. 7. His Angel] A ministering Spirit, Heb. 1. 14. for thy direction and
protection.

V. 8. Clear] So, Josh. 2. 17.

V. 10. Master] Or Lord. These two terms in Scripture are used indifferently,
Mat. 17. 4. compared with Mar. 9. 5.

all the goods] V. 2. 53. chapter 39. 4.

^^n camels] Numerous in those countries, 1 Chronicles. 5. 11. ten here, and
servants to attend them, v. 59. and lading no doubt for them. This argues
Abraham's wealth, and the servants trust. And it was fit for so long a journey,
and to carry presents and gifts, v. 53. and that the kindred might see his
Masters great estate.

Mesopotamia] Between Tygris and Euphrates, called Padan. Aram, chapter 25. 20.
Aram in the New Testament is usually called Syria, Mat. 4. 24.

City of Nahor] See Annotations in chapter 11. 31. as Christ's City, i e. wherein he
dwelt, Mat. 9. 1.

V. 11. Kneel down] As the custom of those Camels was, to rest them, and to
load and unload.

V. 12. And ^e said] In his heart, v. 45.

Good speed] V. 42. prosper my way. Luke 10. 31. the word chance is used.

and show kindnesse] This kindness, in the words following.

V. 14. Let it come to passe] No doubt this came into his mind by the special
instinct of Gods Spirit, v. 7. as that of Gideon, Judge. 6. 17, 37. and that of
Jonathan, 1 Samuel 14. 9. without like warrant we may not attempt the like.

V. 15. Before he had done speaking] So, Esaias 65. 24. Dan. 9 23.

her Pitcher] Thus women employed in mean services, v. 11. 13. yea, great and
good women, as here, and, chapter 18. 6. and, 29 9. Exodus 2. 16.

V. 17. Ran to meet her] v. 13. but had removed a little aloof off to give way
^o Rebekah, and to mark her.

V. 22. Took a golden ear-ring] To give her, as taking or receiving, Psalm. 68.
19. is expounded giving. Ephesians. 4. 8. He puts the ear-ring upon her face, v. 47.
after he had asked whose daughter she was.

Shekel] See Annotat. on chapter 20. 16. and on chapter 23. 15. Half a shekel is called
Bekah, Ex. 38. 26.

V. 26. Worshipped] v. 52. chapter 22. 5. Exodus 4. 31. This is more then kneeling,
or bowing of the head. This is a prostrating of the whole body, a falling down
upon the face to the ground, Psalm. 95. 6. Luke. 5. 12. compared with Mat. 8. 2.

V. 27. Brethren] Kinsfolk, v. 48. chapter 13. 8.

V. 28. Mothers house] It seems the custom of those times and places, was for
the women to dwell in tents and houses apar by themselves, v. 67. chapter 31. 33.

V. 32. And he ungirded] i. e. Laban.

and water to wash] Chapter 18. 4. 1 Timothy 5. 10. In those hot countries men used to
go barefoot, or with sandals, open above.

V. 33. I will not eate] Ephesians. 6. 5, 6, 7, 8.

V. 47. Upon her face] Some were worn in the ear, some on the forehead which
hanged down to the nose, Ezech. 16. 12. Esaias 3. 21.

V. 48. Daughter] Grandchilde.

V. 49. Kindly and truly] Mercy and truth joined, chapter 47. 29. Josh. 2. 14.
Prove. 3. 3. Psalm. 85. 10.

V. 50. Then Laban and Bethuel] The son set before the father, as having the
chief managing of all, by reason of his fathers age, v. 55.

bad or good] Nothing at all against it, chap. 31. 24, 29.

V. 51. At the Lord has spoken] As we plainly see by the whole carriage of
this business, v. 15. 2 Samuel 16. 10.

V. 57. At her mouth] About this motion for her sudden departure.

V. 59. Her nurse] Deborah, chapter 35. 8. Great is the tenderness of the
affections of nursing fathers, and nursing mothers, Numb. 11. 12, 13. 1 These.
2. 7. Esaias 49, 22. 2 Samuel 4. 4.

V. 61. And followed the man] Psalm. 45. 10.

V. 62. Lahai-roi] Ch 16. 14. 12. 9. 25. 11. in the wilderness of Beersheba,
chapter 21. 14, 33, 34.

^e dwelt] Not apart from his father, but with him. That Well was not far from
Beersheba where Abraham dwelt, chapter 21. 14, 33, 34.

V. 63. To meditate] Or pray, or both, so the word signifies, Psalm. 77 3, 6.
12. 119. 15.

V. 65. A Veile] A sign of modesty and subjection, 1 Cor. 11. 5, 6, 10. The
custom was to bring the spouse veiled to her husband. The face was covered
sometimes for grief and mourning, as in David's mourning for Absalom. Sometimes
by others in token of wrath and judgment, as when Hamans face was covered.
Sometimes in way of fear and reverence, as Elias covered his face, 1 Kings 19.
13.

V. 67. Sarahs Tent] Women, it seems had their tents apart, chapter 31. 33. And
Sarahs Tent and furniture, it seems, was reserved for Isaacs wife.

and took Rebekah] By solemnity of marriage, in the fourtieth year of his
life, chapter 25. 20.

loved her] Ephesians. 5. 25, 28.

after his mothers death] Three years before, chapter 17. 17. 23. 1. Dear and
durable was his affection toward his mother.

CHAP. XXV.
Ver. 1. THen again] Whether in Sarahs lifetime cannot certainly be
determined. The sacred story mentions nothing of Keturab or her children, till
now after Sarahs death. And the words here seem to give it to be after her
death. And Sarah in her lifetime not enduring Hagar and Ishmael* would hardly
have endured another. And Isaac when offered is called his only son. And yet on
the other side, Keturab is called a Concubine, implicitly, v. 6. and expressly,
1 Chronicles. 1. 32 And though a Coucubine be called a wife, yet I find not that a
legitimate wife, as she should be after Sarahs death, or a second wife, is
called a Concubine. And the words of Abraham's servant seeking a wife for Isaac,
chapter 24. 36. compared with v. 5, 6. of this chapter, seem to reflect on Keturahs
sons in Sarahs lifetime. And which is most of all, if Abraham did not take
her to wife till after Sarahs death, then he must be one hundred thirty eight,
and likely one hundred and forty years old when he married her, and after
that begat six sons of her, whereas the Apostle says, that forty years
before that time, his body was dead for begetting of children, Romans 4. 19. Genesis
17. 17. 18. 12. If then it were after Sarahs death, it must be said, that God
did renew unto him that masculine strength, and vigor of body, after forty
years, by an extraordinary blessing, in a mavelous, if not miraculous
manner, and that to make good his Promise of multiplying Abraham's seed, chapter 17.
5. in others also, though principally in Isaac.

V. 2. Medan] Chapter 37. 36.

Midian] Numb. 25. 6, 17.

Shuah] Job 2. 11.

V. 3. Sheba] Job 1. 15.

V. 4. Midian] Numb. 31. 18. Judge 7. 25. 8. 5. children of Keturah] And
Grandchildren.

V. 5. To Isaac] As being his only heir and child of Promise, chapter 21. 12. a
figure of Christ and Christians, chapter 24. 36.

V. 6. Concubines] Hagar and Keturah.

and sent them away from Isaac] Because he was to be the heir of Canaa^.

Eastward] Arabia Syria, Job 1. 3. Job likely came of Keturah, Judge. 6. 3. 7.
12.

V 7. One hundred seventy five yeares] Chapter 15. 15. Heber (of whom he was called
an Hebrew, chapter 14. 13.) out-living him. And Jacob and Esau were then fifteen
years old, v. 26. chapter 21. 5.

V. 8. Gathered unto his people] V. 17. which implies the immortality of the
soul, and so the phrase of gathering to their fathers, Judge. 2. 10. Heb. 12.
23.

V. 9. Isaac and Ishmael] Ishmael, though never received again into Abraham's
family, yet dwelt not so far off, but might hear of his fathers death, and
come to his burial.

V. 11. Blessed Isaac] Entailed the blessing and Promises made to Abraham on
him, chapter 17. 19.

Lahai-roi] See, chapter 24. 62.

V. 12. Generations of Ishmael] ch 16. 10, 12. 17. 20. much exceeded Isaacs, 1
Cor. 15. 46.

Nebaioth] He and his brethren seated in Arabia, Esaias 21. 13. 60 7. Ezech 27.
21. Jer. 49. 28.

V. 15. Tema] Job 2. 11.

V. 16. Twelve Princes] Chapter 17. 20. Like the twelve sons of Jacob.

V. 18. Havilah] Chapter 2. 8. an ample region in Arabia, not that Havilah in India.

Shur] Chapter 16. 7 Ex. 15. 22.

died in the presence] His brethren surviving him, chapter 16. 12.

V. 20. The Syrian] So, Luke 4. 27. Aramite is translated Syrian by our Savior.

Padan-Aram] Called Aram-Naharaim, chapter 24. 10. sometime Padam only, chapter 48. 7.
This is Mesopotamia of Syria, distinguished from Aram-Zobah, Ps. 60 tit.

V. 21. Intrcated] Often, no doubr.

barren] Twenty years, v. 20, 26. many good women in Scripture barren a long
time.

V. 22. Strugled] A misery to her, and a mystery in her, v. 23.

if it be so, why am I thus?] A speech of passion; why prayed I? why conceived
I? or why is this strange struggling in my womb, more then in other women?

to enquire of the Lord] By her prayer, or by some Prophet, as her father
in-law Abraham, chapter 20. 7. or Heber, yet living.

V. 23. Two Nations] Esau and Jacob, the virtual roots and Original of two
Nations, Edomites and Israelites.

two manner of people] Differing and disagreeing one from and with another,
differing in Religion, Laws, Manners, Affections, jarring, at variance.

shall be stronger] So Esau stronger then Jacob, chapter 27. 43. 32. 4, 6, 13. and,
chapter 33. 3. And a long time the Edomites were more potent then the Israelites,
Numb. 20. 18, 20.

and the elder shall serve] So the Israelites subdued the Edomites, 2 Samuel 8.
14. 1 Kings 22. 47. Obad. v. 17, 18. And spiritually Jacob got the birthright,
v. 33. and Esau despised it, v. 34. and he got also the blessing, chapter 27, 29,
36. The Lord in Malachi proceeds further, saying, Though Esau was Jacobs
brother, yet I loved Jacob and hated Esau, Mal. 1. v. 2, 3. whence the Apostle
gathers the doctrine of Gods free grace, in the election of some, and
reprobation of others, before the doing of good or evil, Romans 9. v. 10, 11 12,
13. Likely Isaac did not rightly understand this Prediction; but Rebekah did,
which made the one seek so much to favor Esau, and the other Jacob.

V. 25. Red] A sign of the choleric and cruel disposition, found in him and
his posterity, chapter 27. 40. 41. Obad. 1. 10. Ezech. 25. 12. His meat red, chapter
25. 30. his land red, chapter 32. 3.

all over] With red hair all over his body, chapter 27. 11.

his name Esau] That is, made, perfected, as if he were borne a man rather then
a child.

V. 26. Took hold on Esaus heele] As if he would have pulled him back, that he
might be borne before him, or as if he would overthrow and supplant him. A
divine presaging what would afterward come to pass, v. 23. This striving for
the grace and pre-eminence of the birthright, the Prophet mentions, Hos. 12.
3, 4.

Jacob] An holder by the heel or supplanter, chap. 27. 36.

V. 27. A cunning hunter] Somewhat like Ishmael or Nimrod, valourous, fierce.

a plain man] A good plain man, living a plain shepherds life, keeping home
and looking to houshold-affaires, chapter 4. 20. and a sincere plain-dealing man,
without guile, though at his mothers instance and urging, he used too much
deceit in getting the blessing, chapter 27. Shepherds kept in Tents. And such was
Jacobs trade and his childrens, chapter 46. 34.

V. 28. Because he did eat of his venison] By seeing his officiousness to
please his fathers palate, his father might take it as a sign, that he did
greatly reverence, respect and love him, and that he would prove the most able
and active, the fittest for great emploiments, and the best and stoutest stay
and support of their family; yet all this was but carnal, and not so suiting to
the divine oracle, on the behalf of Jacob, v. 23.

V. 29. Sod pottage] This though a small matter, conduces yet, and is
subservient to that divine Promise, chapter 27. 29. 2 Samuel 8. 14.

V. 30. Red] Red is doubled in the Hebrew, and pottage omitted; to note Esaus
haste, and his eagerness of appetite, in his extremity of fainting, after that
mear which his eye first pitched upon, (there being other meat, no doubt, in
his fathers house) and happily fancied too by him for the color sake, if there
were not also some cordial in it, as saffron or other like thing, which gave it
that extreme red color.

called Edom] Or Aedom; Adam signifies red, red-borne, v. 25. and now so
greedily desiring red broth, and selling for it his birthright, got him this
nickname, and brand for it.

V. 31. Sell me this day thy birth-right] The honor of the firstborn was
great. God in honor calls Israel his son, his firstborn, Exodus 4. 22. and
so Ephraim, Jer. 31. 9. as first chosen by him of all people to be his peculiar
people, Ex. 19. 4, 5. Deuteronomy. 32. 11, 12. Ps. 89. 27. yea, Christ is called the
firstborn among many brethren, Romans 8. 29. This birthright advanced them to
be highest in their Parents affections, Zech. 12. 10. to be first in honor
next their Parents, chapter 49. 3. to be Governors of the family under them, chapter
4. 7. 2 Chro. 21. 3. to the Peiesthood, after the fathers death, at least till
Moses time, Numb. 8. 14, 15. 10. 18 to a double portion, Deuteronomy. 21. 17. to omit,
that it might be an outward sign or pledge of being one of those firstborn,
which are written in Heaven, Hebr. 12. 23. They being peculiarly consecrated to
God in aftertimes, Exodus 22. 29. These rights and privileges, or the most of
them, together with the Oracle, v. 23. might move Jacob to catch at any
advantage to gain the birthright: and did move him too to seek it, in a way
not altogether so lawful, as to deny his brother necessary relief in his
extremity, except upon such hard terms: upon such a pinch to drive him for
such a price to so unjust a bargain.

V. 32. At the point to die] With this present hunger, with dangers in hunting
wild beasts.

V. 33. Swear] See Annot. on chapter 24. 3.

V. 34. Bread and pottage] One morsel of meat, Hebr. 12. 16.

of lentiles] A mean kind of grain, a kind of pulse, 2 Samuel 17. 31. Ezech.
4. 9.

eat and drink] Never troubled at all for what he had done, 1 Cor. 15. 32.

despised] Irreligiously and profanely, Hebr. 12. 16. Though possibly selling
so precious a thing, for so poor a price, he might have a purpose to recover
that by force, which was got from him by fraud. And therefore he pleads his
birthright after this to his father, chapter 27. 32.

CHAP. XXVI.
Verse 1. BEsides the first famine] Ch 12. 10.

Unto Gerar] From the Well Lahai-roi, chapter 25. 11. near Beersheba, ch 21* 14.
33. 34.

V. 2. Into Egypt] As thy father did, and by his example thou mindest to do.

V. 3. I will give] To thee as a sojourner, to thy posterity as owners, by way
of propriety, possession and hereditary right.

all these countreyes] Possessed by so many Nations, ch 15. 18, 19, 20, 21.

to Abraham thy father] Thy self being present, chapter 22. 17, 18.

V. 4. Stars] See Annot. on ch 15.

Seed] Meaning Christ, Gal. 3. 6, 18.

V. 5. Because that Abraham obeyed] On man's part there are conditions required,
and by the assistance of Gods grace performed and graciously accepted, and
mentioned as if there were some causality in them, for Gods acceptance and
performance of his part chapter 22. 16. See the Annotat.

V. 6. And Isaac dwelt in Gerar] Where he was borne, chapter 20. 1. 21. 2.

V. 7. She is my sister] As his father did through frailty, chapter 12. 13, 19. 20.
2, 5, 12, 13. This true in a sense, as, Jer. 3. 7, 9. Ezech. 16. 46. Mat. 12.
50. Romans 16 1. 1 Cor. 7. 15. Jam. 2 15. But untrue in their intent.

V. 8. Looked out] As David saw Bathsheba, 2 Samuel 11. 2.

sporting] Deuteronomy. 24. 5. Prove 5. 18, 19.

V. 9. Of a surety she is thy wife] So holy and unblameable was Isaacs life,
that worse then this Abimelech never suspected.

V. 10. What is this] By this passionate expostulation he shows, how greatly
adultery, if not, dissimulation too, were condemned by heathen morality, chapter
20. 9.

guiltinesse] Both sin and punishment, Lev. 5. 5, 6.

V. 11. Toucheth] So, v. 29. chapter 20. 6. Josh 9. 19. Ruth 2. 9. Ps. 105. 15.
Prove. 6. 29. Zech. 2. 8.

V. 12. An hundred fold] Mat. 3 8, 23.

V. 14. Envied him] Eccl. 4 4. Ps^^ 2 10 Job 5. 2.

V. 15. The Philistines had stopped] Contrary to Covenant and Oath, chapter 21. 30,
31.

V. 17. Valley of Gerar] V. 6.

V. 18. After the names by which his father] Renewing the ancient good names,
and altering idolatrous names, Numb 32. 38. The names of idols are not to be
heard out of our mouths, Ex. 23. 13. Ps. 16. 4. Deuteronomy. 12. 3. Hos. 2. 17.

V. 21. Sitnah] Hatred or spite. Hence Satan has his name.

V. 23. To Beersheba] The famine being ended, he returned to the place whence
the famine had driven him, the place of his fathers dwelling. See, Annot. on v.
1. and on chapter 21. 31.

V. 24. And the Lord appeared.] As it seems to comfort him against the envious
dealings of the Philistines. So, chapter 15. 1.

the God of Abraham] Therefore Abraham lives in soul, Mat. 22. 32.

V. 25. An Altar] Chapter 12. 7, 8. 13. 4, 18.

V. 26, Then Abimelech] As, chapter 21. v. 22. etc. These may be those same men.
This history is to be compared with that.

Ahuzzath] More then in chapter 21. v. 22.

V. 27. Seeing ye hate me] Prove. 16 7.

V. 28. And they said] See Annotat. on chap. 21. 22, 23.

an oath] And execration* as, chapter 24. 41.

V. 29. That thou wilt] With a curse if thou shall, so, chapter 21. 23. in the
margin.

the blessed] Chapter 24. 31. This is spoken to further the Peace* and Covenant
desired.

V. 30 Feast] Used at Covenants, chapter 31 54.

V. 32. Concerning the Well] V. 25.

V. 33, S^ebah] Oath.

Beersheba] Chapter 21. 31 Here the name of the City. This Well was formerly so
called by Abraham, chapter 21. 31. But having been stopped by the Philistines, and
now opened again by Isaacs servants, the old name is again imposed upon the
same occasion.

V. 34. Forty years old] He married thirty six years before Jacob. At forty
years old also Isaac married, chap. 25. 20.

Judith] Esaus wives and their fathers had several names, Genesis 36. 2. Both
Hittites the worst sort of Canaanites, Ezech. 16. 3. contrary to the cares and
commands of his father, mother and grandfather, chapter 24. 3. and v. 35. of this
chapter, and ch 27 46. and chapter 28. 1, 6, 8.

CHAP. XXVII.
Verse 1. ISaac was old] One hundred thirty six, or one hundred thirty seven
years old; As is rightly gathered and proved in the great late Annotat. upon
this place. For Isaac was sixty years old when Jacob was borne, chapter 25. v. 26.
And Jacob was at this time seventy five or seventy six years old, when he got
the blessing and fled to Laban. See the Annotat. on chapter 29. 21.

and his eyes were dimme] So Jacobs, chapter 48. 10. so Elies, 1 Samuel 3. 2, 4, 15.
Isaac lived blind forty four years at least, chapter 35* 28.

V 4 That my soule] He would by that feasting cheer up his spirit against
dullness, or any distemper, that he might be the more fit instrument of the
Spirit of God; so Elisha calls for a minstrel, to allay his passion against
Jehoram, prepare his mind, compose his spirit, and fit it for a divine motion
of Gods Spirit by Prophecy, 2 Kings 3. 15.

may bless thee] In faith before the Lord, by the Spirit of the Lord, Hebr.
1^. 20. some bless men, by praying to God to bless them: So, Luke 6. 28. Some
by pronouncing a blessing upon them, by virtue of their calling, and warrant of
Gods Word. So the Priests blessed the people, Numb 6. 23, to the end. Some by
the Spirit of Prophecy foretelling the blessings should come upon them; so
Jacob blessed Ephraim and Manasseh, chapter 48. 9, 15, 16, 20. and the twelve
tribes, chapter 49. 28. and so did Moses likewise, Deuteronomy. 33. 1. And so Isaac
intends to bless Esau here. And does bless Jacob and Esau, v. 27, 28, 29 39,
40. and Jacob again, chapter 28. 3, 4.

Thee] Esau. Isaac being left in this point to his own spirit, out of his
carnal judgment and affection, he intends the blessing to Esau, to transmit
the inheritance of the blessings and promises made to his father unto Esau, as
his firstborn; either not mindful of the divine Oracle, chapter 25. 23. Or
understanding it, not of their persons, but of their posterity. But Gods
Providence, serving it self upon the better faith and illumination of Rebekah,
and by her means does disappoint Isaacs purpose, and he by his free grace and
singular favor, transfers the blessing upon Jacob.

V. 6. And Rebekah spake] Being soundly grounded that the blessing belonged to
Jacob; and seeing now her husband going about to give it to Esau, she labors
to disappoint his error, though by ways not so warrantable, unless she were
moved by some secret instinct of Gods Spirit.

V. 7. Before the Lord, before my death] In his presence, and by his power and
authority, who will ratify this my last Will and Testament, Heb 11. 20

V. 12. I shall bring a curse] For my deceiving, Deuteronomy. 27. 18. Jer. 48. 10.
Mal. 14.

V. 13. Upon me be thy curse] She was over-confident, using such ill means,
though in a good cause, and trusting to the Oracle.

V. 15. Goodly raiment] Perfumed or kept sweet, v. 27. not likely to be holy
robes received from their Ancestors, and kept for the firstborn to minister
in.

Which were with her] Not with Esaus wives.

V. 16. Skins upon his hands] His face by a beard and hair, might be much like
Esaus.

V. 19. I am Esau] It is in vain to labor to excuse Jacob here and hereafter
from diverse lies, deceipts and dissemblings.

V. 20. Brought it to me] Chapter 24. 12. one lie draws on another.

V. 27. The smell of his raiment] Aromatic odours, and spices for perfume,
abounded in those countries.

V. 27. As the smell of a field] With flowers, fruits and vines, Cant. 2. 13.
4. 14. 7. 13.

V. 28. God give thee] A Prayer and Prophecy. And these promises of earthly
blessings were types of spiritual blessings, extending to all that was included
in the Promises and Covenant made to and with Abraham, Deuteronomy. 33. 28. 8. 8.

V. 29. Let people serve thee] From Jacob came Judah; 1 Chronicles. 5. 2. Genesis 49.
10. David subdued many Nations.

be Lord over thy brethren] Hereby he confirms to him the right of the
firstborn.

thy brethren, and let thy mothers sonnes]

Cursed] Chapter 12. 3. Numb. 24, 9. The efficacy of the blessing here, did not
depend upon the intention of Isaac, And no more does the truth and efficacy of
the Sacrament depend upon the intention of the Minister.

V. 33. Trembled] As one perplexed, astonished, between wonder and fear lest
he had done amiss.

Yea, and he shall be blessed] By that trembling as by a bit and bridle. God
restraines him from revoking the blessing. And recollecting himself he does now
by faith re-establish it, Heb. 11. 20. And after more advisedly, chap. 28. 3, 4.

V. 34. Exceeding bitter cry] Yet found no place of repentance, no way to
change his fathers mind, to recall what he had done, though he sought it
carefully with tears, Hebr. 12. 17. Prove. 1. 24, 28.

V. 35. Thy blessing] Which I intended thee, and by birthright pertained to
thee.

V. 36. And he said] These words show no true repentance in Esau.

he took away] Nay, Esau sold it and despised it, chapter 25. 33, 34.

my blessing] Not his then, when the birthright was none of his.

V. 37. Thy Lord] V. 29.

and what shall I do?] As if he should say, comparatively, all other blessings
are nothing.

V. 39. The fatness of the earth] Not unlike that, v. 28. Mount Seir was such
a place, Josh. 24. 4. By faith Isaac blessed Esau concerning things to come,
Hebr. 11. 20. yet Canaan far surpassed Idumea. Besides that Canaan was a type
of the heavenly Canaan.

V. 40. And by this sword shall thou live] With wars and troubles defend thy
state and country, Mat. 10. 34. And not enjoy peace as Jacob, Deuteronomy. 33. 27,
28. Esaias. 2. 4.

and shall serve thy brother] In thy posterity, Deuteronomy. 33. 29. Genesis 25. 23. 2 Samuel 8. 14. 1 Kings 22. 47. Obad. v. 18, 19, 21.

when thou shall have the dominion] Because of Isreal's sins, as in the days of
Jehoram, 2 Kings 8. 20. 22. 2.

break his yoke] Of thy servitude, 2 Chronicles. 21. 8. under which thou wast from
David's days till then, above one hundred years, Esaias 9. 4. 10. 27. Jer. 27.
8, 11. Herod was an Idumean.

V. 41. Hated] Spitefully. This shows no true repentance in him, 1 John 3. 12,
15. This hatred continued in his posterity, Obad v. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 18, 19,
21.

said in his heart] Afterward uttered it in words, v. 42.

are at hand] In his wish and opinion, Isaac being now blind, and yet he lived
forty four years after.

V. 42. Comfort himself] To receive his birthright by killing of thee. Revenge
is sweet to the enraged wicked man; yea, the very purpose of it. And thus they
harden their heart in evil against Gods known Will; so did Saul against David,
1 Samuel 18. 28. God uses a like speech of himself in an holy sense, Ezech. 5.
13.

V. 44. A few dayes] It proved to be above twenty years, chapter 31. 38. Doubtful
whether ever Rebekah saw him again: She sent not for Jacob, because she saw
Esaus rage and malice continue, chapter 32. 6.

V. 45. Both in one day] By fighting they might kill each other, or if Esau
lived, they should and would then count him as dead, and no better. And the Law
was such, chap. 9. 6.

V. 46. Of the daughters of Heth] Esaus wives, chapter 26. 35, 34. A wise, godly
and crafty counsel she conceales from Isaac, the hatred of Esau, and dangerous
discord between his sons.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Ver. 1. ANd blessed him] Isaac was constant to his first blessing,
notwithstanding Jacobs craft in getting it Jacob had need of this second
blessing to confirm his faith against his future troubles and trials; Isaac
therefore by his fatherly authority, now wittingly and willingly settles it on
him again.

V. 2. Arise, go] Isaac was not; but his fathers servant, chapter 24. 3, 4. 5, 6.
And he with ten camels, etc. Jacob here with his staff in his hand, chapter 32.
10. and to serve for a wife, Hos. 12. 12.

thy mothe^s brother] Cousin-germans marry.

V. 3. A multitude of people] Chapter 35. 11. 48. 4.

V. 4. The blessing of Abraham] His Grandfather, who had the Original grant of
the blessings, both temporal and spiritual, earthly and heavenly, made over to
him and his seed, and the blessing chiefly of the promised seed.

art a stranger] Chapter 17. 8. This is to prevent the weakening of his faith, by
being but a stranger in it still, as also his father and Grandfather were.

unto Abraham] By Promise, chapter 12. 7. and often repeated.

V. 5. Of B^ thuel the Aramite] Syrian. So Luke translateth the word, Luke 4.
27.

V. 9. To Ishmael] The Ishmaelites, for he was dead, chapter 25. 17.

Mahalath] Called also Basemath, chapter 36. 3.

sister] By the same mother at least, if not father.

Nebaioth] Ishmaels eldest son, chapter 25. 13. From him Esau had his sister to
wife, Ishmael being now dead. Esau and she were Cousin-germans; two brothers
children. This Esau did to please his father, and strengthen himself by the
Ishmaelites against Jacob. And now he has three wives, as soon likely as Jacob
had any.

V. 10. From Beersheba] Chapter 26. 23.

toward Haran] Charran, Acts 7. 2. a long journey; seven days journey in
Labans pursuit to Mount Gilead, chapter 31. 22, 23. which Mount stretched through
the two tribes, and 1/2 beyond Jordan Eastward. And now was Jacob seventy five
or seventy six years old. See Annot. on chapter 29. 21.

V. 11. And he lighted] By Gods Providence, chap. 32. 10.

because the Sun was set] And so, or for weariness, he did not reach Luz,
after called Bethel. Though it were hard by, v. 19. It is conceived to be near
fifty English miles distant from Beer-sheba; and from Jerusalem eight miles
Northward.

for his pillowes] Hard distress. He went so meanly from his parents, or happily
stole away in a sort, lest Esau should lie in wait for him by the way; as he
did at his return, chapter 32. 6. Abraham's servant went with great state, so that
Rebekah calls him Lord, chapter 24. 18. But Jacob with his staff in his hand, chapter
32. 10.

V. 12. Dreamed] A divine dream; See Annot. on chapter 15. 1. and on chapter 20. 3.

Ladder] Signifying Christ, John 1. 51. In his two natures personally united;
Heaven and earth are as it were joined together. And by him the only Mediator
is man reconciled to God. Colos. 1. 20. by him the Angels for our service, and
the Holy Ghost and his gifts descend down to us, and we and our prayers have
access and ascend unto God. And secondarily, hereby is signified the
Providence of God in governing the world, Psalm. 113. 5, 6. and particularly,
his provident care over Jacob, in his journey going and returning, v. 13, 15.
and 32. 1, 2. And both these, specially by the Ministry of Angels, Psalm. 91.
11, 12. Heb. 1. 13, 14.

earth] Denoting Christ's humanity, and his conversing with men, Joh. 16. 28.

Heaven] Denoting his Deity and Mediation, or negotiation for men with God,
Heb. 8. 1. 9. 24. John 14. 6.

ascending] Coming and going, looking with desire into the mysteries of Christ,
1 Pet. 1. 12. ministering unto him, Mar. 1. 13. at his Tentation, Mat. 4. 11. in
his Passion, Luke 22. 43. at his Resurrection, John 20. 12. and Ascension, Acts
1. 11. And ministering through him unto his people.

V. 13. The Lord stood] Jehovah; His Providence over us in Christ: I am the
Lord God of Abraham, chapter 17. 7. Heb. 11. 16. And this teaches the Resurrection
of the dead, Luke 20. 37, 38.

to thee and to thy seed] To thee in thy seed, when yet he had no wife or child

V. 14. And thy seed] Renewes the Promise to him, and states it in him, which
was formerly made to Abraham, and to Isaac, Act. 3. 25.

all the families] So the Promise pertaines to us; we may say with the Prophet,
God found him in Bethel, and there he spoke with us, Hos. 12. 4.

V. 15. I am with thee] The like Promise made at his return, chapter 31* 3.

in all] God giving his son, does with him give all things also, Romans 8. 32.
1 Timothy 4. 8.

not leave thee] Josh. 1. 5. Heb. 13. 5.

untill] Not excluding the time following. As, Mat. 28. 20.

V. 16. And I knew it not] Being awaked, he perceived that God had appeared to
him there: admires at it, and his goodness in it: that not only in his Fathers
house, but even there God vouchsafed such Apparitions, Job 9. 11.

V. 17. Afraid] Such glorious, though gracious Apparitions, affects man's
frailty with fear because of his sin, Mat. 17. 6. Luke. 2. 9. 8. 35. Rev. 1.
17. See Annot. on chapter 16. 13.

the house of God] He thinks this therefore a fit place for the building of an
House to God, v. 22. 1 Timothy 3. 15.

V. 18. The stone] Or heap of stones, v. 11. or else some one of them.

pillar] Some extemporary pile of stones raised by him before on the sudden,
without tools, as a thankful memorial of Gods gracious Apparition in that
place. This likely being after demolished, he erects about thirty years after
a new pillar of stone upon another Apparition in the same place, chapter 35. 14,
15. This here was a religious sign and monument as Altars also were, Esaias 19.
19. There were also pillars for civil monuments, as Rachels pillar on her
grave, chapter 35. 20. and Absaloms pillar, 2 Samuel 18. 18. the pillar Galecd, Genesis
31. 45, 47, 52. But when the Law was given by Moses, pillars for religious use
were forbidden, Lev. 26. 1* Deuteronomy. 16. 22. in the margin, Hos. 10. 1. And the
pillars of idolaters commanded to be broken down, Deuteronomy. 12 3. 7. 5.

and poured oile] Which he had for food, or to anoint his body in travel. Jacob
poured it on the top or the pillar to consecrate it for holy use. Thus oil of
consecration in use before the Law of Moses. So again, chapter 35. 14. As after in
the Law there was an anointing oil, to sanctify the things used in Gods
service, Exodus 25. 6. 30. 22, 25, 29, to 34. 40. 9, to 16. Or rather here Jacob
poured it as to an offering of thanksgiving to God; having no other sacrifice
at hand. As David poured out the water of the Well of Bethlehem, 2 Samuel 23. 16.
See, chapter 35. 14. but these rites and manner of Worship, with all the Levitical
ceremonies, and Consecrations of places, persons, and things to divine service,
are taken away by the Gospel, John 4. 20. 1 Timothy 2. 8. Yet the rules of
religious order and decency in the times, places, and particulars of Christian
Worship are to be observed.

V. 19. Bethel] The City Luz hard by this place; and after hereupon called
Bethel. Bethel was on an high hill; And therefore we read of Mount Bethel,
Josh. 16. 1. It was nigh to Hui or Ai, and West of it, Genesis 12. 8. Josh. 7. 2.
ch 8^ 9. 12 chapter 12. 9. And therefore the men of Bethel and Ai are joined
together, Ezra 2. 28. Nehem. 7 32. Bethlehem and Shilo were not far from it,
Genesis 35. 16, 19. Judge. 21, 19. Abraham pitched his Tent close by it i^ not
there, Genesis 12. 8. 13. 3. As Jacob had this dream and vision here, whereupon he
calls the name of the place Bethel, so God himself bidding him return from
Laban, is pleased to call himself the God of Bethel, ch 31. 13. And upon his
return God bids him go and dwell there. which command he obeyes and here makes
an Altar. And upon a second vision and Promise made he the second time, erects
a pillar, and renewes the name of Bethel, chapter 35. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6 9* 13, 14 15.
Hos 12. 4. In Joshuths time it had a King, Josh. 12. 16. Joshuah, and after the
house of Joseph conquered it, Josh. 12. 16. Judge. 1. 22, 23, 24, 25. It fell
then by lot to the tribe of Benjamin, Josh. 18. 22. There being another of the
name it seems that fell to Ephraim, 1 Chronicles. 7. 28. It is one of the three
places whither Samuel read circuit yearly, and judged Israel, 1 Samuel 7. 16. Saul
in his time met three men going up to God to Bethel, ^ Sam 10. 3. and had two
thousand men of his army with him there, and in Micmash, 1 Samuel 13. 2. David
sent of the spoils of the Amalckites to them of Bethel, if under that name in
that place, Kiriah-jearim, the House of God, where the Ark then was and abode
be not understood. Jeroboam in his time set up here one of his golden Calves,
made an Altar, and settled Priests, 1 Kings 12. 28. 29, 32, 33. And hence Bethel
the House of God, seems to be called Bethaven, the house of vanity, Hos. 4.
15. 5. 8. 10. 5. And yet there was another place properly called Bethaven, and
nigh to B^thel, Josh. 7. 2. 18. 12. 1 Samuel 13. 5. 14. 23. Thither came a man of
God while Jeroboam stood by the Altar to burn incense, and prophesied against
it; and healed the Kings hand that was dried up, for stretching it out against
him; which Prophet was after slain by a Lion, for suffering himself to be
seduced by an old Prophet that dwelt in Bethel, and came out of Samaria, 1
Kings 13. 2 Kings 23. 18. Abijah the son of Rchoboam took from Jeroboam
Bethel, with the towns thereof, 2 Chronicles. 13 9* whereupon, and upon the
captivity of the ten tribes Jeremie uses these words, That the house of Israel
was ashamed of Bethel their confidence, Jer. ^8. 13. And before that captivity
Hosea threatens that Bethel should do so unto them, as Shalman had spoiled
Beth-arbel in the day of battle, Hos, 10. 14, 15. In Ahaziah's time, or rather
Jehoram's Kings of Israel, Elias comes thither with Elizcus, immediately before
his taking up into heaven. And upon Elizcus his return thither, the little
children out of the city came and mocked him, calling him Bald-head, and forty
two of them were torn by bears, 2 Kings 2. In the days of Jeroboam the
second, Amos the Prophet in scorn, bids the ten tribes come to Bethel and
transgress, Amos 4. 4. And seriously forbids them to seek to Bethel, for
Bethel shall come to naught: but charge them to seek the Lord. lest he break
out like fire, and there be none to quench it in Bethel, chapter 5. 5, 6, 7. Upon
his preaching Amaziah the Priest of Bethel sends to Jeroboam against him, and
forbids him to prophecy any more at Bethel, for it is the Kings Chapel, and
it is the Kings Court, chapter 7 10, 13. Josiah in his days performed all that was
sore told by the man of God, 1 Kings 13. He brake down the Altar, and burnt the
bones of men upon it. And the idolatrous pollutions of the Temple of Jerusalem
he burnt, and carried the ashes of them to Bethel, so far off, on purpose to
defile that place, which the ten idolatrous tribes had held so sacred, 2 Kings
23. 15. 19. 4. Thus large have I been on this place, once for all; purposing to
make a reference hither, whenever I shall meet with the name elsewhere.

^uz at the first] This name in use* chapter 35. 6. 48. 3. and in Joshuahs time,
Josh. 18. 13. See* Judge. 1. 23, 26. It signifies Nut-tree, whence the City
might have its name, as Jericho is called the City of Palme-trees, 2 Chronicles. 28.
15. Deuteronomy. 34. 3.

V. 20. Vowed a V^w] There is an Oath, a Vow, and a devoting of a thing to God:
of an Oath, see, Annot. on chapter 24. 3. of the devoting any thing, See, Lev. 27.
28, 29. A Vow is a binding of the soul with a bond, by a sacred, and solemn,
a free and voluntary Promise made to God, for the doing or more careful doing
of things, which otherwise by our duty and Gods Law we are bound to do, or for
the doing of certain things lawful in themselves, but otherwise left
indifferent to be done, or not to be done; or for the abstaining from the use
of some things, otherwise lawful to be used. And all this in way of
thankfulness to God for some extraordinary blessings received; or for the
obtaining of some special benefits, which we greatly desire and stand in need
of. And therefore Vows are ever joined with Prayers, or Praises and
Thanksgiving, or both. And these Vows once made must carefully be kept and
performed. Thus Jocob here vowed by way of thankfulness to God for this
glorious Apparition, and the gracious Promises vouchsafed to him, and for
further and future blessings to be received from God, that God should be his
God, this should be a new engagement and obligation upon him, that he would for
ever serve and worship him; and that that stone or pillar now erected by him,
should be Gods house, a place consecrated to his worship and service, and that
he would give the tenth of all he should have to God, and for his special use
in Sacrifices, Altars, sacred buildings, and maintenance of his service. Thus
Hannah vowed, that if God would deliver her from the reproach of barrenness,
and give her a man-child, she would give him to the Lord all the days of his
life, and no razour should come upon his head, 1 Samuel 1. 11. Thus Bathsheba it
seems made a Vow for the obtaining of Solomon, whence she calls him the son
of her Vows, Prove. 31. 2. Thus Jephthah made a Vow to obtain victory against
the children of Ammon, Judge 11. 30, 39. And all Israel, to obtain victory
against King Arad the Canaanite and his people, Numb. 21. 1, 2. Thus David
vowed unto the mighty God of Jacob, forthwith to find out a place for the
habitation of the Lord, Psalm. 132. 2, 3. Thus Paul was under a Vow, Acts 18.
18. And again he and four other men, Act. 21, 23, 24. Yea, the Heathen
Mariners, by the light of nature made vows to the Lord, vows of thankfulness
for their deliverance from shipwreck, Jonah 1. 16. In Moses time, the vow of a
Nazarite and Laws for them are set down at large, Numb. 6. as also the things
to be vowed to the Lord, as persons, beasts, clean and unclean, houses, fields
of inheritance, and of purchase, whether vowed before the year of Jubilee, or
after, and the several Laws for the Redemption of them, Lev. 27. And in that
Mosaical and Ceremonial Law, God carefully provides that no unworthy thing
shall be vowed to him, no beast deformed, or that has any member superfluous,
or lacking, or any way faulty, Lev. 22. 18, 21, 22, 23. Mal. 1. 14. Much less
the hire of a whore, or price of a dog, Deuteronomy. 23. 18. any sinful thing as those
wicked men of Judah did, in their idolatrous ways, both they and their wives
which fled into the land of Egypt, contrary to the Word of the Lord by Jeremie
say, We will surely perform our vows which we have vowed, to burn incense to
the Queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto her, Jer. 44. 25.
And least of all would he have any sinful vow made unto him. Now to forbear to
vow is no sin, Deuteronomy. 23. 22. at least, no such sin as if they vow and pay not,
as, John 9. 41. If ye were blind, ye should have no sin, no such sin as now
remains on you, for refusing the light. And the like, John 15. 22, 24. For
howsoever in the general, a vow is a kind of a free-will-offering, a service
of God, Esaias 19. 21. but an arbitrary and voluntary service. Before men vow it
is in their own power and pleasure, as it is spoken in Ananias his case, Acts
5. 4. yet in some extraordinary cases of petition and thanksgiving, vows are
requisite and necessary. And however; yet being once made lawfully, after vows
to make enquiry, undoubtedly it is sin. But after vows to make enquiry is a
snare and sin, Prove. 20. 25. For who vows, binds his soul with a bond, Numb.
30. 3. And therefore when a lawful vow is lawfully made, then God strictly
requires the same to be punctually performed, Deuteronomy. 23. 21, 23. Eccl. 5. 4, 5,
6. And for that cause he gives Laws, who have power to vow, and who may not
vow, namely, children and wives, who are not free of themselves, but under the
power and command of others, Numb. 30. David therefore is mindful of his
performance, Thy vows are upon me, O God, Psalm 56. 12. and 66. 13, 14. And he
minds others of it, Vow and pay unto the Lord your God, Psalm. 76. 11. And
again, To thee shall the vow be paid, Ps. 65. 1, 2. And he says unto God,
Thou, O God, have heard my vows. And so will I sing praise unto thy Name for
ever, that I may daily perform my vows, Ps 61. 5, 8.

If God will be with me] Prayer-wise, respecting the Promile, v. 15.

and will keep me] Respects the Promise likewise, v. 15. and binds upon it;
for if here has the signification of when, as in 1 Samuel 15. 17. And is here a
word of doubting or of condition, but of faith and inference of his duty of
thankfulness,

bread to eate] 1 Timothy 6. 8.

V. 21. So that I come again] Jacobs vow in all points grounded upon the Word
and Promise, v. 15.

then shall] Not as if otherwise not. He was sure of the truth of the Promise,
and thereupon vows this in way of thankfulness.

V. 12. This stone] See on v. 18. and chapter 31. 45.

Gods House] So performed, chapter 35. 7, 14.

the tenth unto thee] A sign of homage and subjection to God: And therefore
given to the Priests. Thus by Abraham, and by Jacob, tithes paid before the Law
of Moses.

CHAP. XXIX.
Verse 1. THeu Jacob] Being seventy five or seventy six years old. See,
Annotat. on ver. 21.

East] Whence Abraham came, Esaias 41. 2. where Job lived afterward, Job 1. 3.
but the particular place in the East here meant is Haran, v. 4.

V. 2. A Well] So, chap. 24. 11, 15. and, Exodus 2. 15, 16, 21.

a great stone] To keep the store.

V. 5. The son of Nahor] That is, the Grandchilde. V. 6. Is he well?] So, chapter
43. 17, 28. 1 Samuel 25. 5, 6. 2 Samuel 20. 9.

V. 8. We cannot] By right, as, chapter 34. 14. 43. 32. or with our might and
strength, for it was a great stone, v. 2.

V. 10. Rolled the stone] By his own strength, or with the help of the
shepherds.

V. 11. Kissed Rachel] Having first showed her who he was, chapter 31. 55.

V. 12. Her fathers brother] That is Kinsman, his sisters son, v. 13.

V. 13. Kissed him] One man kisseth another; so, chapter 45. 15. Exodus 4. 27. 18.
7. Luke 7 45. Rom 16. 16. 2 Cor. 13. 12. Traitorous were the kisses of Joab and
Judas.

all these things] Touching his father, the birthright, blessing, Esau, his
sending away, and the cause and end of it, and vision by the way, else Laban
might have wondered at his poor and solitary manner of coming, Deuteronomy. 26. 5.
considering he saw the servants rich manner o^ coming, chapter 24. 10, ^2, 53. We
read not here of any letter or token sent by him.

V. 14. Surely thou art] I doubt not of thy person; and welcome thou art
whatever the occasion of thy journey be.

V. 15. Should thou therefore serve me for naught?] Seeing him in his
months abode not idle, but active and able, casts about to procure his stay.

beautiful] So, Esther, chap. 2. 7. So, Joseph, chap. 39. 6.

V. 18. I will serve thee] In some countries, and in some ages men buy wives;
so, David, 1 Samuel 18. 25. 2 Samuel 3. 14. Hos. 3. 2. Genesis 34. 12.

V. 19. It is better] Laban out of his churlishness and covetousness, makes
use of Jacobs loving proffer. And yet by his general words and ambiguous speech
may be suspected, not to intend fair and ingenuous dealing with Jacob, as soon
after appeared, v. 23.

V. 20. Served seven years for Rachel] There are two several opinions, and
there can be no more, which must guide and rule the Exposition of these words,
and some others also which are in the ensuing passages of this history. One is,
that Jacob married first at the end of his first seven years service. And then
having Leah fraudulently put upon him in stead of Rachel. That he newly
contracts the second time to have Rachel for other seven years service; but
marries her a week after he had taken Leah; and performs that seven years
service, for Rachel after he had married her. And most Expositors are of this
opinion. But I conceive there are two strong arguments against it. One is, that
they are thereby forced to hold, that Jacobs twelve children were all borne
within those seven years, viz. Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah, Dan, Naphtali,
Gad, Ashur, Issachar, Zebulun, Dinah, Joseph, v. 25. chapter 31. 38, 41. You may
say, this may well enough, be by four women, I confess it; but considering
the plain and pregnant passages of the sacred history, in the times and manner
of their births, I hold it impossible. For it is plain, that none of them at
any time had twins. Again, Leah had Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah, at several
births, which will take up three or four of the seven years, before Rachel
complains of barrenness. Or put case she complained sooner then the history
mentions, yet Bilhah must have Dan and Naphtali at several births, before
Zilpah had Gad and Ashvr at several births; and these last four sons will
take up three or four years; and after all this, Leah having formerly left
bearing when Judah was borne, v. 35. ch 30. 9. And when Reuben her eldest son
was of age to find mandrakes in the field; then after her time of barrenness,
and after her maid Zilpahs births, she then again conceiving bears Issachar,
and Zebulun, and Dinah at several births. And last of all Rachel bears Joseth,
all which must be done within the compass of one seven years according to that
opinion. Which, how it may stand with truth, and without offering violence to
the course of the history, and to many words of the text, I confess I cannot
comprehend. And a second argument against that opinion, is taken from the
consideration of Judahs age, and the birth of Hezron and Hamul his
Grandchildren, when they with Jacob and all his posterity went down into Egypt
chapter ^. 1^.] To, open this we must first knew, that Jacob was seventy five
years old when he came down to Laban, which appears thus; he was one hundred
and thirty years old when he stood before Pharaoh, ch 47. 9. and then Joseph
was forty years old, viz. thirty when he was taken out of pri^on and advanced
by Pharaoh, chapter 41. 46. After which passed seven years of plenty, and three of
famine when Jacob came down, Joseph then being forty years old; it appears
also that he was borne in the fourteenth year after Jacobs coming to Laban, ch
30. 25. 31. 38, 41. Take then those fourteen years before Joseph was borne,
and the forty years of Joseph's age, when his father stood before Pharaoh, out
of his fathers age at that time, he being then one hundred and thirty; and it
will so be clear, that Jacob was seventy five or seventy six years old, when
he first came to Laban. Now this being so, Judah the fourth son of Jacob by
Leah, must needs be by their opinion but three or four years elder then
Joseph, Jacob not (...) Leah, as they say, till after his first seven years of
service were ended. And so Judah must be but forty three or forty four
years old at most, when he and his Grandchildren Hezron and Hamul came with
Jacob into Egypt. To compass this, they must cast their reckonings thus, that
Judah married at twelve years old, and had Er at thirteen; that Er married at
twelve years old, and Onan his younger brother, chapter 38. 4. married at twelve
years old, that Tamar remained a widow, and waited till Sh^lah was grown; and
the days being multiplied, Judahs wife died, and Tamar bears to Judah Pharez;
and all this within the compass of three years. That Pharez married at twelve
years old and begat Hezron and Hamul; and supposing them to be twirs, that at
a year old they were carried into Egypt. For thus the reckoning will rise to
the forty third or forty fourth year of Judahs age. But these supposed
reckonings seem so harsh in that age of the world, to the most learned
favorers of this opinion, that they choose to ease or avoid this, to say
rather, that Hezron and Hamul were not carried down into Egypt, but were borne
afterward in Egypt, so the learned late Annot. on chapter 46. 12. But this were to
offer such plain violence to that text; and to the drift of that whole chapter,
and giving way for others borne after in Egypt to be reckoned in as well as
they, for why not others as well as they? and so the whole number to be
altered, and the intent of the Holy Ghost disappointed; that I think upon due
consideration had, not many will comply with that conceit. And the same
Annotators disclaim it themselves, in their Annotations on chapter 38. 1. The other
opinion whereunto my resolution bends, is this; that Jacob being seventy five
years old, married both sisters at the beginning of the fourteen years
service, fulfilling a week in keeping the feast at the marriage of the one, and
so again presently after at the marriage of the other. And the enjoying not the
want and hopeful expectation of Rachel, made his seven years service for her
seem unto him to be bu^ a few days. This addition of seven years to the
former opinion gives fair way to the birth of all the twelve children, in that
order and sequence of time, as the letter of the words, and context of the
story do require, and gives further scope, (which yet is little enough) for the
time of the birth of Hezron and Hamul, in the fiftieth year of Judahs age, (as
this opinion makes it) when he and they went down with Jacob into Egypt. The
only difficulty here occuring is, the exposition of some words and sentences,
seeming to favor the first opinion, which yet may better receive a commodious
interpretation, then involve and entangle us in greater perplexities, and draw
upon us the forementioned incongruities, if not impossibilities. The text then
here says, That Jacob served seven years for Rahel] that is, after he had
married her. And so all Expositors agree, that indeed he did so, though most of
them infer it upon their construction of the 27. and 28. verses.

but a few dayes] If he had not enjoyed her by marriage all those seven years
of his service, they would have seemed a longsome and tedious time. For hope
deserred makes the heart sick, Prove. 13. 12. And love makes men think everyday
a year till they enjoy the Party loved.

V. 21. And Jacob said] That is, had said.

for my days are fulfilled] That is, I am full of days, and ripe for
marriage: being now seventy five years old, and my brother Esau of my age,
being married thirty five years ago, chapter 26. 34.

that I may go in unto her] Not go away with her, but use her as my wise,
whiles I perform my covenanted service of seven years for her.

V. 22. And Laban gathered] Had gathered. The Hebrews want a preterpluperfect
tense.

V. 23. He took Leah] Being veiled as the manner was, in bringing Brides into
the Bride-chamber, Joel 2. 16. and unto their husbands in the dark, for modesty
sake, chapter 24. 65. chapter 38. 15, 16.

V. 25. What is this] For he hated Leah, v. 31.

did not I serve with thee for Rachel?] Covenant to serve with thee.

beguiled me?] In the dark; and by her silence or soft whispering, likely upon
her fathers direction, which Jacob also might impute to her modesty.

V. 26. Not be so done in our country] Custom here only pretended to cover his
accustomed fraud. Else he should have said so before, and told it.

V. 27. Fulfill her w^^k] The week-feast for Leah, and keep her with thee,
reject her not. The marriage feast continued a week, Judge. 14. 10, 12, 15, 17.
Thus Laban provides that Jacob by voluntary consent to this marriage with Leah,
should not be able afterward to put her away.

give thee this also for the service] All Expositors here agree, that Jacob did
not first serve these seven years, and after marry Rachel. But married her
first, and served after.

V. 28. And fulfilled her week] Leahs week for her marriage feast. Or it may be
understood of Rachels week for her marriage feast, presently succeeding the
other.

V. 30. And he went in also unto Rachel] At the first Creation in Adams time.
And again in Noah's time, when there was most need of multiplication of
mankind, yet God allotted but one woman for one man. And therefore though the
Law against plurality of wives, was not yet so expressly and literally
declared, nor against the marriage of two sisters, as afterward it was, Lev.
18. 18. yet this here in Jacob cannot be allowed, unless besides a disposition
of the divine Provid^^ce in it, there were a dispensation by divine authority
for it. Neither may it without like warrant be drawn into example. As neither
the example of Abraham taking Hagar, nor Jacobs taking here of Zilpah and
Bilhah.

V. 31. Hated] Not simply, but in comparison of Rachel, v. 30. so, in Deuteronomy. 21.
15. Mat. 6. 24. Luke 14. 26. John 12. 25.

V. 35. Now will I praise] Openly in solemn manner. This here applied to the
Lord, is after applied to Judah himself, chapter 49. 8. of Judah the Nation were
afterward called Jews.

and left bearing] If but two years; yet she could not have three children
more, viz. Issachar, Zebulun, and Dinah, at several births, within the compass
of one seven years; yea, the favorers of that opinion confess, that it must
needs be that it was not above a half year that she stayed ere she conceived
again. Mr. Jackson on chapter 30. 9.

CHAP. XXX.
Verse 1. RAchel envied her sister] Rachels fault, chapter 37. 11. Number. 11. 29.
Psalm. 106. 16. Prove. 27. 4.

give me children] Laying the fault on her husband, who yet had children by
Leah, she speaks this in a womanish passion, never considering to whom she
spoke, or by what means he should be able to satisfy her desire.

or else I die] For grief, Prove. 14. 30. It will be my death, and I shall have
no desire to live, Job 5. 2. Barrenness counted a reproach, v. 23.

V. 2. Am I in Gods stead] chapter 50. 19. God only can give children. chapter 16. 2.
20. 18. Psalm. 113 9. 127. 3. Therefore Isaac, and Hannah; and others go to God
by prayer for children, Genesis 25. 21. 1 Samuel 1. 10.

V. 3. Bilhah] By the example of Sarah, chapter 16. 2.

hear upon my knees] Brought forth and nursed on my knees, chapter 50. 23.

that I may] So she calls them hers, and she gives them names, v. 6, 8.
claiming a kind of motherhood in her Handmaids issue; the Handmaids children
by nature were the Dames by adoption, or in right of her husband by the Law
given afterward, in Exodus 21. 4. And so Rachel made account that some part of
her barrenness was put away, and some of her husbands good will swayed from
her sister (whose envious rival she was,) to her side.

V. 4. Handmaid to wife] Called a Concubine, chapter 35. 22. so a secondary wife is
called, such was Hagar, chapter 16. 3. Keturah, 1 Chronicles. 1. 32. and Zilpah, v. 9.
ye^ she and Zilpah are called his two women-servants, chapter 32. 22. The sons of
Bilhah and Zilpah became Heads of tribes, and did in herit in Canaan, as well
as the sons of Leah and Rachel.

V. 5. And bare Jacob a sonne] An improbable cunjecture it is, that this should
be the same year, wherein Leah did bear Levi.

V. 6. God has judged me] On my side against Leah, who upbraided me with
barrenness, as Peninnah did Hannah, 1 Samuel 1, 6. so judging is used, 1 Samuel
24. 15. 2 Samuel, 18. 19 Gen 49. 16.

V. 8. Have I wrastled] By prayer, and by all means.

V. 9 Left bearing] An improbable conjecture it is, that it was not above half
a year that she stayed ere she conceived again. And yet to these straits they
are driven that hold the opinion, that Jacob did not marry till the beginning
of the last seven years service.

V. 13. Call me blessed] Luke 1. 48. Cant. 6. 9

V. 14. Reuben] Must now need^ be more then five years old, rather eight or
nine, having seven brethren at this time borne after him; three of his own
mother, and four by the two Handmaids whiles his mother left off bearing. And
yet if he were now but five or six years old, as the late Annotat. affirm on
this verse, there would remain but one or two years for her three last
children, Issachar, Zebulun and Dinah* which helps still to make against the
foresaid opinion formerly rejected.

mandrakes] Pleasant to the eye, and of a sweet smell, Cant. 7. 13. Lovely
flowers, whether those we call mandrakes, i^is uncertain. But it seems they
were of some esteem amongst them, such ado is here kept about them.

V. 15. Have taken my husband] His affection from me, and so his conjug^l duty
belonging to me, that he does estrange himself from my bed through thee. Happily
these contentions were not merely carnal; but aimed and reached further.

shall lie with thee] Rachel makes ill use of her husbands great affection to
her, takes upon her the disposal of his person, and hires him out ^or a trifle
to her sister.

V. 16. Leah went out to meet him] To make sure, he should not go in to Rachel.
It seems they had several tents.

V. 17. And God hearkened unto Leah] v. 22. Therefore she prayed to him, for a
child. Gods Providence reaches to the numbering of our hairs, Mat. 10. 30.

and she conceived] Not the same year that Zilpah her Handmaid had her first
son; much less the fifth year of the last seven years service.

V. 21. Diuah] Chapter 34.

V. 23. My reproach] Of Barrenness, 1 Samuel 1. 6. Esaias 4. 1. Luke 1. 25.

V. 24. The Lord shall adde] Prayer-wise. See the accomplishment, chapter 35. 7.

V. 25. When Rachel had borne] Jacob then was ninety years old.

send me away] He being now out of Labans debt, chap. 31. 41.

mine own place] Chapter 28. 13. The respect he had to the Promise made him earnest
to return thither.

V. 26. Give me my wiv^s] cb 21. 21. He would not have stolen them away
against his will, and have married them after. He had served for them, and yet
here craves his good leave to depart. Though afterward upon good occasion he
steals away, chapter 31. 20.

V. 27. Favor in ahine eyes] Chapter 18. 3.

for thy sake] Ch 39. 3.

V. 30. Since my coming] And at my labor.

and now when] I being now ninety years old, 1 Timothy 5. 8. He alters his former
real intention to return presently, upon good considerations. And God did not
command his return, till chapter 31. 3, 13.

V. 31. Not give me any thing] No fit wages; nothing out of thy precedent or
present estate, but out of that which shall accrue to thee afterward.

V. 32. I will pass through] Jacob will depend upon Gods bounty, rather then
upon Labans churlish covetousness.

and of such shall be my hire] Of the speckled only, when no speckled ones were
left in the flock. But only white ones.

V. 34. I would it might be] For this was likely to be a good bargain for
Laban, for naturally cattle bring forth young ones like themselves; yet seeing
the issue of this, Laban changes this course chapter 31. 7.

V. 37. Rods] This he did at the ramming-time; and it seems by Gods command,
chapter 31. 9, 10. 11, 12. in recompense of his sore labors, chapter 31. 38, 40. As
the Israelites dealt with the Egyptians, at Gods command. And otherwise Laban
would have sent him away empty, chapter 31. 42. Ezech. 39. 10.

V. 38. Conceive] The color of the rods, happily made also the shadows of the
rams that leaped upon them, to appear parti-colored in the water. And the
strength of fancy or imagination is much at such a time of conception, and
specially with Gods blessing upon it, as here.

V. 40. The Lambs] That were parti-colored.

and set the faces] That so they might conceive the like, as they did before,
by seeing the pilled rods in the troughs.

his own flocks by themselves] Not amongst Labans cattle, lest his own seeing
Labans cattle of one color, shouln engender the like to Labans, and so be
Labans, not his. A third device.

V. 43. Increased exceedingly] Thus even in temporal things God abundantly
blessed him, chapter 31. 9.

CHAP. XXXI.
Ver. 1. GOtten all this glory] i. e. riches. Riches procure men honor and
glory in the eyes of the world. And worldly men esteem them as their chiefest
glory, Psalm. 49. 16, 17. Riches and glory, or honor are joined together, Prove.
3. 16. 8. 18. Eccl. 6. 2.

V. 2. Countenance] Bewrayes the heart; its looking glass.

V. 3. Returne] Thus God removes all Jacobs fears and doubts. And Jacob makes
use of it, chapter 32. 9.

V. 5. Has been with me] To bid me return, v. 3, 13.

V. 7. Ten times] That is, many times. So, Numb. 14. 22. Job 19. 3. Lev. 26.
26. Zech. 8. 23. yet ten times may well be in six years, if sheep in
Mesopotamia bring forth young twice a year, as some say now they do in Italy.

suffered him not] Gods restraining grace in the wicked, chapter 20. 6.

V. 8. Ring straked] With a round struck like a ring, of a contrary color
about their leg. Thus Laban ties and restraines him to that one mark.

all the cattel^ For the greatest part.

V. 9. God hath] No fraud in Jacob.

V. 10. In a dream] Sent of God, six years before this time, and this
apparition, v. 13.

V. 11. Angel] The God of Bethel, v. 13. which appeared to him in Bethel, chapter
28. 13. chapter 48. 16. the Angel of the Covenant, Mal. 3. 3. Exodus 23, 20, 21.

V. 13. I am the God] This Apparition was six year after the former.

of Bethel] Putting him in mind of his promise and vow there made by him, and
accepted by God, thus approving the name it self, and his service there vowed,
chapter 28. 18, 19, 22.

now arise] Without delay.

V. 14. Rachel and Leah] The younger first named, as the best beloved, and who
should have been the elder wise. So, Ruth 4. 11.

V. 15. Strangers] Dealt with us as strangers rather then children.

has sold us] To thee for fourteen years service.

our money] What we might have had in money or money worth, for thy fourteen
years service being our husband; whereas in good conscience he should have
given us that as our portion, he has converted it to his own use. And should
he do so with the wages God has given thee, for us and our children, for thy
last six years service also?

V. 16. Whatsoever God has said] This is a binding reasun, which answers all
doubts, and secures against all after-claps.

V. 18. To go to Isaac] By the way he stayed about six years at Succoth, and
at Shalem a City of Shechem, till Dinah was marriageable, who came from Laban
at six or seven years of age, chapter 30. 21. 33. 18. 34. 1. After he stayed at
Bethel, but not long, notwithstanding Gods command for his dwelling there, chapter
35. 1. as appears by the birth of Benjamin by the way, when he left Bethel, chapter
35 16, 17, 18. and the number of Benjamins children, when they all went down
into Egypt, chapter 46. 21. Joseph being then forty years old, and Benjamin but
twenty seven, though he were borne within a year after Dinahs ravishing, nor
does it appear that Jacob stayed long about the tower of Edar, before he came
to Isaac to Mamre. chapter 35. 21, 22, 23, 27.

V. 19. Rachel had stolen the images] Teraphim. Laban calls them his gods, his
houshould-gods, ^deos penates, v. 30. Images likely in the shape of men, 1 Samuel
19. 13, 16. where the word plural Teraphim signifies one image, used in divine
worship by idolaters, Judge. 17 5. 18. 14, 17, 20 Hos. 3. 4. consulted withal as
Oracles, Ezech. 21. 21. Zech. 10. 2. as Ahaziah did with Beelzebub, 2 King. 1.
2. put down by Josiah and other godly Kings, 2 Kings 23. 24.

V. 21. The river] Euphrates, Josh. 24. 2, 3.

Gilead] Ag eat mountain, or tract of mountains Eastward of Jordan, running
through the Kingdoms of Sihon and Og, the tribes, two 1/2 Deuteronomy. 3. 12. and
having in several parts several names, as Gilead, Seir, Hermon and Libanus, the
country under it very fertile, called the land of Gilead, Jer. 22. 6. 8. 22.
46. 11. Genesis 37. 25. Numb. 32. 1. Here called Gilead by Anticipation; See v. 47.

V. 22. The third day] Chapter 30. 36. 31. 19. Labans fact proved Jacobs advantage,
Job 5. 12, 13.

V. 23. Seven days journey] From the time he set forward in his pursuit, three
days of Jacobs journey were spent ere Laban knew of it. Likely three days more
in his return from his sheep-shearing to his home, and in preparing. Then these
seven days in pursuit were twice swifter, and gained more way then Jacob could
in his slow pace, chap. 33. 14. This then is the thirteenth day of Jacobs
journey.

V. 24. And God came] So, chapter 20. 3, 7. Numb. 22. 9.

take heed] A commination and rebuke, v. ^9, 42.

either good or bad] V. 29. Not simply; but to this end to bring him back
again, or hinder him in his journey, or any way to hurt him, as is the present
intent of thy pursuit, 2 Samuel 13. 22.

V. 26. As captives] They went willingly, ver. 14, 15, 16.

V. 27. Sent thee away with mirth] He had no such mind then, nor willingly
now, but as God overpowered him.

V. 28. To kisse] A Ceremony used both at meering and parting, chapter 29. 11. 27.
26. Exodus 4. 27. Genesis 31. 55. 33. 4. Ruth 1. 14. 2 Samuel 14. 33.

foolishly] Jacob did it wisely, and that Laban himself knew.

V. 29. It is in the power] A vain brag, like Pilates, John 19. 10, 11.

V. 30. Stolen my gods?] Vanity of idolatry and idolaters, that their gods can
be stolen: gods plurally is spoken of one image, Ex. 32, 8. And so Teraphim
plurally signifies sometimes one image, 1 Samuel 19. 13. 16. Though Jacob was
twenty years with Laban, yet Laban continued an idolater. Not thinking yet
those Teraphims to be gods, but that he worshipped God in them, by them and
with them.

V. 32. Let him not live] A severe judgment, proceeding from confidence of
innocence: uttered in detestation of theft, but much more of idolatry, yet done
more rashly then wisely, when he extended it beyond the innocence of his own
person.

V. 33. Tent] Each sort had several tents. See, Annot. on chapter 23. 2.

V. 35. The custom of women] Lev. 15. 19.

V. 36. Wroth and chode] Be angry, but sin not, Ephesians. 4. 26. upon just cause,
whence innocence is slandered.

V. 37. May judge] Lay the blame where it is due.

V. 39. I bear the loss of it] Though against the rule of right, Exodus 22 10,
13.

V. 40. Thus I was] Labans iniquity drives Jacob to praise and justify
himself. So, 1 Cor. 15. 10. 2 Cor. 11. 1. Hos. 12. 12. Deuteronomy. 26. 5.

V. 41. Ten times] V 7, 8.

V. 42. The fear of Isaac] V. 53. chapter 27. 33. 32, 9^ Psalm. 76. 11. Esaias 8. 13.
As elsewhere called the Hope of Israel.

yesternight] V. 24.

V. 43. And all that thou see is mine] 1 Kings 20 3. A brag, as if Jacob had
nothing by desert from Laban, or gift from God.

and what can I do] As if he should say, I cannot hurt them but I must hurt my
self. But why did he then so pursue? surely not to make this ensuing Covenant;
it was not his mind then. Jacob may thank God for all, who had thus bridled,
if not altered Laban.

V 44. A Covenant] Chapter 21. 32.

V. 45. A stone] Heap of stones, v. 46, 48, 51. as, chap. 28. 19.

a pillar] A Monument of the Covenant.

V. 46. Brethren, gather stones] Jacob speaks to his own family and Labans too,
v. 51.

did eat there upon the heap] After the Covenant made, v. 54.

V. 47. Jegar-Sahadutha] In Labans Syrian language ^.

Galced] The same in Jacobs Hebrew language. Hence likely the mountain and
country took the name of Gilead.

V. 48. This heap is a witnesse] A sign, memo rial, which may be alleged in
aftertimes as a witness.

Galeed] Therefore by anticipation so called, v. 21.

V. 49. Mizpah] Near Mount Hermon and Lebanon, Josh. 11. 3. watchtower. There
were afterward diverse places of that name; one in Judahs lot, Josh. 15. 38.
another in Benjamins, Josh. 18. 26. another in Moab, 1 Samuel 22. 3.

V. 50. If thou shalt] Implying the words of a curse, as is usual in this case,
chapter 14. 23 forbearing the expression of the words of the curse, either out of
fear or unwillingnesse to mention it in particular, or as yielding to any
curse in general, if they break Promise and Covenant; so, chapter 24. 3.

V. 52. To thee] For harm.

V. 53. The God of Nahor, the God of their father] Terah: both idolaters, Josh.
24. 2. The idolater swears by his gods, his idols.

V. 54. Offered sacrifice] Killed beasts, for a feast, not sacrifice. Feasts
used at the making of Covenants, chapter 26. 30. Numb, 22. 40. 1 Kings 1. 9. 19 21.
1 Samuel 28. 44.

V. 55. Blessed them] Thus God overrules the wicked; so, chapter 33. 4. so he
turned Balaams curse into a blessing, Numb. 23. 11. Deuteronomy. 23. 5. so the minds
of the Barbarians toward Paul, Acts 28. 4, 5, 6.

CHAP. XXXII.
Verse 1. ANgelis of God] To comfort and confirm him against the future fear
and danger by Esau, Psalm 91. 11.

met him] In a visible Apparition when he was awake.

V. 2. Gods Host] Camp, Army, Heavenly soldiers, Luke 2. 13. Horses and
charets of fire, 2 Kings 6. 17. fighting for Gods people against their enemies,
Dan. 10. 13, 20. 2 Kings 19. 35. Psalm. 34. 7. Hoste] For their Numbers, Order,
Power, Employment; Angel the Guardian of Jacob; but two Hosts, Heb. 1. 14. No
Angel is restrained from a particular ministration to any of the Elect, nor any
of the Elect so allotted to the custody of any Angel, that he may not expect
the protection of many.

Mahanaim] Two armies, the word is of the Dual number, Cant. 6. 13. on either
hand of him, or before and behind, Ps. 34. 7. 91. 11. Here is not one peculiar
Angel. It seems not so likely, that by the two Armies should be meant, the one
of the Angels, the other of Jacobs family. Hence likely is the name of that
City, Josh. 21. 38. in the tribe of Gal, assigned to the Levites the children
of Merari.

V. 3. Land of Seir] Chapter 14. 6. Deuteronomy. 2. 22. The Horims dwelt there before;
called Seir, not from Esau, but from Seir a Chorite or Horite, chapter 36. 20, 21.
chapter 14 6. Thither was Esau gone, chapter 36. 6, 7, 8. And that lay in Jacobs way,
which he must pass.

V. 4. My Lord Esau. Thy servant Jacob] V. 18. 33. 8. Not here by prejudicing
or renouncing the birthright or blessing, chapter 27. 29. Though yielding for a
time, as David, after he was anointed, did to Saul, so Jacob here to pacify
Esaus old malice, and present rage, v. 5. Prove. 15. 1. waiting by faith for the
Promise, which was to be accomplished in future times.

I have sojourned with Laban] As an exile, as it were so long, and rendering to
him an account of his time spent.

V. 5. And I have oxen] And so will not be burdensome to him, or to his fathers
house, not gape after his fathers riches, nor be a reproach to their family by
his poverty, nor seek Esaus favor for his own profit sake.

to tell my lord] q. d. I would not pass by thee without acquainting thee with
it.

V. 6. Four hundred men] Most likely, with a bloody intent, how grievous
soever it might be to his aged father, v. 8. These were too many for
ostentation sake.

V. 7. Greatly afraid] The infirmity of the flesh appears, the Angels being
gone.

he divided] V. 8. Another division, chapter 33. 1, 2. Good and godly policy, so,
v. 16, 17, 18. and, chapter 14. 15. 30. 38.

V. 9. O God] He falls to prayer as his only safeguard. And prayers not to the
Angels that appeared for their mediation. But labors to strengthen himself,
and his faith in God, and his Promises and Word throughout his Prayer.

of my father] To whom thou have made such promises. He prays not to Abraham.

which said unto me, Return] Chapter 31. 13. Be now as good as thyword, to me
obeying it.

V. 10. I am not worthy of the least] Nor of this I now beg; so, chapter 18. 27. 2 Samuel 9 7, 8. Luke 17. 10. Though he justly pleaded his merit to Laban, chapter 31.
38.

the truth] In performing thy gracious Promises and Predictions.

this Jordan] Now in sight, being in Mount Gilead or nearer.

two bands] V. 7.

V. 11. And the mother with the children] Or upon them, as, Hos. 10. 14. Deuteronomy
22. 6.

V 12. And thou saidest] Chapter 28. 14, 15. 31. 3.

V. 13. Which came to his hand] The night, and his haste to prevent his
brother, would not suffer him to stand upon choice, 1 Samuel 25. 8.

a Present] Rich, of five hundred and eighty head of cattle, a stock for breed.
As Jacob prays and trusts in God and his Promises, so yet he uses means,
Prove. 17. 8. 18. 16.

V. 16. A space betwixt] V. 20. To mitigate his displeasure by degrees, chapter 33.
8, 9. and that if he fell in hostile manner upon the first, the other might
seek the better to escape.

V. 20. Jacob is behind us] Lest Esau might surmise that he sent these only,
that he in the mean season might escape some other way.

V. 21. That night] Not that, v. 13. but the night following, having spent the
day before in sending away the droves and Presents by his servants.

V. 22. Two women-servants] So are Bilhah and Zilpah called here.

eleven sonnes] Dinah his daughter not mentioned. And Benjamin not yet borne.

Jabb^ak] Deuteronomy. 2. 37. 3. 16. Numb. 21. 24. Josh. 12. 2. Judge. 11. 13. the
border of the children of Ammon. If Jacob now had not been well settled in the
confidence of Gods Protection, he would not likely have passed over this river,
as having better means to escape on the other side, Or rather, he being last,
stayed yet on the other side of the river.

V. 23 Sent them ever] He remaining behind, left alone on the other side, v.
24. And there, without knowledge of any, wrestled with the Angel that night, v.
24. 26, 31.

V. 24. Wrestled] Jacob wrestling both spiritually and corporally. He deignes
this, who afterward deigned to be borne in a stable, to die on a Cross for
us, Esaias 55. 8. 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28.

a man] God in the shape of a man, even Christ, v. 26, 28, 30. Called God, and
an Angel, Hos. 12. 3, 4. that Angel, Genesis 48. 16 Mal. 3. 1. that Archangel
Michael, Jude v. 9. After he had stayed behind alone, purposely to pray, as he
did, Hos. 12. 4. with weeping, at the last the Lord appeared and set on him
with wr^stling.

until the breaking of the day] A private wrestling without Spectators, v. 26.
nor then did Jacob fully know with whom he wrastled.

V. 25. And when he saw] This is spoken after the manner of men. God knows
all, with one pure and perfect act.

that he prevailed not] With that measure of strength, which God in that
assumed body was then pleased to take and use, Genesis 19. 22. Mar. 6. 5. Mat. 15.
22. 24. 27, 28. Exodus 32, 10. Luke 24. 29. To confirm him hereby, that he
should prevail with Esau.

out of joynt] The huckle-bone, where the Sciatica is, to humble him that he
should not be exalted out of measure: but know by whose indulgence he did
prevail; and this halting to remain as a monument of it, and of this
Apparition.

V. 26. Let me go] Speaks after the manner of men, whose shape he had taken,
and to put Jacob in mind of haste to his affairs, Esaias 64. 7. Cant. 3. 4.

except thou bless me] Now then he knew him to be an Angel, the Archangel.
Here is his wrestling by prayers and tears, knowing him now to be God, Hos.
12. 4. The power of prayer, Deuteronomy. 9. 14.

V. 27. What is thy name] God knew well enough, as what was become of Abel; and
Adam, chapter 3. and 4. He asks his name, to take occasion for what himself
meant to say of the change of his name.

V. 28. No more Jacob] Only, so, 1 Samuel 8. 7. Jer. 7. 22. or principally. The
Jews are never called Jacobites but Israelites; as, Exodus 16. 8. See,
Annotations on chap. 46. 2.

but Israel] The change of names for honor sake; so in Abraham, Sarah, Joseph,
Daniel and others. Esaias 62. 2, see, chapter 35. 10.

with men] Laban already, Esau shortly.

V. 29. Tell me, I pray thee, thy Name] As God asked before his name v. 27. so
Jacob here returns a like demand, hoping he would give himself some peculiar
name, whereby he might have the surer and clearer knowledge of him, and the
better remember and honor him, Judge. 13. 17. God appeared to Jacobat least
thrice before, yet not having the like occasion, he does not, as now, ask his
name.

wherefore is it] A refusal to satisfy his curiosity; as likewise, Judge. 13.
17, 18. It would be curiosity in us to ask the reason of this resusal, 1 Samuel
6. 19. some Angels had names, as Gabriel, Luke 1. 19, 26. Christ the Angel of
the Covenant is named Michael, Dan. 10. 21. Jude v. 9. Apoc. 12. 7. Romans 12. 3.

blessed him] So granting his request, v. 26.

V. 30. Peniel] And Penuel, v. 31. Exodus 33. 11. so before in chapter 28. 19. In
this place afterward a City and Tower was builded, and spoiled by Gideon, Judge.
8. 8, 17. and built again by Jeroboam, 1 Kings 12. 25.

God face to face] Jacob now knew him to be God, Exodus 33. 11, 20, 23. Deuteronomy.
34. 10.

and my life is preserved] Which the godly feared when they saw visions of God.
See, Annotat. on chap. 16. 13.

V. 31. He halted] Infirmities we have in tentations and wrastlings with God,
whether cured of it afterward, or it still continued, we read not.

V. 32. Eat not] In any creatures. To perpetuate the memory of this honor
done to Jacob.

unto this day] Till Moses time; without fault or folly in abstaining.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Verse 1. HE divided] Chapter 32. 16.

V. 2. He put] The dearest he reserves to the safest place.

V. 3. Before them] This shows his fatherly affection, and his faith in the
Promises. It seems he followed the five droves of cattle, and went before his
children and their mothers, that were in three companies.

bowed] See Annot. on chapter 32. 4. Humility goes before honor.

Seven times] Sometimes taken for many times, 1 Samuel 2. 5. Prove. 26. 25.

V. 4. Kissed him] Esaus heart really changed, Luke 15. 20. Prove. 26. 7.

V. 8. What meanest thou] The servants had told him; but he thus takes occasion
courteously to refuse them.

V. 9. I have enough] Many will never say so, Eccl. 4 8. Prove. 30. 15.

V. 10. Face of God] Honorable and comfortable. The Scripture uses to entitle
to God the things that excel; so the Mountains of God, the City of God, Prince
of God, Wrastlings of God, Cedars of God, and seeing the light of Gods
countenance shine evidently in the cheerful countenance of his brother, Psalm.
41. 11.

V. 11. My blessing] Gift of good will to thee, which God has blessed me with,
1 Samuel 25. 27. blessing thee, and God for thee, 1 Samuel 30. 26. 2 Kings 5. 15. 2
Cor. 9. 5, 6.

he took it] It is a more blessed thing to give then to receive, Acts 20. 35.
Genesis 14. 23.

V. 14. Be able to endure] Esaias 40. 11. Mar. 4. 33. 1 Cor. 3. 2. 9 22. Romans 15.
1.

until I come unto my Lord] We read not that he performed this Promise. After,
upon some reasons he might change his mind, ( Mat. 2. 12.) Or go to him with a
few, making no stay. For it is not like that he would so soon, by so manifest a
contempt or neglect, provoke afresh his new reconciled brother.

V. 15. Let me find grace] Ch 34 11. 47. 25. 1 Samuel 25 8. 2 Samuel 16. 4. Ru^h 2.
13.

V. 17. To Succoth] Here first so named, Judge. 8. 15, 16. Exodus 12. 37. Lev.
23. 34.

and built him an house] Not yet that he stayed here long.

V. 18. To Shalem] Or Salem, Thought to be Sychar, Joh. 4. 5. Not that Salem
where Melchizedech reigned. This Salem was about forty miles distant from it,
John 3. 23. There is Salim near Ae non, happily that mentioned, 1 Samuel 9. ^.

a C ty of Shechem] Sychem, Acts 7. 16. Sychai, John 4. 5, 6.

pitched his tent] Dwelt at Succoth, and here most about six years, till Dinah
was ravishable, and Jacobs sons able men to slay the Shechemites.

V. 19. And he bought] As Abraham did, chapter 23. 17, 18. See Annot. there.

a parcel of a field] After it became the portion of Joseph and his children.
(And perhaps that legacy of Jacob on his deathbed, chapter 48. 22) Josh. 24. 32
Here Christ had conference with the woman of Samaria, Joh. 4. 5.

of Hamor] Acts 7. 16. Emor.

a hundred pieces] Or lambs. Ancient custom to buy and sell by exchanging one
thing for another. Or money having the pictures of Lambs stamped on them,
whence pecunia has its name a pecude, Josh. 24. 32. Job 42. 11. the same word
Kesitah is used, where it must be understood of a piece of money, likely of
gold, for a Lamb were too small a gift. Kesitah is 1 d. ob.

V. 20. An Altar] As, ch 12. 8. 13. 3, 4, 18. 26. 25. He repaired that Altar
Abraham had built there, chapter 12. 6, 7.

El-eohe-Israel] Exodus 17. 15. Figuratively calling the sign by the name of
the thing signified. This the name of the Altar, not the Inscription upon the
Altar.

Judah's departure from his brethren, and marrying a Canaanitish woman, chapter 38.
1. fell not out at this time; but before. See Annot. on that place.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Verse 1. ANd Dinah] Chapter 30. 21, 22. This must needs be about six years after
Jacobs coming from Laban, and Dinah at this time but thirteen years old at
most; because of Benjamins birth a while after this, chapter 35. 16, 17, 18. who,
if borne the next year, yet can be but twenty six years old, when he went
with his father into Egypt, and had then ten sons, chapter 46. 21.

went out to see] Likely upon some festival day, and also her self alone, Tit.
2. 5.

V. 2. Hamor] Acts 7. 16. Emor or Emmor.

V. 3. And s^ake kindly] To comfort her, being afflicted for the injury done
her, as Tamar in like case was, 2 Samuel 13. 13, 19.

V. 5. Jacob held his peace] Though sorrowful enough. So Aaron, Lev 10. 3. and
David, Psalm. 39. 9. Thus Jacob ruling his own spirit, did better then his
sons that took the City, Prove. 16. 32.

until] As fittest to comfort and counsel him.

V. 7. And the sons of Jacob] Reuben being born the first year of Jacobs
coming to Laban, was now about twenty five years old, Simeon twenty four,
Levi twenty three.

wroth] In hatred of the sin, and for the disgrace and reproach of the Church.

folly] So the rape, Judge. 20. 6. and Achans sacrilege, Josh. 7. 15. are
called folly, Romans 1. 22. Folly in offending God, losing the soul, forfeiting
heaven, gaining hell.

in Israel] This name given him first, chapter 32. 28. Therefore these words likely
are the words, not of Jacobs sons, but of Moses, who writes this story,
according to the phrase of speech used in his time, and suitable to the words
of the Law, delivered by him afterward, Deuteronomy. 23. 17. See, Deuteronomy. 21. 21. Josh.
7. 15. Judge. 20. 6.

V. 8. With them] Likely apart from their father.

Your daughter] They treating in their fathers name as well as in their own.
So, v. 17.

V. 11. I will give] See, Annot on chapter 29. 18. Amnon did far worse with Tamar,
2 Samuel 13. Exodus 22. 16, 17. and, Deuteronomy. 22. 28, 29, is in satisfaction for
wrong done; not upon a free and equal motion and proceeding in marriage.

V. 13. And the sons of Jacob] Without their fathers consent.

deceitfully] Without their fathers knowledge. He was a plain man and sincere,
chapter 25. 27.

V. 14. Uncircumcised] Superfluous. Though Isaac and Jacob were married to
women of Bethael and Labans family, where circumcision of the males in all
likelihood was not in use.

V. 15. But in this will we] Jacob would not have the holy Sacrament profaned,
and obtruded upon unbelievers, nor his holy seed to be mingled with the cursed
Canaanites, (Deuteronomy. 7. 3, 4) Neither did Jacobs sons here deal otherwise then
deceitfully, v. 25.

be circumcised] Thus they abuse and prostitute the holy Sacrament to their
bloody purpose, and under color of Religion cover their deceit; so did
Jozebel, 1 Kings 21, 9, 10. and Absalom, 2 Samuel 15. 7, 8.

V. 16. Our daughters] Which we have or shall have.

V. 17. Our daughter] As, v. 8. using the name of their father.

V. 19. More honourable] His great esteem was one ground of his present
prevailing so much with all the men, in so strange a request.

V. 20. The gate of their City] Where were the public Assemblies and Courts of
justice. See, Annotat. on chap. 23. 10.

V. 23. And every beast of theirs be ours?] Not as a spoil from them, but by
commerce, marriages and the like.

V. 25. On the third day] The Critical day, by Physicians, for wounds.

Simeon and Levi, Dinahs brethren] By father and mother, Reuben was of a more
mild nature, chapter 37. 29. They only the chief Authors and Actors, others also
both brethren and servants like to be Assistants, v 13, 27.

boldly] Because the wounded men could not resist them; and the City was secure.

slew all the males] A male had done the wrong. Their wives and little ones
they took captives, v. 29. God might justly suffer this for the Shechemites own
sins, and take occasion for it from the sin of their Prince, 1 Chronicles. 32. 25. 2 Samuel 24. 1, 15, 17.

V. 27. The sons of Jacob] The rest likely.

and spoiled the City] V. 28, 29. of murderers become robbers.

they had defiled their sister] One of them had, and the other repressed it
not, nor judged him for it; So, Josh. 7. 1, 11, 12. 22. 20.

V. 29. Captive] What they did after with them we read not.

in the house] In every house, chiefly Shechems house wherein Dinah was, v. 2^.

V. 30. Unto Simeon and Levi] As the chief offenders.

ye have troubled me] He then was neither privy to, nor approver of this
massacre. And therefore, chapter 49. 5, 6, 7. he does by the spirit of prophecy
curse them for it, Josh. 6. 18. 7. 25. 1 Kings 18. 18. For this fact likely he
deprives them of their birthright, as Reuben for his sin, and conferres it
on Judah, chap. 49. Prove. 11 29.

to make me] Though he were in no fault.

to stink] Cruelty and treachery are odious crimes, Ex. 5. 22. 1 Chronicles. 19 6.

V. 31. As with an harlot] A stubborn answer. In the Hebrew Zonah, the first
letter is extraordinarily great. In chapter 23. 2. There is a little letter to note
Abraham's moderation without excess in weeping.

CHAP. XXXV.
Verse 1. ANd God said] Jacob being now perplexed with fear, for that done to
the Shechemites, and likely thinking thereupon of removing, God here bespeaks
him, as follows.

said] Whether by vision, or dream, or in what manner is not set down.

to Bethel] Southward from Shechem about thirty English miles.

and dwelt there] Yet he dwelt a small while there, as appears by the birth of
Benjamin, after he went from Bethel, v. 16, 18. And from Dinahs ravishing at
Shechem, to Benjamins going down with his father into Egypt, there can be no
more then twenty seven years; reckoning Joseph to be thirteen years old when
Dinah was ravished, both being borne in one year, chapter 30 21, 22. and Joseph
being forty years old in the third year of famine, when Benjamin with his
father came down into Egypt. And Benjamin then had ten sons, chapter 46. 21.

an Altar unto God] Altars built by Noah. Abraham, Isaac and Jacob himself,
chap. 33. 20. To sacrifice thereon.

unto God] Speaks of himself in the third person. So, Ex. 20. 7, 10, 11.

that appeared unto thee] Thereby minding him of Gods gracious Promises, and of
his own vow there made, chapter 28. 22.

when thou fleddest] And wast in as much danger then, as thou art in now.

V. 2. Unto his houshold] Jacobs religious care of his household.

and to all that were with him] This may relate to the captived Sichemites, and
to all of his retinue and followers.

Put away] So, Josh. 24. 23. Judge. 10. 16. 1 Samuel 7. 3, 4. no mixture
permitted, no toleration allowed in a false worship, Deuteronomy. 29. 9 10, 11. 1 Samuel,
5. 1. 2 Cor. 6. 16.

Strange gods] Of strange Nations, and other people, differing from the true
God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, whether Labans gods stolen by Ruchel, and it
may be yet unknown to Jacob; or any other brought by any other of his retinue,
when they came from Laban and Mesopotamia; or any gods of the Shechemies, their
captives among them, worshipped by them, or taken as spoil, and secretly kept
for the tichnesse of them.

and change your garments] Putting on others or washing these, Zech. 3. 3, 4,
5. Exodus 19. 10, 14. Ceremonies afterward enjoined by the Law in diverse cases,
Lev. 15. 13. Numb. 31, 23. importing change of mind and manners, cleansing
from sin to holiness, Jude v. 23. 2 Cor. 7. 1. Ezech. 16. 8, 10 Apoc. 3. 4,
18. 7. 14.

V. 3. And go up to Bethel] Eccl. 5. 1. The House of God, that dreadful, the
gate of Heaven, chap. 28. 17. Therefore in a special manner they should prepare
and sanctify themselves.

I will make] And perform my vow.

an Altar] V. 1, 7. after a pillar, v. 14.

of my distresse] About twenty seven years ago.

V. 4. And all their eare-rings] Idolatrous monuments, Hos. 2. 13. Judge 8. 24,
25, 26. 27. Deuteronomy. 7. 25, 26. Exodus 32 2, 3, 4.

under an oak] From the knowledge of his family and people, Esaias 30. 22. Under
an oak by Shechem, Joshuah set up a great stone for a witness of the peoples
Covenant with God, Josh. 24. 26, 27. And there the Shechemites made Abimelech
King, Judge. 9. 6. Oaks and groves of trees forbidden in worship, and used by
idolaters, Esaias 1. 29.

by Shechem] Shiloh and the Tabernacle of God were after there, or by Shechem,
Josh. 24. 1, 25, 26.

V. 5. Terror of God] Chapter 34. ^0. In all humane reason they easily might have
destroyed him and his, Exodus 23. 27. Josh. 2. 9, 11. Gods restraining hand upon
the wicked. See, Annot. on chapter 20. 6.

V. 7. An Altar] According to part of his vow, chapter 28. 22.

El-Bethel] Here he adds to the former name, chap. 28. 19.

V. 8. Rebekahs nurse] Sent with Rebekah, chapter 24. 59. And Jacob being now
returned into Canaan, and being there now about seven years, and not very far
from his fathers house, she thence might come to him of her own accord, or he
send for her, or fetch her, if she did not return into Mesopotamia, and thence
come along with Jacob.

V. 9. Again] This is the seventh time God revealed himself to Jacob in
special, manner, chapter 28. 13. 31. 3, 11. 32. 1, 2, 24. v. 35. 1.

V. 10. But Israel shall be thy name] Confirms this name to him the second
time. See Annotat. on chap. 32. 28.

V. 11. I am God Almighty] Confirms and amplifies the Promises made, chapter 28.
and chapter 32.

Kings] Thus God gives him the blessing of Abraham, chapter 28. 4. 17. 6.

V. 12. To thee] Not to Esau.

V. 13. And God went up] Chap. 17. 22. Judges 13. 20.

V. 14. Set up a pillar] Repaired the old, set up near thirty years ago, chapter
28. 18. or rather a new one in the very place here named.

a drink offering thereon, and he poured oil thereon] These in use before the
Ceremonial Law by Moses, chap. 28. 18.

V. 16. A little way] About a mile short of Bethlehem, chapter 48. 7. 2 King. 5. 19.

Ephrath] Which is Bethlehem, v. 19. The Prophet joins them, And thou Bethlehem
Ephrata, Micah 5. 2. called also Bethlehem-Judah, to distinguish it from
another in Galilee, in the tribe of Zebulun. Here our Savior was borne.

V. 17. This son also] Ch 30. 24.

V. 18. As her soul was in departing] To God that gave it, Eccl. 12. 7. being
it self immortal, as appears here; and as is confessed by Heathens
themselves, as Plato, Aristotle, Cicero and others; and so again life is
restored, when the soul comes again into the body, 1 Kings 17. 21, 22.

for she died] Who formerly would die for want of children, chapter 30. 1.

Ben-oni] The like case is, 1 Samuel 4. 20, 21.

Benjamin] Psalm. 80. 17. Now was Joseph about twelve or thirteen years old,
six years old when he came from Laban, and six or seven years more since he
came into Canaan, till the birth of Benjamin after Dinah's ravishing And
B^njamin was twenty seven or tweney eight when he went into Egypt with his ten
sons, Joseph then being forty, and Benjamin younger then he twelve or thirteen
years.

V. 19. Buried in the way] About this place many infants were murdered by
Herod, Mat 2. 16, 18 Jer. 31. 15.

V. 20. A pillar] Monuments and memorials for the dead are lawful and useful
too.

unto this day] Till Moses time, and after that to Saul's time, 1 Samuel 10. 2.

V. 21. Tower of Edar] i e Of the flock, Micah. 4. 8. It may be hereabouts the
Angels appeared to the shepherds, Luke 2. 8.

V. 22. His fathers Concubine] See Annot. on chapter 22. 24. and on chapter 25. 1. By
this he justly lost his birthright, chapter 49. 4. 1 Chronicles. 5. 1. So Absalom
sinned with his fathers Concubines, 2 Samuel 16. 22. And as David abstained from
them afterward, 2 Samuel 20. 3. so likely Jacob did from Bilhah.

and Israel heard it] Here is an empty space left in the line, with a mark to
move consideration. As likewise in Genesis 4. 8. And also a pause or breaking off
as to a new matter, even in the midst of the verse. So in Deuteron. 2. 8.

twelve] He had no more after. Dinah was a daughter, and Joseph was one of the
twelve; yet after when the twelve tribes were accounted and settled, Ephraim and
Manasse were put in, and Joseph and Levi (in a sort) left out, Levi for any
land by lot in Canaan. They are called the twelve Patriarchs, Acts 7. 8. and
twelve tribes, Acts 26. 7. Their names engraved on twelve precious stones, on
the High Priests plate, Exodus 28. 21, 29. and on the twelve gates of the new
Jerusalem, Ezech. 48. 31. Apoc. 21. 12. The Apostles of Christ were twelve, and
their names written on the twelve foundations of the wall or the City of the
new Jerusalem, Apoc. 21. 14.

V. 23. The sons of Leah] The sons of the wives by themselves, and of the
Concubines by themselves.

V. 26. In Padan Aram] Except Benjamin, which is so plain in the former part of
this chapter, as no Reader could mistake it. And so no need of an exception of
him to be named.

V. 27. And Jacob came unto Isaac] His sons, though borne out of the land of
Canaan, come with him into the land, whereas Esau and his sons, though borne
in the land, do go out and give place. Jacob and his wives, children and family
came to him, and removed their habitations thither. Though in all likelihood,
living diverse years in Canaan before, and that not far from Isaac, he did
before this time come to visit his blind and aged father.

unto Mamre] See Annot. on chapter 13. 18. and on 23. 2.

V. 29. And died] Long after Jacobs rerurn to him, for he lived till the year
before Joseph's advancement in Egypt, or till the time of his advancement. He
being sixty when Jacob was borne, and Jacob being one hundred and twenty when
Joseph was advanced in Egypt, and one hundred and thirty when he stood before
Pharaoh, which sixty and one hundred and twenty make up the full life of Isaac.

Esau and Jacob buried him] So Isaac and Ishmael buried Abraham, chapter 25. 9.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Verse 1. NOw these are the generations of Esau] 1. Chron. 1. 35. All this
shows the accomplishment of that Oracle given to Rebekah, chapter 25. 23. As also
of that temporal blessing wherewith his father blessed him, chapter 27. 39, 40. And
likewise of the Promise to Abraham, chapter 22. 17.

V. 2. Esau took his wives] Chapter 26. 34. 28. 9. Many here have two names.

Adah] Called Bashemath, ch 26. 34.

Aholibamah] Called Judith, chapter 26. 34.

the daughter of Anah] Called Beeri, chapter 26. 34.

the daughter of Zibeon] His Grandchild. And this does distinguish this Anah
from another of the name, v. 20. who was the brother of Zibeon, and so the
Uncle of this Anah.

the Hivite] A Hittite, chapter 26. 34. The Hivites comprehended the Hittites under
them.

V. 3. And Bashemath] Called Mahalath, chapter 28. 9.

V. 6. And Esau took] Had taken before Jacobs coming, chapter 32. 3. 33. 14.

and went into the countrey] Another country, Mount Seir, v. 8.

from the face] Before Jacobs coming, chapter 32. 3.

V. 7. For their riches] His and his fathers, or else all this removing, though
begun as before, yet might receive a full and final accomplishment after Jacobs
coming, and perhaps after Isaacs death. When the riches of the two brethren
were more, then that they might dwell together in a land wherein they were but
only sojourners; and happily too that Esau by this time had already hope to get
the possession of the land of Seir.

V. 8. Seir] So named from a man of that name, v. 20. God gave it to Esau,
Deuteronomy. 2. 5, 12. Josh. 24. 4.

V. 11. Eliphaz were Teman] Eliphaz the Temanite, Job 2. 11.

V. 12. And Timna] Sister to Lotan, the son of Seir, v. 20, 22. was married to
Eliphaz Esaus son. Thus by marriages and the sword Esau got into the rule and
possession of Mount Seir, chapter 27. 40. 1 Chronicles. 1. 36.

Amalek] 1 Chronicles. 1. 36. A Duke, v. 10. Whence came the Amalekites, which were
so great enemies to Israel, Exodus 17. 8, 14.

V. 13. Revel] 1 Chronicles. 1. 37.

V. 15. Dukes] Leaders or chief Governors, fourteen in number. After they had
Kings, v. 31. and after that Dukes again, v 40, 41, 42, 43.

V 16. Duke Korah] Omitted among the sons of Eliphaz, v. 11. and 1 Chronicles. 1.
36. nor yet that Duke Korah, v. 18. he being of another mother.

V. 20. Seir the Horite] Chapter 14. 6. Horites seem to be of the Hivites. v. 2.
for Zibeon the Hivite, v. 2. comes of this race. Their race is mentioned
because of the affinities the Edomites made with them, and the Edomites being
their successors in the land and Government.

V. 24. This was that Anah] Mule.] The vulgar Latin translates it Buhes. Mules
engender not, but are engendered by an He-Asse upon a mare; against the Law,
Lev. 19. 19. This Anah was father-in law to Esau, v. 2. 25.

V. 26. Children of Dishon] Many following are of two names, 1 Chronicles. 1. 41,
etc.

Hemdam] Or Amram, 1 Chronicles. 1. 41.

V. 27. Akan] Or Jakan, 1 Chronicles. 1. 42.

V. 28. Dishan] And Dishon, distinct persons, v. 21, 28. 1 Chronicles 1. 38, 42.

V. 30. Among their Dukes] That is, Dukedomes. For these seven sons of Seir had
their Dukedomes at one time in several places, being all brethren, the sons of
Seir, ver. 20, 21.

V. 31. And these are the Kings] The accomplishment of the Promise to Abraham,
chapter 17. 16. For Kings to proceed from Sarah. Thus Esau after his Dukes, v. 15,
16, 17, 18, 19. had of his posterity eight Kings, which b^re successively a
golden scepter, whiles Jacobs posterity was in servitude, under a rod of iron
in Egypt.

Before] Before Moses time; for he was King in Jeshurun, Deuteronomy. 33.

V. 32.] These Kings being borne in several places, of several kindreds, and
reigning most in several Cities, must therefore reign, not by succession, but
by election or tyranny.

V. 37. Of Rehoboth] A City builded by Nimrod, Genesis 10. 11.

by the river] Euphrates.

V. 40. And these are the names of the Dukes] From Kings they come down to
Dukes again, eleven here named; which happily might be Dukes in several places,
all at one time. The Dukes of Edom are mentioned, Exodus 15. 15. at the
Israelites coming out of Egypt And the King of Edom, mentioned a little before
the end of their forty years being in the wilderness. Numb. 20. 14. and that
may be happily the last King Hadar, v. 39. of this chapter. If these eleven Dukes
were to be counted in succession one after another, then must Moses here by the
spirit of Prophecy foretell their names and dignities, which did succeed when
he was dead.

V. 41. Aholibamah] And Timnah likewise, v. 40. before the names of women, v.
12, 14. are here the names of men.

the father of the Edomites] Of Edom, from the red pottage, and his red hair
too, chapter 25, 25, 30.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Verse. 2. THe generations of Jacob] The story of things that did befall him,
chap. 6. 9. 25. 19.

Joseph being seventeen years old] And Jacob then one hundred and seven, Joseph
uourished him seventeen years in Egypt before he died.

was feeding the flock] Not idle, but a shepherd himself.

with the sons of Bilhab] The sons of the Handmaids sorted together, and
Joseph with them rather then with Leah's sons, for safety against envy and
emulation. And specially in safety with Bilhah, Rachels handmaid.

their evil report] Of their injurious usage of him, or of their evil
conversation.

V. 3. More then all] More then any of them all.

son of his old age] He was upon ninety at the birth of Joseph, and now one
hundred and seven; Bonjamin was now but about three or four years old, and
not come yet to any proof to gain so much of his fathers affection.

of many colours] So Tamar had, and Kings daughters used them that were
Virgins, 2 Samuel 13. 18. A sign of Jacobs love, an object of his brethrens
envy.

V. 4. More then all his brethren] There appeared in him presages of virtuous
acts and great employments.

V. 5. Dreamed] See Annot. on chapter 20. 3.

told it] Gods special Providence was in it, causing him thus to reveal his
dreams.

V. 7. And made obeisance to my sheaf] For corn it was that they went down
into Egypt, and there did obeisance to Joseph, chapter 42.

V. 8. Reign over us] They apply it to themselves, as the Midianites did, Judge.
7. 13, 14.

made obeisance to me] Twice, as Pharaohs dreams, chap. 41. 25, 32. see it
accomplished, chapter 46.

V. 10. And his father rebuked him] Partly through ignorance, and partly in
policy to abate the hatred of his brethren, v. 11.

and thy mother] Stepmother, Leah; Rachel being dead at this time undoubtedly.

V. 11. Observed the saying] Seeing the dream was doubled, and that excellent
gifts and graces of mind and body, appeared in Joseph, Luke 2. 19, 51.

V. 12. In Shechem] Which was from Hebron, where his father and Grandfather
were, v. 14. about sixty miles, chapter 35. 27. This the place, where not four
years ago they committed that massacre. And ever since likely the less
inhabited, and so more fit for pasturage, and freer from danger, the terrout of
God being still upon the neighboring places. Happily in that place bought, chapter
33. 19.

V. 14. Well with thy brethren] Minding happily the massacre they had made there,
and their possibility of danger by it.

V. 16. I seek my brethren] His fathers care in sending, and his in seeking, do
aggravate his brethrens sin and cruelty against him.

V. 17. And found them in Dothan] Joseph's obedience stretched further then his
fathers words, to his fathers mind. About eight miles distant from Shechem.
Here afterward was a City where Elizaus was, 2 Kings 6. 13.

V. 18. They conspired] They quickly conclude out of their fore-conceived
malices, so, Luke 20. 14.

V. 19 This dreamer] A nickname in scorn. And so best men are used.

V. 20. Slay him, and we will say] One sin draws on another.

some evil beast] As, 1 Kings 13. 24. 2 Kings 2. 24. They will do a beastly
act, but not own it.

V. 21. Reuben] The eldest, chapter 42. 22. He the eldest might most hate Joseph's
Sovereignty; he did it with an intent to deliver him to his father again, v.
22. it may be to make some amends to him for his incest with Bilhah. Sinful all
the sons of Jacob, sinful the Church.

V. 23. Stripped Joseph] He besought them in the anguish of his soul, chapter 42.
21. Mat. 27. 28.

V. 24. No water] Jer. 38. 6. Zech. 9. 11.

V. 25. To eat bread] Exodus 18. 12. without remorse for it, they make much of
themselves, and little regard the afflictions of Joseph, Amos 6. 6. Their
consciences were asleep.

Ishmaelites came from Gilead] From Arabia; or East from Jordan, by Dothan
toward Egypt.

Gilead] A place of merchandise, Jer. 8. 22. 22. 6. 46. 11.

V. 26. What profit] A good quaerie to pose our selves when we are about to
sin. Profit would arise by selling him, Mat. 16. 26. Romans 6. 21.

V. 27. Sell him] Ancient and usual to sell men, Exodus 21. 21, 16.

Ishmaelites] Chapter 39. Called also Midianites, v. 28. and Medanites, v. 36.
Medan and Midian brethren, 25. 1, 2. a mixed company of Merchants, both
Ishmaelites by Hagars son, and Midianites of Keturahs son, chapter 25. 2. both
dwelling in Arabia; so, in Judge. 8. 22, 24, 26.

V. 28. Drew up] in Reubens absence.

for twenty pieces of silver] Twenty shekels, i. e. shillings, and 3 d. a piece
more, ^ 1 li. 5. sh See Annot. on chapter 23. 16. Joseph here may many ways be a
type of Jesus; sold for thirty pieces.

V. 29. And he rent his clothes] He was absent when Judahs counsel was
followed, v. 26, 27. And likely he absented himself of purpose, that he might,
as now he did, go some secret way to the pit to deliver him, v. 22. missing
him, he rent his clothes, as custom then was in like cases of great and
grievous sorrow, to show the brokennesse of their heart, what little care or
comfort they took of any thing in that passion. Examples are many of the like,
v. 34. chapter 44. 13. David commands it to Joab and the people in their mourning
before Abuer, 2 Samuel 3. 31.

V. 30. The child is not] Not in the pit, nor alive, chapter 42. 13, 36. Jer. 31.
15. Yet after he knew all, he consents to conceal the sale of him from his
father.

and I, whither shall I go?] Of me the eldest my father will require him. And I
have so greatly offended him already, chapter 35. 22. So, 2 Samuel 13. 13.

V. 32. sent] By messengers. and they brought it] The messengers.

V. 34. Jacob rent his clothes] Isaac was alive, and no doubt mourned too.

put on sack-cloth] Here first mentioned. A ceremony of sorrow much practiced
afterward by Gods people, and by the Ninevites themselves, Jonah 3 -- 5.
Hereunto were sometimes added earth and ashes on the head.

and mourned] Washed the bloody coat of his son with his tears.

V. 35. And all his sons] That plotted this sorrow, pretended sorrow
themselves; and would never lessen his sorrow by confessing the sale.

and all his daughters] Dinah and his sons wives.

but he refused to he comforted] Infirmity in Jacob. This aggravates his sons
sin.

into the grave] The word signifies the state of the dead, without any
reference to pain or anguish. Jacob here meant not a grave properly, because he
thought Joseph to be some of wild beasts, much less dreamed he of a Limbus
Patrum, and least of Hell or Purgatory, Joseph being so good a son. Usually
the word signifies a grave. As death is appointed for all men, so is this
Sheol, Psalm. 89. 48. Eccl 9. 10. Job desired to be hid in Sheol, Job 14. 13.
Genesis 42. 38. 44. 29, 31. Psalm. 16. 10.

V. 36. An Officer] Eunuch. Such came to be great Officers in Courts of Kings,
Chamberlaines, etc. and so the word came to be a word of Court-honour, chapter 40.
2. and so given to some that were not gelded; as to Potiphar here, who had a
wife, chapter 39. 7, 9. The Law is against such, Deuteronomy. 23. 1.

Captain of the guard] A Provost-Marshal, 2 Kings 25, 8. Genesis 40. 3.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Verse 1. AT that time] Or in that time not of Joseph's selling into Egypt. For
between that time and Judahs going into Egypt with his father Jacob, were but
twenty two or twenty three years. Joseph being sold at seventeen years old;
and all coming down when he was forty years old. And within the compass of
those twenty two or twenty three years, Judabs marriage with the daughter of
Shuah, and the begetting of Pharez upon Tamar his daughter-in-law, and Pharez
his begetting of Hezron and Hamul could not possibly be done. Judah's marriage
then must needs precede the story of Joseph's sale; and Er his eldest son must
needs be about ten years old at that time. Therest, and so the most of the
story in this chapter, fell out after the selling of Joseph into Egypt.

went dom^ from his brethren] Not before he left Laban, though some reject not
that opinion; but before Dinahs ravishing, yea, speedily upon his first coming
into Canaan. They that make Judah to be born in the beginning of the 14th year
of the latter seven of Jacobs service, and so but three or four years older
then Joseph, and but forty three or forty four when he came with his father
into Egypt, they find him by that account to be but ten years old when he
first came into Canaan, and thereupon defer his marriage till two or three
years after, and so straiten the times for the births of his offspring before
they all went into Egypt, which howsoever the great Annotations miscast it upon
this place, must needs run thus, viz. that Judah at twelve or thirteen married
the daughter of Shuah, two or three years after his coming into Canaan; and in
three years after had Er, Onan and Shelah. That Er at twelve married Tamar,
that four years were spent in the matters of Onan and Shelah, and Judahs
begetting Pharez, and Zerah of Tamar, to the time of the birth of Pharez: that
Pharez at twelve married, and in two years had Ezrom and Hamul. All which do
make up but thirty three or thirty four years, which is the full time between
the first coming of them all into Canaan, and their going down into Egypt, as
clearly appears by the several periods of Joseph's age; he being six or seven
years old when they all left Laban, and forty when they all came down unto
him into Egypt. But the other opinion which makes Judah to be borne in the
fourth year of the first seven of Jacobs service, and so to be ten years
older then Joseph, and fifty years old when he with his father came into
Egypt, does give fairer way to the course and times of the story thus, viz.
Judah at sixteen years old, comes into Canaan, and speedily marries the
daughter of Shuah. In the next year has Er. Er marries Tamar at fourteen.
After which four years are spent in the matters of Onan, of Shelah, and till
the birth of Pharez, begotten by Judah after the death of his wife, upon the
body of Tamar, and Pharez at thirteen years old marries, and in two years
has Hezron and Hamul, and then all go down into Egypt. And all this within the
fifty years of Judahs age.

Adullamite] Adullam, a city that fell afterward to the tribe of Judah, Josh.
12. 15. 15. 33, 35. had a King was seated in a valley, David fled to a cave
here, 1 Samuel 22. 1. 2 Samuel 23. 13.

V. 2. Canaanite] Contrary to the wills of his Grandfather and great
Grandfather, chapter 24. 3. 27. 46. 28. 1.

Shuah] The name not of Judahs wife, but of her father, v. 12. 1 Chronicles. 2. 3.

V. 3. He called] The man names the child.

V. 4. She called] The woman names. And so, v. 5.

Chezib] Likely Achzib, Josh. 19. 29. 15. 44. signifies lying, and thereto the
Prophet alludes, Micah. 1. 14.

V. 7. Was wicked in] What wickedness is not set down, but heinous sure in
kind and degree.

slew him] Shortly after his marriage, how or by what means is not set down,
chapter 46. 12. Numb. 26. 19. 1 Chronicles. 2. 3. In some extraordinary remarkable
manner by sudden vengeance.

V. 8. And marry her and raise up seed] This before Moses time. After a Law
made for it, Deuteronomy. 25. 5, 7, 9. And in want of a brother, the next Kinsman was
to do it, Ruth 3. 9. 4. 6, 7. But forbidden in case the brother left any issue
before he died, Lev. 18. 16. 20. 21.

V. 11. Remain a widow at thy fathers house] Lev. 22. 13. Lest she should
entice Shelah.

till Shelah] Yet he minded it not, v. 14, 26.

lest he die] Conceiving something amiss of Tamar, upon an evil surmise, as if
some unluckinesse followed her.

V. 12. In process of time] The days were multiplied, yet long it could not
be: but surely after the deat^s of Er and Onan, because after his fit of
mourning for her death, he soon lies with Tamar.

sheep-shearers] Then they used to have feasts, 1 Samuel 25. 8, 11. So he went to
make merry after his mourning.

Timnath] A City in the Philistines country, which after fell to the lot of
Judah, Josh. 15. 20, 57. There Sampson took a wife, Judge. 14. 1.

V. 14. Widows garment] Some mournful guise and habit, to notify her estate.
An ancient and lawful practice.

in an open place.] So whores used, Prove. 7. 12. 9. 14. Jer. 3. 2. Ezech. 16.
25.

grown, and she was not given] Some suitable time must be allowed to this:
which will hardly stand with that opinion of Judah's not marrying till he had
been three years in the land of Canaan.

V. 15. Because she had covered her face] A veil did serve for Modesty, chapter
24. 65. But here it was that Judah might not know her. And likely to the same
purpose she used whispering, or changed her voice and tone. See, Annot. on chapter
29. 25

V. 16. What will thou give me] Ezech. 16. 33. Deuteronomy. 23. 18. Micah 1. 7.

V. 17] Pledge] Hebrew Eraben, whence the Greek Arrhaebon, and the Latin
Arrhabon. This she did for her future security. v. 24, 25.

V. 18. Thy signet] Luke 15. 22. Jer. 22. 24.

came in unto her] In some secret place by, and near.

conceived by him] Being now about thirty four years of age. The great
Annotators reckon him now to be about thirty years of age; and yet by the
grounds of their own reckoning, he must needs be twenty nine at the marriage of
Er; marrying himself at fourteen, and his eldest son Er likewise marrying at
fourteen; which how they will agree together let the Reader judge. See their
Annot. on chapter 38. 1. yet of Judah by this conception come the Jews, who brag
they were not borne of fornication, John 8. 41. yea, our blessed Savior sprung
from this race, Mat. 1. 3. He will not reject great sinners.

V. 23. Lest we be shamed] Shameful was the sin of fornication among the
Heathen.

V. 24. Let her be burnt] For adultery, as being betrothed and belonging to
Shelah. Thus the Heathens condemned adultery, Jer. 29. 22, 23. And so Moses Law
after, Deuteronomy. 22. 23, 24. condemned there to be stoned. And a Priests daughter
for fornication to be burnt, Lev. 21. 9. Judah here takes upon him, as if he
had power of life and death over those that belonged to his family, as Tamar
did though now in her fathers house; or at least, he shows the eagerness of
his desire against her, if his meaning were, but to have her carried before the
Magistrate, and be so punished by burning, according to the Law of the
country. However, he was desirous to be rid of her, for his son Shelahs
sake: and bewrayes his own partiality in his own sin, and inhumane cruelty
in thus judging her to fire, and the fruit in her womb yet unborne, and that
before he heard what she could say for her self, never minding how unjustly he
had dealt with her, in not giving her to Shelah to wise. Thus, 2 Samuel 12. 5, 7.
Romans 2. 1.

V. 25. When she was brought forth] To execution, or rather to prison or trial.

she sent] To stay his proceedings, and happily to smother it before it came to a
public hearing.

the signet, and bracelet, and staffe] Thus she convicts him by his own seal,
and beats him with his own staff.

V. 26. And Judah acknowledged] His repentance, else he might have pleaded
against those tokens many ways, by many excuses, to have freed himself.

more righteous then I] Aggravates his own fault. In many things both faulty,
and in some things each of them more faulty then the other. He was the cause or
occasion of her sin.

and he knew her again no more] It had been incest. His repentance. To sin no
more is true repentance, Job 34. 31, 32. Though Judah were young now, yet we
read not of any more of his children after, so that it seems he married not
again, or had no children by his second wife, chapter 46. 12. Numb. 26. 19, 20, 21,
22. 1 Chronicles. 2. 3, 4. Shelah was after married, and likely to Tamar, Numbers
26. 20.

V. ^8. Put out his hand] Dangerous labor for her sin, chapter 25. 26.

a scarlet thread] Discerning there were twins, as a skilful midwife might do,
and intending to mark the firstborn.

V. 29. This breach be upon thee] Thou have made it, and thou shall bear the
name of it. As these twins, so Jacob and Esau may be said to strive for the
birthright in the womb.

Pharez] Ruth 4. 12. Mat. 1. 3.

V. 30. Zarah] Signifies risen or sprung up, as the Sun is said to rise. In the
birth of these two brethren, the state of the two Churches of Jews and
Gentiles may be considered, as in a figure, the Jew drawing back his hand by
unbelief, Romans 10. 3. and after the fullness of the Gentiles is broken forth
and come in, then he coming forth last of all, Romans 11. 11, 12, 24, 25, 26.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Verse. 1. TO Egypt] For their preservation, chap. 45. 5, 7.

V. 2. And the Lord was with Joseph] V. 3, 21. Acts 7. 9, 10 Psalm. 91. 15.

in the house of his Master] Gods blessing went along with him. His Master
employed him at home in the house, and not in more servile businesses abroad.
No doubt he soon got skill in the Egyptian language, to enable him to it.

V. 3. His Master saw] By the effects. Thus the Heathen acknowledge a divine
Providence, chapter 30. 27.

V. 4. Found grace in his sight] V. 21. though none in his brethren, Nehem. 2.
4, 5.

Overseer] Steward, Prove. 27. 18. 14. 35. 17. 2.

all that he had] So fully trusted him, his worth and fidelity.

V. 5. For Joseph's sake] The benefit of a religious servant, Psalm. 1. 3.

V. 6. Save the bread which he did eate] A proverbial speech, noting his ease
and security, and his trust reposed in ^oseph, v. 23. chapter 43. 32. the Egyptians
might not eat bread with the Hebrews, as being shepherds.

a goodly person] Here beauty and grace do meet. So in David, 1 Samuel 16. 12.

V. 7. Cast her eyes] Beauty a dangerous object to a wanton eye, eyes full of
adultery, 2 Pet. 2. 14. lustful looks condemned, Mat. 5. 28. Job makes a
Covenant with his eyes, Job 31. 1.

lie with me] Impudency, though happily she spoke not so broad at first, Prove. 7.
13, 18. 6. 26.

V. 9. How then can I] The godly cannot consent to sin, 1 John 3. 9. the wicked
cannot cease from sin, 2 Pet. 2. 14.

great wickednesse] Adultery a great wickedness. The suspicion of it raises
jealousy and rage, Prove 6. 34, 35. It is a kind of sacrilege in a godly
person, 1 Cor. 6. 19.

against God] It had been great ungratefulnes to his kind Master. Yet the
fear of God was the chiefest reason to withhold him.

V. 10. Day by day] Importunity joined with impudency.

he hearkened not] Perseverance in the resistance of sin.

or to he with her] Appearances and occasions of sin are to be shunned, 1 These.
5. 22. 1 Timothy 5. 14. Prove. 1. 15. 5. 8.

V. 12. Caught him by the garment] So un^uly a thing is lawless lust: makes
such a woman impudently offer to commit a rape upon a man.

he left his garment] Stays not to parley with her. got him out] v. 15 Eccl 7.
^6.

V. 14. The men of her house] V. 11. Those few that were about the house.

See] Showing the garment.

an Hebrew] She so names him in contempt, chap. 43. 32.

to mock us] To cause us to be mocked; by his dishonest attempt to cause us to
be disgraced. Or she will seem to speak modestly in a pretended attempt of
ravishment. And thus raging lust turns to raging hatred, yea, though
satisfied, as in Amnon, 2 Samuel 13. 15.

to lie with me] A loud lie. Thus sin is seconded with sin, and the guilty
charge the innocent. Thus the blasphemous Jews charge Christ with blasphemy.
Papists call us Heretics, 1 Kings 18. 17.

V. 16. Her Lord] The sovereignty of husbands, and subjection of wives.

V. 17. Which thou have brought] She lays the fault upon him, that to quit
himself to her, he may lay more rigor upon Joseph.

V. 20. Into prison] Dungeon, chapter 40. 15. 41. 14. Psalm. 105. 18, 19. without
examining the matter, or hearing Joseph, or at least not believing him, and his
true pleading for himself, and not willing to have the blame and shame lie upon
his wife, and so upon him.

V. 21. And gave him favour] After a time, Psalm. 105. 18, 19.

of the Keeper of the prison] Chief Jailer, perhaps under Potiphar, chapter 40. 4.
Captain of the Guard. Likely Joseph might declare the matter, and clear his
innocence to him, which he might not be suffered to do to his Master. And
Potiphar by his officers relation, might begin to be better persuaded of
Joseph, and to show him favor.

V. 22. He was the doer of it] Not as a drudge to do every ones work, but as a
Ruler, that all things there were done by him, or his direction. Thus, though
many Archers had shot at Joseph, yet his bow abode in strength, and the arms
of his hands were made firm, by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob, chapter 49.
23, 24.

CHAP. XL.
Verse 1. BUtler] V. 13. Nehem. 1. 11.

V. 2. Officers] Hebr. Eunuchs. See, Annot. on chapter 37. 36.

V. 3. Put them in ward] The fickle state of Favorites and Courtiers.

in the house of the Captain of the guard] Likely the same Potiphar, chapter 37.
36. 39. 1, 20.

into the prison] Tower or round prison, dungeon, v. 15. chapter 39. 20. 41. 14.

V 4. Charged Joseph with them] Potiphar, if he be this Captain now thinks
better of Joseph, and intrusts him, likely upon that relation of his chief
officer, chap. 39. 21, 22, 23.

V. 5. And they dreamed] See Annotations on chap. 20. 3.

according to the interpretation] No vain dreams, as the interpretation showed,
v. 12, 18, 21, 22. 41. 11, 12.

V. 6. Sad] So dreams sent of God use much to affect men, chapter 41. 4. Dan. v. 1,
3. Mat. 27. 19.

V. 8. We have dreamed a dream] Each his own dream, not both one.

no Interpreter] Being prisoners we cannot go to the Soothsayers, chapter 41. 8.
Dan. 4. 7.

be^ong to God*] Not to your wizards, chapter 41. 16. Dan. 2. 27, 28, 18, 19, 23,
47.

tell me] He finds by the instinct of Gods Spirit that he should be able to
interpret their dreams, through an extraordinary gift given him. Though Joseph
was bound, yet Gods Word and gift to him was not bound, 2 Timothy 2. 9. Before he
was a dreamer, chapter 37. 5, 9, 19. Now an Interpreter.

V. 12. They are] They signify, chapter 41. 26. So, Mat. 26. 26, 28.

V. 13. Within three dayes] V. 20. The three branches might as well have
signified three weeks, months or years, but for Gods revelation to Joseph.

lift up thine head] Sum up and reckon thee, as, Exodus 30. 12. Numb. 1. 2.
26. 2. and promote thee to thy former place of office and honor, as, Jer. 52.
31. This shall Pharaah do when he shall take survey of his family and officers.

V. 14. Think on me] Therefore Joseph knew not the time, means and manner of
his own deliverance. God in his wisdom did not reveal that unto him. So, 1
Kings 13. the man of God knew not his own mishap, by means of the old false
prophet, Gen 46. 27.

make mention of me] Joseph is careful to use the means for his delivery.

V. 15. Stolen away] To conceal his brethrens fault, And yet stolen from his
father and sold, Ex. 21. 16.

Land of the Hebrewes] Canaan, wherein the posterity of Abraham the Hebrew
dwelt, chapter 14. 13. And to whom by Gods Promises it belonged, called the Holy
Land, Zech. 2. 12. Thus Joseph shows his faith.

have I done nothing] Innocence protects not against mischief, yet may be
pleaded, as here, John 10. 32. Acts 24. 12, 13, 20. 25. 10, 11. Job 31. Psalm.
7. 3 26. 1. Dan. 6. 22.

V. 16. White baskets] Of which holes, that is made of white twigs, with holes
as network.

uppermost] Of the three baskets, nothing mentioned in the two lower baskets.

V. 19. Lift up thine head] Reckon thee; as, ver. 13, 20.

from off thee] Likely cut off thy head, and after hang thy body on a tree.

and the birds shall eate] The Jews were to bury him the same day, Deuteronomy. 21.
22, 23. The Egyptians and many Gentiles suffered them to hang many days.
Joseph deals truly and plainly with the Baker. So should Physicians do, and
such as attend the sick.

V. 20. Birth-day] So Herod kept his with a feast, Mar. 6. 21. Lawful in it
self so it be kept without vanity, excess, superstition and profaneness. And
so for Ecclesiastical Festivities, if there be no error committed in the
manner and end of their celebrations.

V. 22. Hanged] On his birthday, having occasion thereby to take notice of his
chief officers.

V. 23. But forgot him] Forgot his misery, and unthankful for his
interpretation, Eccl. 9. 15, 16. Amos 6. 6. Thus Joseph tried still two years
longer, chapter 41. 1. until the time his Word came, Psalm. 105. 19.

CHAP. XLI.
Verse 1. TWo full yeares] After that, chapter 40. 19. There is no certainty how
long Joseph was in prison, in what year first put in. He waited patiently upon
God in long afflictions for his deliverance.

by the river] Nilus, or some river drawn from it, Deuteronomy. 11. 10, 11. This
waters Egypt, and makes it fruitful without rain, Zech. 14. 18.

V. 2. Out of the river] Out of Nilus comes plenty and dearth, according to the
heights of the rising of it. Plin. not. hist. l. 5. c. 9.

Kine] Kine and corn are the two chief sustenances of man.

V. 5. Seven cares of corn upon one stalk] Sign of great plenty.

V. 6. Blasted with the East-winde] Strong and drying to blast the fruits,
Ezech. 17. 10. 19. 12.

V. 7. A dream] That stuck by him: dreams the occasion of his fall; and
dreams the occasion of his rising.

V. 8. His spirit was troubled,] Chapter 40. 6. Dan. 2. 1, 3. Gods Power to scare
men, even Kings, with dreams, Job 7. 17.

Magicians] Exodus 7. 11. Dan. 2. 2. 5. 7. strong illusions of Satan, that
wrought men to such deceits, and strong conceits of the power of Magicians,
Dan. 2. 2, 4, 5. If Atheists confess a devil and devilish divinations, there
must needs be a God and divine revelations.

wise men] Mat. 23. 34. Philosophers among the Greeks, Acts 17. 18.

none that could interpret] So, Dan, 2. 10. 5. 8. Thus God makes the wisdom
of their wise men perish, Esaias 29. 14. 44. 25. 19. 11, 12, 13.

V. 9. I do remember my faults this day] Courtier-like complements to prevent
suspicion in the King, lest he should think he grudged as unjustly punished in
his imprisonment. This was rather to please Pharaoh, then to pleasure Joseph.
Gods Providence in it, that he mentions not Joseph, till the Magicians had been
tried.

V. 13. Me he restored] He, that is, the regal Majesty restored me.

V. 14. Brought him hastily] Psalm. 105. 20. Dan. 2. 25. The wicked seek to the
Prophets and People of God in their necessity.

dungeon] There happily he was then, as overseeing the rest in that place.

shaved himself] Polled himself in a seemly sort. He had let his hair grow, it
seems, in sign of sorrow, as, 2 Samuel 19. 24. Mephibosheth did. Now he trims
himself; being to go before the King. To shave all hair away were unseemly,
Jer. 41. 5. 2 Samuel 10. 4, 5. The middle way is commanded the Priests, Ezech.
44. 20.

raiment] His prison-weeds, Esther 4. 2.

V. 16. Not in me] Dan. 2. 28.

an answer of peace] So Joseph wished, hoped, and happily foresaw. It is an
apprecation of such an answer, as might quiet his troubled mind concerning his
dream.

V. 21. Still ill-favoured] Such are wicked men, Esaias 9. 20. The godly
otherwise, Psalm. 37. 19. neither earing nor harvest, chapter 45. 6.

V. 26. Are] Signify, Joseph before a Dreamer, now an Interpreter.

V. 32. Doubled] Here God teaches the reason, why things are sundry times
repeated in the Scriptures.

V. 33. Let Pharaoh look out] Means must be used. Joseph gives this counsel
not rashly, but by the guidance of Gods Spirit, by this means and occasion to
fulfill that, ch 37. 7, 9.

V. 34. Officers] Overseers, Bishops, so the Bishops of the Army, Numb. 31. 14.
2 Kings 11. 16. Bishops of the works, 2 Chronicles. 34. 12, 17. So among the Priests
and Levites, Numb. 4. 16. Nehem. 11. 9, 14. So, 1 Timothy 3. 1, 2.

the fifth part] Likely other great men would be buyers and storers, by Joseph's
example. Thus counsels he to provide against the time of want, as in the
example of the Pismire, Prove. 6. 6, 7, 8. Luke 16 9. This fifth part was for
the King, chapter 47. 14. Taken up most likely by way of tribute partly, and partly
by purchase; and upon his charge put into his granaries. The other four parts
were abundantly sufficient in those years of plenty.

V. 37. Was good] Acts 7. 10. Prove 20. 12. Psalm. 105. 22.

V. 38 The Spirit of God is] Dan. 4. 6. 5. 11. This Pharaoh grounds upon his
Prophetical interpretation. He speaks as an Heathen, naming gods plurally. So,
chap. 31. 53.

V. 40. Over my house] Psalm. 105. 21 So, Dan. 2. 46, 47. 5. 29. So, 1 Kings 8.
3. 2 Kings 18. 18. Luke 12. 42. Men fitly and fully qualified and gifted should
be made Officers, Numb. 11. 17. Acts 6. 3.

according unto thy word shall all my people be ruled] Hebr. is, At thy mouth
shall all my people kiss. That is, at thy Commandment. (So, Job 39. 30. Numb.
9. 20. Luke 19. 22. Genesis 24 57.) they shall kiss or apply the hand to the
mouth. (as, Job 31. 27.) in sign of honor and obedience, as, Psalm. 2. 12. so
Samuel kissed Saul, 1 Samuel 10. 1. 1 Kings 10. 18. Hos. 13. 2. Prove. 24. 26.
Thus Joseph was honored and ou^horized, Psalm. 105. 22. Acts 7. 10. they kissed
the commands that came from his lips, which imports a submission, and that
rather of affection and delight then of compulsion and fear.

V. 41. See I have set thee] See, respecting the ornaments and ceremonious
signals, whereby this honor was conferred unto him. Thus God brings low, and
lifts up. etc 1 Samuel 2. 7, 8. Psalm. 113. 7, 8.

V. 42. Took off his ring] An Ensign of honor and authority, Esther 3. 10.
and 8 2. Luke 15. 22. Hereby to publish under the Kings seal such Orders and
Commands as Joseph would.

of fine linnen] Egypt was famous for fine linen, Prove. 7. 16. Ezech. 27. 7.
it signifies also bysse or silk, Ex. 25. 4. Apoc. 19. 8, 14. The wear of great
personages, Prove. 31. 22. Ezech. 16. 10. Luke 16. 19.

a gold chaine] Prove. 1. 9. Ezech. 16. 11. Thus, Dan. 5. 7, 16, 29.

V. 43. Second chariot] 2 Chronicles. 35. 24. As Mordecai riding on the Kings horse,
Esther 6. 8. Thus Joseph the second man in the Kingdom, Daniel made the third,
Dan, 5. 29.

Bow the knee] Abrech. kneel down, as to the father of the King, chapter 45. 8.

V. 44. I am Pharaoh] I am King, and will be; and assure as I am Pharaoh, so
sure without thee, thy advice, and authority, not the least thing shall be done
in matter of Government; no man shall do anything, or go any whither.

V. 45. Zaphnath-Paaneah] A Revealer of secrets, Dan. 1. 7. Genesis 17. 5.

of Poti-pherah Priest of Ou] To distinguish him from that Potiphar, chapter 37.
36. 39. 1. who dwelt in Memphis the royal City.

Priest] Or Prince, Exodus 2. 16. 18. 1. Both offices concurred in one person,
as was the manner of those times and places. See Annotat. on chap. 14. 18. This
name given to the sons of David, 2 Samuel 8. 18. and expounded, 1 Chronicles, 18. 17.

of Ou] Called also Aven, Ezech. 30 17. in Greek Heliopolis, the City of the
Sun, perhaps now Damiata. Joseph's marriage here cannot be an example or rule to
us, except where all reasons, and circumstances, and warrants are alike, by
reason of the prohibitions and perils set down in Scripture. The Israelites
forbidden to marry with the Canaanites, Exodus ^4. 16. Deuteronomy. 7. 3, 4. 1 Rings
11. 1. Nehem. 13. 26. Forbidden to Christians, 2 Cor. 6. 14, etc. But for
Joseph there was no other in the land, and he might not desert his charge and
dignity, whereto God had called him for the preservation of his Church, to go
seek a wife elsewhere: neither know we what instinct or dispensation he might
have from God. As the like might be in Esthers marrying with Ahashuerus.

V. 46. Thirty years old] At this age Jesus Christ entered into his public
Ministry; so John Baptist; so the Levites, Numb 4. 3. And David began his
reign, but not Ezekiel his Prophecy. This notation of Joseph's age, here gives
much light to many passages in this history of Jacob and his sons; there are
thirteen years since he was sold ch 37. 2.

V 51. And all my fathers house] My injuries and molestations there; not his
filial affection, whereby he might happily privily enquire in the thirteen years
before, and afterward also of his fathers welfare, ere his brethren came down,
and yet wait for the most fit opportunity of fulfilling the dream.

V. 54. In all lands] Round about, as Canaan, Arabia, etc. So, Luke 2. 1.

V. 55. Cried to Pharaoh] As the woman, 2 Kings 6 26. Joseph would do but as
Pharaoh directed.

V. 56. Sold] Prove. 11 26.

V. 57. And all countreys] Neighboring. to Joseph] Chapter 45. 5. 50. 20. Psalm
105. 16, 17.

CHAP. XLII.
Verse 1. SAw] Heard, v. 2. so the people saw the voices, Exodus 20. 18. Jacob
was as much assured of it as if he had seen it. And one eyewitness is of more
credit then many eare-witnesses. And likely he saw it too by many Canaanites
that bought and brought co^ne out of Egypt, Acts 7. 12.

corac] The word for corn signifies also breaking.

why] So negligent, or as men amazed helpless, Acts 7. 11. gaze, as men
destitute of counsel. Famine is a terrible thing, 2 Kings 6. 25. Deuteronomy. 28. 57.
Lam. 4. 10. Esaias 9. 20. A famine in Canaan in the days of Abram, chapter 12. 10.
of Isaac, chapter 26. 1. and now in Jacobs time, and, Acts 11. 28. Gods servants
subject to common calamities, yet God provides for them, Psalm. 37. 19.

V. 2. Get you down] Egypt lay lower then Canaan, chapter 45. 13, 9.

V. 4. But Benjamin] ^h. 37. 3. 35. 18. 42. 38.

V. 6. Governour] Ps. 105. 22. Of the Hebrew word Shallet and Shil^on, is made
in Arabic Sultan, a title whereby the chief Governors of Egypt and Babylon
are still called.

and he it was that sold] Likely his Officers to the Natives. But himself to
Foreigners, that by sifting them he might inform himself of any danger to the
land, to prevent it of any means of good to the land, to advance it.

bowed down] So fulfilling his Prophetic dream, chapter 37. 7, 8, 9. So, chapter 43.
26, 28. 44. 14. 50. 18.

V. 7. He knew them, but] For many good reasons, he yet dissembles that he knew
them, and yet discovers not himself unto them, to prevent sundry
inconveniences, and to further good intents and purposes toward them.

spoke roughly] They deserved no better of him. Though Joseph did it in a good
intent, to a good purpose.

V. 9. Remembered the dreams So he did before. But now more usefully, he saw the
time for the fulfilling of them.

spies, to see the nakednesse] Exodus 32. 25. Not by way of lying he speaks
thus, but by way of questioning and examining, to bolt out other matters to
other good purposes; so* v. 12. as a severe Inquisiter.

V. 11. All one man's sons] And therefore not likely to be spies. The spies were
sent one of a tribe, Numb. 13. 2. And they dispersed themselves in all
likelihood and reason.

V. 13. One is not] Is dead, chapter 44. 20. 37. 30. Not in this world, chapter 5. 24.
Heb 11. 5.

V. 14. This is it that I spake] This discovers it; pretending another brother,
or why should he alone be left behind? This not likely; and being false in
this, ye are but spies sure.

V. 15. By the life of Pharaoh] Pharaoh lives: a kind of oath or swearing as
the like phrase imports, Jer. 5. 2: But more properly a kind of vehement
Asseveration, as, Ezech 33. 11. 1. Sam, 1. 26. 17. 55. 20. 3. 25. 26. and 2 Samuel* 15. 21. 2 Kings 2. 2, 4. Or it may be a wish, Let, or, so let Pharaoh
live, as, etc. No sufficient ground to charge upon Joseph, a sinful oath by the
life of Pharaoh, yea, a grievous sin, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. compared with Mat. 4. 10.
Jer. 5. 7.

Ye] Ye all, v. 16.

ye shall not] If ye go. The words are suspensive, implying a curse; so, chapter
14. 23.

V. 17. Into ward] God calls them by tribulation to repentance for their sin,
Heb 12. 10.

V. 18. I fear God] Chap. 20. 11. Nehem. 5. 15. Prove. 16. 6.

V. 20. Your youngest brother unto me] Cares most for him, and hopes his father
will conceive no hurt toward him, by his bountiful dealing with them.

V. 21. And they said one to another] In the absence, or out of the hearing of
the Interpreter.

guilty] Affliction as a rack forces confession, and a guilty conscience,
though likely sleeping before, yet now upon twenty years after, galleth afresh,
Hos. 5. 15. Job 36. 8, 9, 10.

therefore is this distresse] Diverse ways Joseph dealt now with them, as they
had done with him, Judge. 1. 7, Mat. 7. 2. Jam. 2. 13.

V. 24. And wept] Chapter 43, 30, moved with their self-accusations, and his own
natural affection, which was to o strong to be kept in by artificial disguises,
but that in secret it must have vent.

Simeon, and bound him] That eldest of them that were most against him. Reuben
most, and Judah next, were for him. And Simeon was chief in that bloody
massacre of the Sichemites.

before their eyes] Though happily when they were gone, he might give him some
more liberty, chapter 43. 23.

V. 25. Every man's money] Lest his father should be in want.

Thus did he unto them] Josoph did so, or his steward at his command. Thus
Joseph rewards evil with good, Romans 12. 17, 19. Mat. 5. 44.

V. 27. And as one of them] V. 35. What Judah says, chapter 43. 21. as if they had
all opened their sacks, and found their moneys in the Inn, ^is but a summing
and cutting off particulars for brevity sake, to Joseph's steward, as not a
thing material to their present purpose, with him, and they speaking in haste.

V. 28. Failed them] Suspecting some plot laid for their ruin, or at least
some danger to Simeon by it, Lev. 26. 36.

God has done] They rightly acknowledge Gods hand and his Providence in it.

V. 35. Were afraid] Lest also they should be accused of theft, chap. 44. 5.
Guilty consciences timorous, Lev. 26. 36.

V. 36. Against me] Heavy to me, though ye make light of them.

V. 37. My two sonnes] That is, slay two of my sons. For he had four, chapter
46. 9. or my two sons here present, or most dear to me. A passionate speech,
yet such as might make Jacob conceive he had some reason for his so confident
undertaking for Benjamins return.

V. 38. For his brother is dead] Only brother by the mother, chapter 44. 20, 27, 28.

to the grave] See Annot. on chapter 37. 35. Here Jacob bewrayes too much passion,
and too little faith and patience.

CHAP. XLIII.
Verse 1. SOre] The longer, the sorer.

V. 2. Eaten up] Near-hand.

a little food] For present need, not knowing there were five years of famine
yet to come, and he had a great family.

V. 3. Solemnly protest] Chapter 42. 15, 20.

not see my face] With favor and safety.

V. 4. Thee food] At thy command, for thee and us all, thy family.

V. 5. We will not go] Because it were vain and dangerous, chapter 44. 26.

V. 7. Asked us strictly] Many things passed between Joseph and his brethren,
which are not so expressly related in the story, chapter 44. 22, 19. They could
not upon Joseph's questions honestly avoid the telliug of their brother Benjamin.

V. 8. And Judah said] He now fittest to move, and this the fittest season.

the lad] Benjamin was now about twenty seven years, being twelve or thirteen
years younger then Joseph, and borne after Dinahs ravishing, and in the
departing from Bethel. See Annot. on chapter 35. 18. And now Benjamin had nine or
ten sons, chapter 46. 21. See Annot. on chapter 22. 5. Lad, comparatively, being the
youngest.

V. 11. Must be so] No wisdom to strive against necessity. Better to adventure
one to uncertain danger, then to cast the whole family upon certain famine.

a Present] Prove. 18. 16. 21. 14. 17. 8. So Jacob had tried, chapter 32. 20. He
uses prudent means as subservient to Gods Providence.

nuts] Of Terebinth, or the Turpentine-tree.

V. 12. Double money] Because the price of corn increased by the continuance
of the famine.

and the money] This besides. Jacobs just dealing.

V. 14. God Almighty] Our chief trust must be in him, Prove. 21. 1.

If I be boreaved] Esther 4. 16. Contentation in Gods Will, referring all to
him with patience.

V. 18. S^ek occasion] Guilty persons are suspicious.

V. 19. At the door of the house] Before they went in.

V. 21. Every man's money] See Annot. on chapter 42. 27, 35. For haste they join
together what was done in the Inn, and what was discovered at home.

V. 23. Your God] It seems Joseph taught his steward and family to fear God.

V. 24. Washed their feet] Chapter 18. 4. 24. 32.

V. 26. They brought him the Present] Each a part of it, as they had divided it
amongst themselves.

bowed] Chapter 37. 9.

V. 28. Thy servant our father] Ch 37. 9.

V. 30. Did yerne] 1 Kings 3. 26.

V. 32. By himself] As became the Viceroy. Here were three Tables.

Abomination unto the Egyptians] For the Hebrews were known to be Keepers of
sheep, and so to kill, eat and sacrifice such cattle as the Egyptians
worshipped, chapter 46. 34 Exodus 8. 26. The Egyptians had flocks of sheep, chapter 47.
6. Oxen, Exodus 9. 3, 19. But not to kill the sheep or kine, or to eat the head
of any beast. But for delight and profit by their milk and wool, and for
commerce. And happily those that kept them were strangers rather then Egyptians.

V. 33. Youngest] Hebt. Least in age.

marvelled] Seeing themselves so seasted, and that Joseph appointed them their
places, according to each man's age.

V. 34. Messes] The custom of those times, to have the meat set before the
Lord, and he to distribute to the Guests, 1 Samuel 1. 4, 5. 9, 23, 24. 2 Samuel 6.
19.

five times] To show his affection to him, and to make trial whether his
brethren would envy him for it. 1 Samuel 1. 4, 5.

drank, and were merry] yet with sobriety, Hag. 1. 6. John 2. 10. Cant. 5 1.

CHAP. XLIV.
Verse 2. PUt my Cup] To try their affection to his father and to Benjamin: and
for the more full verification of the dreams. Joseph's case, and place, and
person may carry out these practices, which otherwise are not so warrantable, 2
Cor. 1. 12. 11. 3.

V. 5. Is not this it] Speaking according to the opinion the Egyptians had of
him, who by reason of his prophetical skill in interpreting dreams, thought he
used divination as their Magicians did.

whereby] Or in which, or by which, or of which cup. Their fault so made the
greater, a kind of sacrilege in stealing such a Cup.

he divineth] Searching searches, makes trial by experience, as, chapter 30. 27.
searches thoroughly, 1 Kings 20. 33. or searches by divination, and so
sinfully using the cup, (as some do a basin and other things) in such an
unlawful Art. Thus the steward by Joseph's appointment may speak as an Egyptian,
as they conceived of Joseph, and as their Magicians used to do. Not yet that
Joseph was guilty of such a crime.

V. 7. My Lord] Thus they call Joseph's steward.

God forbid] Far be it, chapter 18. 25.

V. 8. We brought againe] Therefore would no^ steal.

V. 9. Let him die] So, chapter 31. v. 32. Innocence is confident, yet this is too
rash and rigorous. They might have though of their money in their sacks mouth
before.

V. 10. My servant] The steward speaks in his Lord Joseph's name.

V. 12. And be searched] He knew well how not to meddle with that end of the
sacks, where he had put their money.

V. 13. Rent their clothes] See Annot. on chapter 37. 39, 34*

V. 14. He was yet there] Expecting their return.

V. 15. What deed] As, chapter 3. 13. 4 10.

can certainly divine] See Annot. on v 5

V. 16. What shall we say] Their consciences clear, and yet their conviction
seems as clear. They knew not what Apology to make.

God has found out] So, chapter 42. 28. If we see not evident cause of our
affliction, let us look to the secret counsel of God, who punishes us justly
for our sins. A good use of afflictions and crosses, Esaias 27. 9. Genesis 42, 21,
22. Judah thought this his best argument and way, having no legal excuse or
defense to make for the clearing of themselves: though he was sure enough of
Benjamins innocence, and could not upon this occasion, but remember the putting
of their money in their sacks, yet he durst not accuse any of Joseph's family,
nor stand out against him, but yields and submits, as an hopeful way to procure
favor with a man of a generous spirit.

iniquity] Our other sins, though free of this.

both we] V. 9.

and he also] Not die, a^, v. 9. but be servant, as, v. 10. is found] He
forbears to say that he stole it.

V. 17. He shall be my servants] Joseph confirms his stewards dealing, v. 10.
In Moses Law, for theft restitution should be made, in some cases double, in
some fourefold; if the party not able thereto, then to be sold, or become a
slave to him from whom he had stolen, Exodus 22. 31. Here Joseph's power and
their own yielding binds them.

V. 18. Then Judah came near] Judah before, v. 16. And now Judah more
addresseth himself to plead, because he had undertaken for Benjamin, chapter 43. 8.
9.

in my Lords eares] But an Interpreter yet still for ought we read.

as Pharaoh] And so thine anger would be dreadful and deadly, Prove. 19. 12.

have ye a father] See Annot. on chapter 43. 7.

V. 20. A little one] Ex enuating his age by an officious lie, to excuse his
taking so long a journey. See Annot. on chapter 43. 8.

V. 26. We cannot go down] Chapter 43. 5. We will not go down.

V. 27. My wife bare me] Rachel his wife, by way of eminency, first in his
choice, and dearest in his love. Leah but by fraud.

V. 28. Torn in pieces] Thus Joseph might perceive how they colored to their
father their dealing with him.

V. 30. Bound up in the Lads life] 1 Samuel 18. 1. If he die, or be thought so,
the father cannot live.

V. 33. In stead of the Lad] A filial affection to his old father. And yet love
uses more to descend then ascend.

V. 34. How shall I go] He would rather remain here a servant or prisoner.

CHAP. XLV.
Verse 1. REfrain himself before] Upon this supplication of Judah, though
hitherto he had refrained, chapter 43. 31.

to go out] He would not have his brethrens fault divulged, nor his own
passion, being a man of his place, so openly discovered, as to weep aloud
before others.

V. 2. Wept aloud] No thought of revenge for their cruel usage of him.

heard it] V. 16.

V. 3. Could not answer him] Through astonishment at the wonder; and the prick
of their guilty conscience.

V. 4. Come near] They had kept, no doubt at a reverend distance from him so
great a Lord.

ye sold] Tells this, not to upbraid them, but to assure them it is he.

V. 5. not grieved] Chapter 31. 35.

nor angry with your selves] He comforts them, 2 Cor, ^. 7. Look up to Gods
Providence, who turns your sin to good.

for God did send] V. 8. Ps. 105. 16, 17.

V. 6. Neither earing nor harvest] None, till Joseph supplied them with corn
for it the last year, chapter 47. 23. or as good as none; few had corn to sow,
few would attempt to sow, as being to expect little or no increase by Joseph's
prediction.

V. 8. But God] Chapter 50. 20. Josph cleares not his bre^thren, but he cheeres
them up in contemplation of Gods merciful Providence, who turns their sin to
much good. God can and does bring good out of evil, out Judas sin and others in
the death of Christ the salvation of mankind, Acts 4. 27, 28.

a father to Pharaoh] Judges 17. 10, 11. Genesis 41. 40, 44. As a son follows the
direction of a father, so did Pharaoh Joseph's.

V. 10. Goshen] A Province between Nilus and the red sea, very fruitful, chapter
46. 28, 29. 47. 1. 6, 27. Another Goshen in Canaan, Josh. 11. 16. 10. 41. 15.
51. This he says, presuming of Pharaohs assent, chapter 47. 4, 6.

near unto me] On the City whence he married, and where he most resided was
near to Goshen.

V. 12. My mouth] And not an Interpreters, as, chap. 42. 23.

V. 15. He kissed] See Annot. on chapter 20. 13.

talked with him] Having overcome their astonishment and fear, talked of any
thing he or they desired to know.

V. 16. And his servants] The Courtiers envied not, but honored Joseph.

V. 19. Thou art commanded] Thou need no more authority or instructions from
me.

V. 20. Regard not your stuffe] That is not portable. Here you shall be
supplied.

V. 22. Changes of raiment] Such as were used to be given for honor or reward,
2 Kings 5. 22. Zech. 3. 4. Judge. 14. 12. Apoc. 6. 11. 7. 9, 14.

Three hundred] Shekels* See Annotat. on chapter 20. 16. and on chapter 23. 16.

V. 24. Fall not out by the way] About the selling of me. Reubens former words,
chapter 42. 22. occasioned happily this charge.

V. 26. Heart fainted] Between hope and doubt, between joy and fear. Unbelief
and doubting weakeneth the heart, Romans 4 19, 20. Mat. 14. 31.

Believed them not] So he fell into that fainting, swooning fit, Luke 24. 41.
They believed not for joy, Jacob might the less believe them, because of their
former lie they had told him of Joseph.

V. 27. Revived] Rose out of that swoone, as it were. His failing of spirit did
not altogether take away the use of his sight and senses, but that he saw the
wagons.

V. 28. It is enough] Here is proof enough. And it is enough to me that he is
alive, and enough for me, if I may be so happy as to see him once before die.
chap. 46. 30.

CHAP. XLVI.
Verse 1. TO Beer sheba] This was in the way from Hebron to Egypt, the most
Southern part of Canaan. Here Abraham and Isaac had much been. See Annot. on
chapter 21. 31.

sacrifices] Of thanks, for the tidings of Joseph. and to consult with God
about his going into Egypt, and thereby to worship God.

V. 2. In the visions of the night] See Annot. on chapter 15. 1. what this vision
was, and in what manner is not set down.

Jacob, Jacob] To rouse him up to attention, and for more certainty, as, chapter
22. 11. 1 Samuel 3. 10. Genesis 41. 32. See Annot. on chapter 32. 28. Here Jacob twice
for Israel once. And so v. 5. The name Jacob forbidden but comparatively.

V. 3. Fear not] It seems he feared it, knowing his father in a famine was
forbid it, chapter 26. 1, 2, 3. And knowing the Oracle, that his seed was to be
afflicted in Egypt, chapter 15. 13, 14. And, now he and his father and grandfather
had been Pilgrims, two hundred and twenty years in Canaan, from the first
Promise of Canaan, and he saw now less hope to have it, by his leaving the
land with seventy souls, which might seem a kind of forsaking of it; yet by
faith as he sojourned in the land, Heb. 11. 9. so now he goes to sojourne in
Egypt upon this warrant.

there] Egypt. This not promised before. This wondrously fulfilled, in that of
seventy souls going down, in the space of two hundred and ten years, there came
up six hundred thousand men, Exodus 12. 37. Deuteronomy. 10. 22.

a great nation] This promised. chapter 28, 14. 35. 11. 15, 13

V. 4. Thee up again] Thee dead, chapter 50. 5, 13. Thy posterity after, Ex. 12.
37. Josh. 3. A like Promise, chapter 28. 15. his hands upon thine eyes] Closing
them on thy deathbed. An ancient and honorable custom.

V. 6. And came into Egypt] This journey is often mentioned, Josh. 24. 4. and
Esaias 52. 4. Acts 7. 15. Numb. 20. 25. Deuteronomy. 10. 22. Thus that was fulfilled,
chap. 15. 13.

V. 7. His daughters, and his sons daughters] As many as he had. A general
kind of speaking, though he had but one daughter Dinah, and one granddaughter
Sarah, v. 15, 17. The like speech, v. 23. and chapter 21. 7. Numb. 26. 8. 1 Chronicles.
2. 8, 31. His servants, no doubt, went also.

V. 8. These are the names] To know hereby their wonderful increase, chapter 35.
23. see the order of the tribes on Aarons breast plate, Exodus 28. 10, 21.

V. 9. These four were heads of their fathers house, Exodus 6. 14. Numb. 26. 5,
6. 1 Chronicles. 5. 3. So of the rest that follow.

V. 10. Jemuel] Nemuel, Numb. 26. 12. 1 Chronicles. 4. 24.

Obad] Omitted, Nu^b. 26. 12. 1 Chronicles. 4. 24.

Jachin] ^areb, 1 Chronicles 4. 24.

Zohar] Zerah, Numb. 26. 13. 1 Chronicles. 4. 24.

of a Canaanitish woman] Likely Zerah, Numb. 26. 13. Genesis 28. 1.

V. 11. Kohath] Grandfather to Moses. Of his family came the Priests. They are
reckoned before the Gershonites, Numb. 4. 34.

V. 12. Hezron and Hamul] Too great violence to the text, to say these were
borne after in Egypt. See Annot. on chapter 29. 20. Compare the great Annotations
upon this verse, and upon chapter 38. 1.

V. 13. Thola] He had a rare blessing in multitude of children, 1 Chronicles. 7. 2.
A Judge of this name and tribes, Judge. 10. 1.

Job] Jashub, Numb. 26. 24. 1 Chronicles. 7. 1.

V. 15. In Padan Aram] With his Nephews or Grandchildren, bor^e after ^e went
out of Padan-Aram.

Thirty three] Reckoning himself in. It seems Leah was dead.

V. 16. Ezbon] Ozni, Numb. 26. 16.

V. 17. Jisvah] His name and family wanting, Numb. 26. 44.

V. 19. Jacobs wife] As if Rachel were the sole legitimate wife.

V. 20. Ephraim] Here the LXX. add a son and a Grandchilde of Manasse, and
two sons and a Grandchilde of Ephraim, taken out of 1 Chronicles. 7. 14, 20. By
reason of that speech, Genesis 50. 23. but this makes too bold with the Hebrew
text which wants it.

V. 21. The sons of Benjamin,] These ten might well be borne to him now. He
being now twenty seven years old at least, and twelve or thirteen year younger
then Joseph. See Annot. on chapter 35. 18.

Belah] The eldest son, 1 Chronicles. 8. 1.

Becher] Seems to be the fourth son, called Nohah, 1 Chronicles. 8. 2. Neither is
his name or family reckoned, Numb. 26. 38. but his children are named, 1 Chronicles.
7. 8.

Ashbel] The second son, Numb. 26. 38. 1 Chronicles. 8. 1. called also Jediael, 1 Chronicles. 7. 6.

Gera] By the LXX. made the son of Balah, and so the Grandchild of Benjamin
from a seeming ground of 1 Chronicles. 8. 3. But Benjamin was too young now to be a
Grandfather, Numb. 26. 38. There is no mention of Gera, neither was he
Benjamins third son, but Aharah.

Naaman] Another of his name, son of Belah, 1 Chronicles. 8. 4. Numb. 26. 40.

Ehi] Aharah, 1 Chronicles. 8. 1. third son, Numb. 26. 38.

Rosh] Likely Rapha the fifth son* father to Palti one of the spies, Numb.
13. 10. none of his family reckoned, Numb. 26.

Muppim] Called also Shuppim, 1 Chronicles. 7. 12.

Ard] Seems to be the son of Belah, and Grandchilde of Benjamin. And such a
one thing there was, Numb. 26. 40. But this Ard was brother to Belah.

V. 22. Fourteen] The Septuagint say elghteen, adding Joseph's Grandchildren, as
is noted on v. 28.

V. 23. Sonnes] One son, change of numbers is often in the Hebrew, v. 7. 1 Samuel
9. 21. Genesis 21. 7. Numb. 26. 42. 2 Chronicles. 24. 25. Thieves for one of them, Mat.
27. 44. Ass for an Asses, Zech. 9. 9. Mat. 21. 5. sat upon them, Mat. 21. 7.
for which in Mark 11. 7. it is, he sat upon him.

Sixty six] So the LXX. here. Jacob is not reckoned in here: nor Joseph and his
two sons which were now in Egypt.

V. 27. Seventy] So Exodus 1. 5. and Deuteronomy. 10. 22. counting in Jacob, Joseph and
his two sons, Acts 7. 14. the number is seventy five, which will arise if we
reckon in all that are here named, viz. the four wives of Jacob, and Er, and
Onan that were dead, and take out Jacob, as distinguished from them. The LXX.
have here seventy five, raising the number of five out of the p^ste^ity of
Ephraim and Manasseh, (see the notes on v. 20.) And St. Stephen in that, Act.
7. 14. seems to follow the LXX. as St. Luke does, likewise in the matter of
Cainan. See Annot on Genesis 11. v. 12. And see the late lea^ned and large
Annotat. upon this text, where this doubt is fully discussed and determined.

V. 28. To direct his face unto Goshen] That Joseph might meet him there, and
by his authority settle him there, without grievance to the native inhabitants.

V. 29. Presented himself] With lowly reverence to his father.

fell on his neck] While Joseph bowed before him.

and wept] With tears of joy, chapter 45. 1.

V. 30. Let me die] I am willing to die, as, Luke 2. 29, 30. chapter 45. 28. here
that desire is accomplished.

V. 31. Unto him, my brethren] Joseph in his greatness not ashamed of them,
yea, though shepherds were an abomination to the Egyptians, v. 34. chap. 47. 7.
Hebr. 2. 11.

V 32. Shepherds] Not ashamed of their base trade in the account of the
Egyptians.

V. 34. That ye may dwell in the land of Goshen] The nearest part to Canaan a
fruitful pasturage for cattle. That thus living by themselves they might be
least corrupted with the Egyptians idolatry and superstition, and less
offensive to them by their trade of shepherdy. Joseph though in that favor,
and of that power, chapter 45. 19. yet would not do it without the Kings express
consent.

Goshen] See Annot. on chapter 45. 10.

for every shepherd] See Annot. on chapter 43. 32.

CHAP. XLVII.
Verse 1. GOshen] See Annotat. on chap. 45. 10. 46. 28.

V. 2. Five men] Not set down which five, and therefore guesses here are but
idle and curious.

V. 3. Occupation] Chapter 46. 33. Jonah 1. 8. 2 These. 3. 10. Good Magistrates
inquisitive against idlen^sse, as the bane of a Commonwealth.

shepherds] Every one a shepherd, v 6. chapter 46. 34.

V. 4. To sojourne] For a time, duri^g the famine. This likely their intent at
first, and not to leave Canaan. Though afterward for Joseph's sake, and his
great accommodations afforded them, they continued their abode there. And
afterward the following Kings against the Laws of Hospitality, kept them as
bond slaves.

no pasture] It failed sooner in Canaan, then in Egypt and Goshen, Canaan being
an higher land.

let thy servants dwell] Pharaoh made a frank offer, chapter 45. 18, 20. Joseph
intended this place for them, chapter 45. 10. His brethren here requested it, and
no doubt by Joseph's direction, chapter 46 34. Thus by this means, Joseph in his
modesty, would gain Pharaohs ^onsent to this particular place.

V. 6. Of Activity] Men of fit and able parts are to be chosen to places and
offices.

Jacob blessed Pharaoh] Saluted him with prayer for his welfare; and thanks,
and praise for his bounty to Joseph, to him and his children, 2 Kings 4. 29.
Numb. 6. 23, 24. Mat. 26. 26. with Luke 22. 19. so again, when Jacob left
Pharaoh, v. 10.

V. 9. Of my pilgrimage] Pilgrims here, seeking after a better country, an
heavely, Heb. 11. 9, 13. 13. 14. 1 Chronicles. 29. 15. Psalm. 39. 12. 119. 19. Jacobs
flittings from Labai roi to Gerar, to the valley of Gerar, to Rehoboth, to
Beersheba to Bethel, to Haran in Mesopotamia, to Gilead, to Mahanaim, to
Succoth, to Shalem in Sechem, to Bethel, to Ephrath, to Mamre, to Beersheba, to
Egypt, to Pharaohs Court.

one hundred and thirty yeares] Therefore Jacob was ninety when Joseph was
borne, and seventy six when he came to Laban, v 28.

and have not attained] Abraham lived to one hundred seventy five. Isaac to one
hundred and eighty.

V. 11. Ramases] Exodus 12. 37. The City built after by the Israelites, Exodus 1.
11. After the Israelites multiplied and spread further, and had Egyptian
families among them, and about them, whence their doors were distinguished by
the blood, Exodus 12 7, 23. and, v. 35, 37. they soon borrowed jewels of them.

V. 12. According] As a child is nourished by the nurse, chapter 45. 11. 49. 24.
50. 21. lovingly, tenderly, carefully.

V. 13. Fainted] Yet now among strangers God satisfies his Church with fullness.

V. 14. All the money into Pharaohs house] His treasury. Joseph's fidelity.

V. 15. Money failed] Generally, for the most part, ^almost totally.

give us bread] Yet ask it in an humble manner, v. 17. 18, 19, 25.

V. 18. The second yeare] Namely after their cattle was sold, which seems to
have been the sixth year of the famine, the second of their extremity.

V. 19. And our land] Die, become desolate. As trees while they bear fruit are
said to live; when not, to die, so may the ground.

and give us seed] This is the seventh year of the famine,

V. 21. He removed them] So to gain the right of propriety and possession, from
the people to Pharaoh. The people mutiny not in all these extremities, nor
break open the granaries of Pharaoh: but by Joseph's prudence, and Gods
overruling Providence keep their loyalty and obedience. Thus Chams posterity
was brought into bondage, chapter 9. 25.

V. 22. Only the land of the Priests] Or Princes, Pharaohs chief Officers and
Lords, as, ch 41. 45. See Annos. on that place, chapter 14. 18. if it be here
understood of Priests, as the Chaldee and LXX. translate it. This shows
Pharaohs care, (not Joseph's, for he favored not idolatrous Priests) to
preserve their rights and revenues, to save their lands from alienation, to
maintain them; so Jezabel, 1 King. 18. 19. These shall rise up in judgment
against many Christian Kings and people, who neglect the maintenance of the
Ministers of the Gospel.

V. 24. The fifth part] He might have required the half, or have allowed them
but the fifth part. Here then he deals not with them injuriously, or
uncharitably, making his best advantage of their necessity: But mercifully, as
themselves confess, v. 25. and yet faithfully, as became the steward of
Pharaoh, whose corn he sold. This fifth part was no more then was laid up in
the years of plenty, chapter 41. 44.

V. 25. Pharaohs servants] His Farmers and Tenants.

V. 27. Multiplied exceedingly] So God fulfilled his Promise, chapter 46. 3.

V. 28. Seventeen yeares] So long Joseph nourished his father in Egypt, as his
father had nourished him at home.

V. 29. Thy hand under my thigh] See Annot: on chapter 24 2. Jacob requires this
oath, not so much doubting Joseph's obedience herein, but that he might allege
it to Pharaoh, chapter 50. 5. and so decline the envy of the Egyptians, and their
surmising of his scorning their land, and that it might be a testimony of his
faith in Gods Promises for possessing the land of Canaan, and that as a type of
Heaven, Heb. 11. 9, 10, 14, 15, 16. and for a strengthening of the faith of his
seed, that they should return thither. And for this also Joseph lays his
bones, as it were at stake, chapter 50. 25. Heb. 11. 22. Thus being dead they teach
and preach faith to them.

V. 30. But I will lie] Lie down and sleep. Such is death, lie in burial.

with my fathers] Abraham and Isaac. See, v. 29.

V. 31. Bowed himself] Unto God with thankfulness, Heb. 11. 21. His religious
thoughts, now near his end, took up his mind with matter of praying to God,
and praising of God. And though weak and bed^id, yet he would not do it without
some outward expression of devout reverence. This bowing then was not to
Joseph, (chapter 48. 12.) nor yet toward the East or Canaan, but to God, so David,
1 Kings 14.

upon the beds head] The LXX. read it leaning upon the top of his staff. The
Hebrew word without pricks or vowels serves both. Mittch is a bed, Matteh is a
staff. The LXX. sure had a copy without pricks. The Apostle follows the LXX.
in Heb. 11. 21. See Annot. on chapter 46. 27. and on chapter 11. 12. Jacob turning his
face to the bed, and so rearing himself upon the boulster at his beds head, he
then bowed himself and worshipped the Lord, chapter 48. 2. 1 Kings 1. 47, 48. And
it well may be, that to help himself herein in his great weakness, he might
lean upon the top of his staff which he had in his hand, being an old man;
and the Apostle knowing this also to be true, did not therefore stick to
allege the place, according to the Translation of the LXX.

CHAP. XLVIII.
Verse 1. WIth him his two sonnes] To receive the blessing of their venerable
Grandfather, at his farewell from the world.

V. 2. And sat upon the bed] Chapter 47. 31.

V. 3. At Luz] Or Bethel, and that twice, chapter 28. 13, 19. and, chapter 35. 6.

V. 4. A multitude] Thirteen populous tribes.

for an everlasting possession] Literally, if his seed keep Covenant with God,
spiritually to his spiritual seed, he will give the heavenly Canaan for an
everlasting possession.

V. 5. Ep^raim and Manasseh] Jacob still prefers Ephraim, v. 19.

are mine] My sons by adoption, and shall have the privilege of my sons;
have either a twelfth share and be heads of tribes, as Reuben and Simeon. Thus
Joseph had the double portion, that right of the firstborn, 1 Chronicles. 5. 1. A
Law for this to the firstborn after, Deuteronomy. 21. 17. So the Sabbath,
Circumcision, raising up seed to the brother, and many such more before Moses
Law.

V. 6. begettest after them] Therefore he had no more at this time.

the name of their brethren] Therefore he had more children after; which were
sorted and counted to the stock and tribe of Ephraim or Manasse, as if they
were their sons not their brethren: as all Jacobs other Grandchildren likewise
were.

V. 7. Rachel died] Thy mother, and my dear and only true wife, if I had been
fairly dealt withal, and so thou had been my right firstborn: and therefore
in thy sons I give thee a double portion, yet she was soon taken from me.

in the way of Ephrata] Even there, rather then to bury her among idolaters in
Bethlehem, chapter 23. 9.

V. 8. Who are these] Named them before, yet knew not that they were present,
or did not well discern them for the dimnesse of his sight, v. 10.

V. 9. I will bless them] Not by a mere apprecation of prosperity, for so the
less may bless the greater; but in the Name and Authority of God, guided with
an especial energy or operation of Gods Spirit, and so ratified by God, as
ordinary blessings were not; so, chapter 27. 33. See Annot. on chapter 27. 4. Genesis 49.
26.

V. 10. Dimme] Chapter 27. 1.

V. 11. I had not thought] Gods blessings are beyond our expectations and
imaginations.

V. 12. From between] Jacobs knees rather then Joseph's, for Jacob embraced and
kissed them, v 10.

he bowed] In reverence and thankfulness for the former Adoption.

V. 13. Ephraim in his right hand] In a fit posture, as he thought, to receive
the Patriarchal blessing, which it seems was usually done with Imposition of
hands. And in this punctual order, as fearing happily Jacob might mistake their
age and persons, naming Ephraim first, v. 5.

toward Isreal's right hand] The right hand has the pre-eminence of the left,
1 Kings 2. 19. Mat. 25. 33. Ps. 20. 6. 110. 1. 118. 16. Esaias 62. 8. Ephesians 1. 20.
in strength and honor. To which the Scripture has reference, in speech also
of God.

V. 14. And laid it upon Ephraims head] Here is the first express mention of
Imposition of hands, used after in benediction, Mat. 19. 13. Mar. 10. 16. at
secrifices, Lev. 1. 4. as witnessing, Lev. 24. 14. in extraordinary giving of
graces, Acts 8. 17. in miraculous cures, Mar. 6. 5. in ordination of Ministers,
Numb. 8. 10. Acts 6. 6. 1 Timothy 4. 14. so now Moses laid his hands upon Joshuah,
Deuteronomy. 34. 9. in prayer, Acts 13. 3.

Ephraims head] Of him came Joshuah, and the Kings of the ten tribes. And the
tribe of Ephraim is called the tribe of Joseph, Numb. 1. 32, 34. Apoc. 7. 6. 7.
8. The name of Ephraim is taken for the whole Kingdom of Israel, Esaias 7. 2.
They both had a double lot, Josh. 17. 14.

wittingly] And therefore crossed his arms to that purpose, as a sign, not of
Christ's Cross, but of that which afterward he foretold, by the special
revelation of the Spirit of God, he being so dim of sight, that he could not
thereby so well distinguish between them.

V. 16. the Angel which] Christ. See Annot. on chapter 31. 11. Exodus 14. 19. 13. 21.

my name be named on them] As, v. 5. no invocation of Saints departed; they
shall be in the same state and degree as my other sons, my adopted children; so
Gods Name is said to be called on us, Deuteronomy. 28. 10. 2 Chronicles. 7. 24. Jer. 14. 9.
that is, we are called the sons of God, and the husbands name is called upon
the wife, Esaias 4. 1. And the Lords Name upon the City Jerusalem, Dan. 9. 19.
and upon the Temple, 1 Kings. 8. 43. Jer. 7. 10, 11.

grow into a multitude] Spawn like fishes. There were eighty five thousand two
hundred men of war of these two in Moses time, Numb. 26. 28, 34, 37. Thus Moses
blesses them, Deuteronomy 33. 17. Josh. 17. 17.

V. 17. it displeased him] Thinking his father was mistaken, he seeks to mend
the error, and likely before that blessing, v. 15, 16. was uttered.

greater then he] In number of issue and power, though the birthright remain
with Manasseh, Josh. 17. 1. So, Numb. 1. eight thousand three hundred men more
of Ephraim then of Manasseh, and, Deuteronomy. 33. 17. See Annot. on v. 14. Number. 2.
18, 20. yet sometimes Ephraim was at a loss, 1 Chronicles. 7. 20, 21, 22. less in
number then Manasseh, Numb. 26. 28.

V. 20. In thee] Joseph using thy name and for thy sake, or taking thee for an
example, as, Ruth 4. 11. and so for cursing, Jer. 29. 22.

Israel] My posterity.

I have given] Thus Prophetically bequeathing, as by Will and Testament to the
posterity.

one portion] That bought, chapter 33. 19. nigh unto Sechem after called Sychar,
John 4. 5. Not all the City Sechem, and all its territories, as some would have
it out of Josh. 17. 7. This portion, though little, was all he had by purchase,
and so he designs him as it were his heir; Sechem was the inheritance of the
Ephraimites, Josh. 16. 1. 20. 7. John 4. 5. And thither were Joseph's bones
carried and buried, Josh. 24. 1, 25, 32.

have taken] Shall take. So, Esaias 9. 6. Thus Jacob in faith disposes of it as
already taken, Heb. 11. 21. or rather have taken it out of the hands of those
neighboring people, that seized upon it among the rest, after the slaughter of
the Sichemites, and would not restore it till Jacob by force of arms took and
recovered it. Though this be not elsewhere mentioned in Scripture.

my sword] Of my children, Josh. 17. 14, to 18.

CHAP. XLIX.
Verse 1. GAther your selves] Repeated, v. 2. Some present were to call and
gather the absent. By this joint injunction he intimates the union that should
be amongst them, Psalm. 133. 2, 3. 33. 3.

that I may tell you] By the Spirit of prophecy. Men on their deathbeds
should give their last and best counsels to their children, and family, and
friends.

you] Altogether, what I have to say to every one particularly, that so every
one may reap benefit also of what shall be said concerning his brethren.

in the last dayes] In long time to come, 1 Timothy 4. 1. 2 Timothy 3. 1. Acts 2. 17.
with Joel 2. 28. Your last state in this land, your state in Canaan, and til
Christ's coming, v. 10. The time of the Gospel may be called the last time,
because after that there will be no change of the Church from Christianity, no
change of doctrine or Sacraments to the worlds end, Heb. 1. 1. This foretelling
things to come so long after, shows that Jacob now was inspired and assisted
with a divine Spirit.

V. 3. Reuben, thou art my first-borne] And so many honorable privileges
belonged to him: headship of the family, a double portion to maintain the
honor of the Headship. This practiced among the Patriarchs, as many like other
things were put into a Law afterward, Deuteronomy. 21. 17. See, Gen, 35. 2. 48. 5.

my might] Deuteronomy. 21. 17. Psalm. 105. 36. 78. 51. 127. 4, 5. They are the
principal stay and pillar of the family also. Thus and thus thou should have
been but for thy sin.

V. 4. Unstable as water] That is, easily moved with the winds, still ebbing
or flowing, never standing still, nor easily contained in its own bounds and
place, unconstant, light, treacherous, Zeph. 3. 4. Such were the divisions and
grudgings of Reuben amongst themselves, Judge. 5. 15, 16. Such was he in his
sin, such shall he be in his downfall from the dignity of his birthright, as
waters roll down from high places; or Reubens posterity shall be weak as water,
( Ps. 22. 14. Josh. 7. 5.)

thou shall not excel] We read not that this tribe ever came to any excellency
among the other tribes, excelled not in number, Deuteronomy. 33. 6. valor, or any
excellent archievement.

because thou wentest up] For a pang of lawless lust he lost all, So does
sensuality besot and befoole men, Prove. 7. 7, 22. This fact, above forty
years ago done, soon after the birth of Benjamin, chapter 35. 22. is here doomed
and punished in Reuben and his posterity. Forbearance is no acquittance.

he went up] As out of an indignation of the fact, he turns his speech from
Reuben to his brethren, and shows how just cause there was to pronounce this
sentence against him. Such changes are often in Scripture, Deuteronomy. 5. 10. love
me, and keep his Commandments, Dan. 9. 4. that love him, for that love thee,
Mar. 11. 32. If we shall say of men they feared the people, for we fear. Jacob
would have this censure of him, to be a caution to his brethren. And now dying,
without malice sure to Reuben, is yet thus zealous against sin. So David, 1
Kings 2. 9.

V. 5. Simeon and Levi are brethren] In birth, in evil, Prove. 18. 9. It may
happily be also in conspiracy against Joseph. Thus impartially Moses sets by his
relation, and a brand of infamy upon Levi, his great grandfather.

instruments of cruelty] Cruel weapons, Chapter 34. 25.

in their habitations] Or in their agreements and conventions with the
Sichemites, chapter 34. 13, 15.

V. 6. my sou^e] By this pathetical Apostrophe, he shows his zealous
detestation of their out-ragious fact, and cleares himself of suspicions and
aspersions of his favoring it, which otherwise after his death might have been
cast upon him for it.

come not thou into their secret] He protests against his least knowledge of,
much less consent unto their secret (to him) and cursed plot, contrivance and
execution of it. q. d. God forbid that ever my soul should join in such a
villainy.

secret] Psalm. 64. 2, 4. Jer 15. 17.

my glory] My soul, which is man's glory. Or, my tongue, Ps. 16. 9. my glory is
rendered by the Apostle, my tongue, Acts 2. 26. Jacob would not suffer in his
honor and reputation for their sakes.

they slew a man] The singular is often put for the plural, 1 Chronicles 10. 1. They
slew Hamor, Sichem, Citizens and subjects.

self-will] Not in sudden wrath, but upon a wilful settled resolution and
deliberation, plotting and acting.

they dug down a wall] We read not of this, chapter 34. yet happily they might do
so to the house of Hamor or Shechem, where their sister was. The words may
well, yea, best be rendered thus, they houghed an ox; so relating to the prey
of cattle they took, and houghing such as would not drive.

V. 7. Cursed be their anger] It was likely to be to the ruin and extirpation
of him and his, chapter 34. 31. he curses not their persons, but their sin; so
David not against Ahitophels person, 2 Samuel 15. 31. Psalm. 109. 17, 18, 19, 20.
is a prediction rather then an imprecation, or imprecation conditional, not
absolute. Or if absolute, then by the immediate guidance of Gods Spirit, and so
not lawful to those that want it. The rule for all is, Prove. 20. 22.

I will divide them] Jacob speaks as in the person of God: as Prophets usually
do. Or he would do it by his prediction and prophecy, as it were passing his
word, they should be divided. As Ezekiel is said to come to destroy the City,
Ezech. 43. 3. Levi was thus divided and scattered, yet God, after their zealous
execution, Exodus 32. 26, 29. turned it to a blessing to his people and to them,
Deuteronomy. 33. 9, 10. The Levites are first mentioned to be taken in, Numb. 1. 47.
and 3. 12, 45. and chapter 4. and chapter 7. 5, 6, 7, 8. and chapter 8. for the first
borne, which were by their birth the Priests before Moses time, and again due
to the Lord, upon his sl^ying the firstborn when he brought Israel out of
Egypt, Exodus 13. 2. Simeon likewise was not planted apart by himself, as the
other tribes were, but had their inheritance intermingled with that of Judah,
out of whose lot in several places here and there Simeonites had certain cities
and villages, Josh. 19. 9. And that not so much for Simeons sake, as because
Judah had too much. So Simeon was but an Inmate to Judah, and under him. Till
afterward upon their multiplying they were forced to seek further for new
habitations in Mount Seir, and Mount Gedor, driving out the Amalekites, 1 Chronicles. 4. 39, 41, 43. And so they were scattered in their habitations. And all
this wrath of Jacob, and detestation of Simeon and Levies massacre of the
Shechemites proves the book of Judith to be Apocryphal, which so highly
commends this fact of Simeon, chapter 9. 2, 3, 4. Moses omits the blessing of
Simeon, Deuteronomy. 33. And thus their union in evil was punished with this division
and scattering among the tribes.

V. 8. Judah thou art he whom thy brethren shall praise] Judah signifies
praises, chapter 29. 35. as if Jacob should say, thou art so by name, and shall be
so indeed; praised for Regal Government, praised for that Christ shall come of
thee, Heb. 7. 14. See, Hos. 11. 12. of Judah all the children of Israel were
called Jews; not Reubenites of Reuben, not Simeonites, nor of any other son.
Judahs sin with Tamar is omitted; Judah therein only intended single
fornication.

in the neck] This was fulfilled, Numb. 10. 14. 7. 11, 12. Judge. 1. 1, 2. 20.
18. 3. 9. in Othniel, David, Solomon, and perfectly in Christ, 2 Samuel 22. 41.
Psalm. 78. 68. 89. 20.

thy fathers children] By all his wives, chap. 27. 29. thy mothers sons,
because Isaac had but one wife.

shall bow down before thee] Thy Regal power. Every knee to Christ. Phil. 2.
10. the Lion of the tribe of Judah, Apoc. 5. 5.

V. 9. Lions whelp] True in Judahs Kings, most true in Christ. Lions are kingly
beasts, stout, bold, strong, terrible. Lions in Kings arms. Lions were stays
for the steps of King Solomon's throne.

he couched] Varies the person as the Prophetic Spirit moved him. After
victories he shall lie down and rest securely. So in Solomon's days after
David's victories, 1 King. 4. 25. Numb. 23. 24.

V. 10. The Scepter] Or tribe, so the word signifies, v. 16, 28. after once
the regal dignity should be settled in this tribe, 1 Chronicles. 5. 2. (as in David)
the Government should never be taken from him, at least so far, but that there
should be a Lawgiver from between his feet; nor his Kingdom and Commonwealth
be utterly ruined, and the distinction of his tribe taken away and confounded,
till the coming of Shiloh. There were no more Kings of that tribe after
Jechoniah and Zedekiah, Jer. 22. 30. Ezech. 21. 27. After their return from
that captivity, the principality was in Zerubbabel, and likely in others of the
tribe of Judah, And when some while after, the Maccabees of the tribe of Levi
got the rule; yet then the Sanhedrin, or great counsel of LXX. Elders,
consisted of the tribe of Judah And the Maccabees had their supreme power by
the choice and appointment of the people of Judah, and continued therein till a
little before the birth of Christ, when Herod a mere stranger was King, and
rooted them quite out, in the thirtieth year of his reign. And if that
Sanhedrin were not all chosen out of the tribe of Judah though most of them
doubtless were: yet the Maccabees themselves of the tribe of Levi, were of the
Kingdom of Judah, as distinct from the Kingdom of Israel, or of the ten
tribes, the tribes of Benjamin and Levi, were amongst the tribe of Judah, and
adhered to them; yet were but as incorporated into the tribe and Kingdom of
Judah, which is therefore said, 1 Kings 11. 1^, 32, 36. three times to consist
but of one tribe, viz Judah only; so also, 1 Kings 12. 20. And when they
returned out of captivity, the greatest part by far that returned were of that
tribe, yea, and after their return out of captivity, they were all chiefly
planted in the lot and territory that appertained to the tribe of Judah, and
the People, Kingdom and Commonwealth were still called by the name of Judah;
and therefore still the Government may be said to be in Judah. where as those of
the ten tribes once carried into Assyria, never returned to become a Kingdom
or Commonwealth, as before, and had also their tribes, confused and confounded.

Shebet] Signifies a rod, a rod of iron, a rod of authority, a Mace or Scepter
of Kings, a Kingdom, Esaias 14. 5 a tribe, Judges 18. 19.

shall not depart] When once come to it. It was long ere it came to it. Moses
was of the tribe of Levi; Joshuah of the tribe of Ephraim; of the fifteen
Judges only two, Othniel and Ibzan were of the tribe of Judah; Saul was of
Benjamin, David the first King of this tribe Therefore Jacob says not when
Judah should begin to sway the Scepter, but having begun, how long it should
hold on.

from Judah] Not his person, v 1. in the last days, but the tribe of Judah, or
the Nation of the Jews with relation to that tribe.

nor a Law-giver] Ps 60. 7. or Scribe, writing Laws for Rules.

from between his feet] Deuteronomy. 28. 57.

until] And then it should. The authority of the Synedrion in their Synagogues
in our Savior Christ^ time, was but preca^io under the Romans, and restrained
in capital crimes, Mat 23 34. Acts 5. 17. 9. 1, 2. 23. 5. John 18. 3^. 19. 7.
Acts 7 59. Ananias was deposed from the High Priesthood, for stoning James the
brother of Jesus, Joseph. antiq l. 20. c. 8. The Jewish Scepter was much
weakened by Pompey, much shaken by Herod's intrusion; finally broken and
abolished at the destruction of Jerusalem. After which they had no form nor
face of a Commonwealth. Therefore it is evident against the Jews, that the
Messiah is come.

until Shiloh come] The Prosperer, Safe-maker, or his Son, viz, of a Virgin,
i. e. Christ, Heb. 7. 14. secundae ejus, the tunicle or skin wherein the child
is wrapped in its mothers belly, and so taken for the child it self, the
continent for the thing contained in it. Then it shall depart. God appoints the
periods of Kingdoms and States, and so the p^uses and stops by rebellions and
insurrections; wherein Gods Providence is not asleep, but his Justice awake.

shall the gathering] Jews and Gentiles shallobey him, Is. 11. 10. 42. 4. Mat.
12. 21. Romans 15. 12. He is the desire of all Nations, Hag. 2. 7. Esaias 2. 1, 2.

V. 11. Binding his foale unto the vine] Wondrous fruitful, for wine especially
should Judahs lot in Canaan fall out to be, full of vines, and abounding in
pastures* lying all in the South-part of Canaan.

V. 12. Red with wine] Prove. 23. 29, 30. No allowance to drunkenness, no more
then to theft in that saying, Apoc 3. 3.

white with milke] Through plenty of pasturage and kine.

V. 13 Zebulun] Before Issachar, so his lot before him in the division of the
land, Josh. 19. 10, 17. though Issachar the elder. So, Deuteronomy. 33. 18.

at the Haven of the sea] The Ocean westward, near Mount Carmel, and the sea
of Gal lee Eastward, Josh. 19. 10. Esaias 9. 1. Thus the lot for Zebulun fell
out, not by chance, but by Gods Providence according to Jacobs prediction so
many ages before. Nazareth was in this tribe, and Mount Tabor, and here Christ
began to preach, Mat. 4. 15.

unto Zidon] Josh. 19. 10. to the 16. the coa^^s of it were over against Zidon,
and fit for easy commerce with Zidon.

V. 14. Issachar is a strong Asse] Of strong force, but small courage, Deuteronomy.
33. 18. Judges 5. 16.

between two burdens] Or bounds, borders. In a fertile and fat soil, loving
husbandry and a quiet life: and not trafficking abroad as Zebulun.

V. 15. And bowed his shoulder] Rather servilely subject themselves to toil
and tribute, then forego their quiet peaceable kind of life. Yet some of
Issachar were of more noble and heroic spirits, Judge. 5. 15. 1 Chronicles. 12. 13,
32.

16. Dan shall judge] Chapter 30. 6. Alludes to his name of judging; as, v. 8. and
chapter 9. 27. He shall enjoy the privilege of a tribe, as well as his freeborn
sons. And as other tribes had their Heads and Elders to judge and decide
causes amongst them, so should they, Numb. 1. 4, 16. And Sampson of Dan was an
extraordinary Judge. And the like is implied concerning the rest of the sons of
the handmaids.

V. 17. Dan shall be a serpent] More by cunning, then by force shall they
prevail, so did the Danites with Laish, Judges 18. 27. And Sampson used craft
as well as strength, Judges 15. and 16. Moses compares him to a Lions whelp,
Deuteronomy. 33. 22. happily for the suddenness of his leap, when he sees the
advantage of his prey. Dan is omitted in the sealing of the tribes, Apoc. 7.
And so is Simeon omitted in Moses his benediction, Deuteronomy. 33. Likely Simeon for
his cruelty against the Sichemites. And Dan for his notorious idolatry, Judge.
18. 20. 1 Kings 12. 29. Not because Antichrist should come of the tribe of Dan.

V. 18. I have waited] Psalm, 130. 5. Esaias 26. 8. Motions of the Spirit, and
ejaculations of a dying man, are not tied to rules of method, and yet may have
good coherence with silent and smothered thoughts, whence their expressions
burst out.

for thy salvation] Foreseeing the troubles of his posterity, and of the tribe
of Dan in special, Judge. 1. 34. he breaks out into this passionate expression,
of longing after their deliverance and salvation by Shiloh specially, Luke 2.
30.

V. 19. Gad, a troop] Chapter 30. 11 An Allusion, as, v. 16. See the Annotations
upon it. Gad was situate beyond Jordan Eastward, and so the more subject to
incursions of the bordering enemies, Judge. 10. 7, 8. Jer, 49. 1. He comforts
him against his dangers by sudden inroads of troops, that at last he shall
overcome them, Deuteronomy. 33. 20. Fulfilled, 1 Chronicles. 5. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. Judge.
chapter 10. and 11.

V. 20. Asher his bread shall be fat] Rich soil for corn and wheat specially,
and for oil, Deuteronomy. 33. 24, 25. and royal dainties, and minerals, Josh. 19. 24,
etc. Fat signifies the best of any thing, chapter 4. 4. 27. 28.

V. 21. Naphtali is an Hind let loose] Deuteronomy. 33. 23. with scope and liberty in
choice of pastures, in plenty and peace. And also of cunning and active
nimblenesse in dealing with their enemies, and light-footed to pursue them, and
to escape danger, Psalm. 18. 34. Judge. 4. 10, 15, 16. Josh. 19. 32, to 39. Judah
a Lion, Issachar an Ass. Dan a Serpent, Naphtali an Hind. All these were
absurd in a literal sense. And so the words in the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper in a literal sense.

he gives goodly words] Fair and courteous, prevailing by that means, and
words also of praises and blessings, Judge. 5.

V. 22. Joseph is a fruitful bough] In his two branches Ephraim and Manasseh,
which multiplied exceedingly, and became two tribes.

by a well] Moisture is a means of fruitfulness, Psalm. 1. 3. Ezech. 19. 10.

whose branches] Hebr. Whose daughters. As bough was called by the name of
son, and whatsoever comes of or from another, is called in Hebrew a son,
as the young of birds, beasts, etc. arrows are called the sons of the bow,
chapter 18. 7. Job 41. 28.

run over the wall] Abundantly increase, Josh. 17. 17.

V. 23. The archers] His brethren that sold him, his Mystris that accused him,
his Master that imprisoned him, and happily the Magistrates of Egypt, and the
Courtiers of Pharaoh.

V. 24. But his bowe] His innocence, patience, faith, chastity, Psalm. 18. 34.

by the hands of the mighty] Joseph ascribes his strength to God, Psalm. 44. 6,
7, 8.

from thence] From the mighty God of Jacob, from his Power and Providence it
was that Joseph became the shepherd, the stone of Israel, to feed them in
famine, and to be a rock of refuge, stay and strength unto them. And herein
Joseph may be as a type of Christ, the true shepherd and cornerstone, Act. 4.
11. Esaias 28. 16.

V. 25. With blessings of Heaven] Influences of the startes, rain and dew,
Deuteronomy. 33. 14. Ezechiel 34. 26.

blessings of the deep] Springs and rivers, if not minerals too, chapter 7. 11.
Deuteronomy. 33. 13.

of the beasts] Ten thousands of Ephraim, and thousands of Manasseh, Deuteronomy. 33.
17. A contrary curse is that, Hos. 9. 14.

V. 26. The blessings of thy father] Wherewith I do bless thee and thy
brethren.

have prevailed] Or do prevail, are stronger, of greater efficacy and
excellency.

above the blessings of my Progenitors] Abraham and Isaac, I have blessed thee
in thy two sons, more then my father or grandfather blessed their two
sons. Abraham gave way that Ishmael should be cast out. And Isaac gave the
blessing to me from my brother Esau. But I bless thy two sons, and make them
two tribes, and keep them within the Church. Or I have more expressly, and
with more tenderness of affection blessed thee, then my Progenitors blessed
their children. I do strive to out-blesse my forefathers, in multiplication of
blessings upon thy head. Or referring the words to all Jacobs children, he
preferres his blessing above that of his Progenitors, as being more
particularly explained and applied; and should be more suddenly, clearly, fully
and effectually accomplished in them; by their multiplication in Egypt, etc.
And by including them all in the Covenant of grace, making them all heirs of
the Promise, not one of them being excluded.

unto the utmost bounds of the everlasting hilles] Deuteronomy. 33. 13, 15. This sets
forth the riches of that portion of land in Canaan, which should by lot fall to
Ephraim and Manasseh. Or, the blessings on Joseph shall be eminent and
excellent in extent, and in quality and quantity; and perpetual in duration, as
the everlasting hills, intimating so spiritual blessings, Psalm. 54. 10.

on the head of Joseph] Poured as oil (wherewith Princes are anointed) on his
head.

separated] By his selling away from them, and being by God so advanced in
Egypt.

V. 27. Benjamin shall ravine] Be strong, fierce, warlike, going forth mornings
and evenings to take his prey, vanquishing and spoiling his enemies. So did
Saul the King of this tribe, 1 Samuel 11. 6, 7, 11. 14. 13. 15. 47, 48. Paul was
of Benjamin, Warlike they were, as appears in those bloody battles, Judges 20.
15, 16, 17. Ehud was of Benjamin, Judge. 3. 15. Mordecai and Esther were of
Benjamin, Esther 8. 7. etc and chapter 9. 5.

devour the prey] 2 Samuel, 2. 26.

V. 28. Twelve tribes] Distinguished into twelve tribes afterward. And in them,
rather then in the persons of his twelve sons, we are to look for the meaning
and the accomplishing of these prophetical blessings. They were thirteen
counting in Levi, and Ephraim and Manasseh in stead of Joseph. But Levi had no
portion in dividing the land, Deuteronomy. 10. 9. And so they were still called the
twelve tribes. For their order they are reckoned sometimes according to their
birth, chap. 29. and 30. Exodus 28. 10. sometimes with reference to their
mothers, as, chap. 35. sometimes with relation to their dignity; so is Judah
first, Numb. 2. 3. Apoc. 7. 5. sometimes to their lot in dividing the land of
Canaan. And so is Zebulun placed before Issachar here; sometimes withoot regard
had of any order, as here, and Deuteronomy. 33. and Apoc. 7. 5. and Numb. 1. 5. 2. 5.

^ and blessed them] To Reuben, Simeon and Levi, it might seem rather a curse
then a blessing; yet the denomination may be from the greater and better part.
And their fathers reprehension might prove a blessing to their further
repentance. He concludes them within the number of the tribes, and so
comprehends them within the Covenant, gives them a right to Canaan the type,
and so by faith to the heavenly Canaan. And likely he dismissed them all with a
general benediction, praying for them all. And as those three became tribes,
and had their shares and portions in Canaan, so they had their names in Aarons
breast plate on twelve stones, Exodus 28. 21. and on two Onix-stones upon the
shoulders of the Ephod, Exodus 28. 10, 11, 11. Levi likely, because they were
the Priests and holy Ministers themselves, being left out in the precious
stones. And as many of their tribes are sealed, Apoc. 7. 5, 7. as of the rest.

every one according] The blessings applied to every tribe, according to the
several references to his twelve sons; such blessings as were meet for every
of them, as Gods Spirit did allot.

V. 29. Gathered into my people] His soul to the Saints, Heb. 12. 23. His body
to the grave. See Annot. on chapter 25. 8. and on chapter 47. 9. to my holy fathers by
death, v. 33.

bury me with my fathers] See Annotat, on chap. 47. 30.

^ in the cave] This a ground of Joseph's request to Pharaoh, chapter 50. 5. And
lest in seventeen years absence question might be made of his right to the
place, evidences by writings being not then in use.

of Ephrou] Bought of him, v. 30. ch 23. 9, 10, etc. and chapter 47. 30.

V. 31. I buried Leah] Chapter 47, 30. 48. 7. Of the death and burial of Rebekah
and Leah, we have nothing elsewhere set down in Scripture.

V. 33. He gathered up his feet] Which happily hung down before, as he sat on
the beds side. And so composed himself to a quiet rest and sleep of death,
enjoying the use of memory and speech unto the last, Psalm. 37. 37. The gesture,
chapter 47. 31. was for reverence and thankfulness to God, and happily to Joseph 100.

CHAP. L.
Verse 1. ANd Joseph fell upon his face] Exceeded his brethren, as in Piety
toward God, so in filial affection and duty to his father. Religion rejects
not, but regulates natural affections.

wept upon him] Not womanish weakness to weep, Men of excellent spirit and
valor have been noted for it; David, Ezekiah, Ne hemiah, Joseph seven times,
Christ himself thrice. John. 11. 3. Luke 19. 41. Heb. 57. Paul, Acts 20. 19,
31. 2 Cor. 2. 4. Lawful in Funerals, if mixed with faith, and exceed not a just
measure. The want is a fault, Esaias 57. 1. Acts 8. 2. Jer. 22. 18.

and kissed him] To touch the dead was after forbidden, Numb. 19. 11, 12. yet
in Joseph's time not forbidden. Filial affection in a good son dies not with
a good father, but surviveth.

V. 2. His servants the Physicians] The Antiquity of Physic, Physicians, and
embalming the dead. Luke a Physician, Col. 4. 14. 2 Timothy 4. 10, 11.

embalmed] Embalmed bodies are transported from Egypt into other parts of the
world, at this day to be used for medicine. Hence the Jews had the custom of
embalming; so they embalmed King Asa, 2 Chronicles. 16. 14. 21. 16. and our Savior,
John 12. 7, 19, 39, 40. Mar. 14. 8. Though his body needed it not, being
secured from corruption, Psalm 16. 10. Act. 2 31. 13. 35. yet they that embalmed
him knew not so much. Jacobs body was to be kept long and carried far.

V. 3. Seventy dayes] To honor him, as, 2 Chronicles. 32. 33. The Hebrews time of
mourning was thirty days, Numb. 20. 29. Deuteronomy. 21. 13. 34. 8. And the Egyptians
time for embalming was forty days. These two might make up the seventy days;
much time taken in the very ceremonies of mourning.

V. 4. Joseph spoke unto the house] Uses the mediation of Egyptian Courtiers,
to testify his modesty in a business concerning himself, to prevent all
suspicion of his not returning, and to decline their envy, and endear himself
to them the more. And perhaps also Mourners were not to come into the presence
of Princes, Esther 4. 2.

V. 5. Made me swear] Lest he should seem to disdain to have his father buried
in Egypt, he alleges this tie upon him by the dead.

which I have dug for me] So spacious was the place, that they might dig
themselves several Repositories or Cells for their dead bodies in it; where his
Progenitors and wife were buried. The manner of men to build sepulchers while
they were alive. So Absalom, so Asa, 2 Chronicles. 16. 14. so Joseph of Arimathea,
Mat. 27. 60. so Shebna, Esaias 22. 16.

bury me] Some bodies are embalmed and not buried; most buried without
embalming; some embalmed with Aromatic spices put into their bodies, some only
had spices upon them and about them; some had sweet odours burnt at their
burials, 2 Chronicles. 16. 14. 21. 19. Jer. 34. 5. some had their dead bodies
themselves burnt, 1 Samuel 31. 12. sundry other manners amongst Heathen. Want of
burial is a calamity bewailed, Psalm. 79. 3. and a judgment threatened, Jer. 7.
33. 22. 19.

V. 6. As he made thee swear] Very infidels would have oaths performed.

V. 7. All the servants] A very great multitude of them. So, Mat. 3. 5. All
Judea; and so again many is put for all, Romans 5. 19. Such was Joseph's prudence,
and sweetness of disposition, that he kept the height of honor still without
envy, which Court-favourites seldom do.

and all the Elders] Senators, Governors, Officers, Counselors, Ezech. 7.
26. Psalm. 105. 22.

V. 10. Valley of Atad] Signifies a bramble or thistle. Likely not far from
Hebrou or Machpelah.

beyond Jordan] As Moses stood when he wrote this, Deuteronomy. 1. 1. 3. 25. being now
in the plains of Moab. Else in a direct journey from Egypt to Hebron, Mamre or
Machpelah, their way was not to pass over Jordan.

seven dayes] So long in Moses Law they were unclean, the touched the dead,
Numb. 19. 11. See Annot. on v. 3.

V. 13. And buried him in the cave which] Acts 7. 15, 16. says Stephen, to
Jacob went down into Egypt, and died, he and our fathers, and were carried over
into Sichem, and laid in the Sepulcher that Abraham bought for a sum of money
of the sons of Emor, the father of Sichem. The case is clear, that the two
places which Abraham bought, chapter 23. and which Jacob bought, chapter 33. are not
one and the same but diverse; as appears by the place or situation, by the name,
use, price and persons, buyers and sellers. And yet these two purchases seem to
be confounded in the speech of Stephen. Again, Stephen might have a failer in
memory, in his long and sudden speech, as not being then infallibly guided as
an Inditer of Scripture, though full of the Holy Ghost, Acts 6. 5. 7. 55. For
so it is said of the other Deacons, Acts 6. 3. of Peter, Act. 4. 8. of Paul,
Acts 9. 17. yet Peter erred, Acts 10. 14. Gal. 2. 11, etc. and all the Apostles
erred in the point of Christ's Resurrection, and of his Kingdom, Acts 1. 6. and
of the calling of the Gentiles. And St. Luke might do right in recording it as
it came from Stephen. As the like is in chapter 27. 19, 24. and, 1 Kings 13. 18.
Joseph's bones were buried in Shechem, the place his father bequeathed to him
and his on his deathbed, and likely the rest of his brethren, in conformity to
his example, would be buried there, have their bones likewise carried thither;
and this, though not mentioned in Scripture, might by other Records or
Revelation be made known to Stephen, as the names of ^annes and Jambres to
Paul, 2 Timothy 3. 8. the Prophecy of Enoch to Jude, v. 14. the Genealogy to
Luke, chapter 3. v. 23, to 31. Jacob himself was certainly buried in Machpelah, as
is here recorded: and though he be joined together with his sons in a state
of mortality, Acts 7. 15. yet the sixteenth verse of their burial may well be
confined to his sons as the next Antecedent without taking him into the
number. And that Jacob bought the field of the sons of Emor or Hamor,
Shechems father, is likewise certain. By Abraham then, Acts 7. 16. we must
understand Abraham's Grandchild Jacob; And so expound it, which is a very harsh
Exposition, the whole text considered, and could not be so apprehended by the
multitude of his hearers. Or rather we may say, that Stephen mistook the story,
and named Abraham in stead of Jacob, which may be done without any great
offense, as has been showed, and so Luke relates what rightly he should; for
to lay an error upon the sacred text, by saying Jacob should be put in the
text in stead of Abraham, and that Abraham came into it by the error of the
transcribers, mistaking the one name for the other, or whereas neither was in
the Original, and Abraham error being put in the margin, that from the margin
they put it into the text, all this is not so likely, nor any way so safe. That
Emor or Hamor was father to Sichem, not son to Sichem, appears, Josh. 24. 32.
Genesis 33. 19. and therefore it is so to be supplied in Acts 7. 16. so is the
word mother supplied, Luke 24. 10. out of Mar 15. 40. That Zohar, Genesis 23. 8.
was not otherwise called Hamor, not had a son called Sechem, but called
Ephron, the Scripture-Story declares. And Sechem of Hamors sons is only
mentioned, because he was more honorable then all the house of his father, and
so it is most probable, that in the sale of the ground to Jacob he had most to
do, and the rest consented to his transaction. They that would make a
reconciliation, by saying that the two places and sepulchers, that Abraham
bought, and that which Jacob bought were near one another, presuppose what is
not sound, for Hebron and Machpelah were in the tribe of Judah, and Sechem or
Sychar a city of Samaria in the tribe of Ephraim, above twenty miles distant.
And if granted, yet helps nothing to answer the other difficulties of the text.

of the field] Places for burials have been very various. Fields as here. Moses
in a valley, Deuteronomy. 34. 6. Uzziah in the field of the burial which belonged to
the Kings; in the same field; but apart from the corpses of the Kings, 2 Chronicles.
26. 23. The Potters field was bought to bury strangers in, Mat. 27. 7. Manasseh
was buried in the garden of his own house, 2 Kings 21. 18. Our blessed Savior
in a garden, Joh. 19. 41. Among Christians, after they had peace from
persecutions, and Churches for devine service, they soon buried in the Church
yards, and afterward came to bury in the Churches themselves, which grew in
time into a superstition among many, and to be an annoyance to the living
through the commonnesse of it.

V. 15. And will certainly require us] The unquietness of guilty consciences
now after forty years, Lev 26. 36.

V. 16. Sent a messenger] And after went themselves, v. 18.

thy father did] Most likely that they feigned this.

V. 17. So shall ye say unto Joseph] They use arguments from his fathers
command, their relation as brethren, their Penitencie, his Piety.

wept] As pitying their perplexity, and grieving at their doubt of his good
will.

V. 18. Fall down before his face] Wittingly confirming the prediction, chapter 37.
7. and yielding themselves his servants, whom they had sold for a slave.

V. 19. Am I in the place of God?] Chapter 30. 2. Am I in Gods stead to revenge
myself; or to cross Gods purpose, turning it to your hurt, which he turned to
your preservation? or fear ye me more then God? am not I under God?

V. 20. But God] Joseph] ascribes nothing to himself, but all to God, whose
goodness over-masters man's malignity and badnesse, chap. 45. 5. Acts 3. 12,
13. Psalm. 119. 71.

much people] Them, Egyptians and others.

V. 21. I will nourish you] Doing good for evil, Mat. 5. 44. Romans 12. 21.

V. 23. Third generation] So soon was Jacobs blessing begun to be accomplished
in Joseph's lifetime, chapter 48. 19. 49. 22.

of Machir] Numb. 32. 39. 1 Chronicles 7. 16.

V. 24. Surely visit] Chapter 15. 14. 46. 4. Heb. 11. 22.

V. 25. Took an oath] V. 5.

of the children of Israel] His brethren happily were now dead, many of them; yet
was Levi alive, who lived one hundred thirty seven years, Exodus 6. 6. and so
outlived Joseph some sixteen years. Therefore the oath was taken of the
children of Israel: and it may be renewed by the succeeding generation, that
they in whose time the deliverance should be brought to pass, should perform
this oath.

from hence] Mean while his body was interred in Egypt to the contentment of
the Egyptians, and to the comfort of his family and kindred, to have his body
and bones among them; and so to have them there the more preserved for their
good. And Joseph's bones were carried thence. And not kept as relics to be
worshipped. but were buried at Shechem, Josh. 24. 32. Jacobs purchase, and
Joseph's sons heritage. And this, to testify his own, and confirm his
brethrens faith, in the belief of the Promises of Canaan, and that as a type or
pledge of the heavenly Cannan. There were the other Patriarchs Jacobs sons
and Joseph's brethren also buried, Acts 7. 16. Their bones likely being carried
with his bones.

V. 26. An hundred and ten years old] Eighty years after his advancement. At
that age also died Joshua, who was of his race, Josh. 24. 29. Joseph died in
the two thousand three hundred sixty nineth year of the world; sixty years
before the birth of Moses, and one hundred and forty years before the
Israelites coming out of Egypt, as may be gathered out of Genesis 15. 13. and
Exodus 12. 41. See Annot. on chapter 15. 13.

FINIS.
CHOICE OBSERVATIONS AND EXPLANATIONS UPON THE Old Testament.
Genesis.
GENESIS Containns an History of 2369 years; from the Creation of the World,
and Adam; to the death of Joseph.

The Day of 24 hours, Numb. 8. 17. begins here at Evening, Chap. I. v. 5, 8,
13, 19, 23, 31. And so Exodus XII. 18. and Levit. XXIII. 32. And hence, in
Daniels time, it is called the Evening-Morning. (...), Dan. VIII. 14, 26. 2
Cor. XI. 25. Yet the Account sometimes seems to begin in the Morning: as
vulgarly with us, and many other Nations. And may seem so also, in some kind
of reckoning with the Jews; out of Number. XXVIII. 3, 4. And so in the days of
our Savior, out of Matthew. XXVI. 17, 20. and XXVIII. 1. Mar. XVI. 1, 2. Luke
XXIV. 1. John XX. 1, 19. Unless we take the day there for the time of Light
contradistinguished to Darkness; as it is, 2 Samuel I. 12. Diverse other Nations
did begin their day diversely; Some with Sunne-rising; some at the setting; some
at midnight, as Astronomers with us usually do. And whereas our Savior seems
to some to keep his last Passover a day before the Jews, out of John XVIII.
28. and XIX. 14. Unless by Passover there we understand the Feast of
Unleavened Bread, which immediately succeeded the Passover, or Paschal Lamb,
Levit. XXIII. 5, 6, 7, 8. and not the Passover it self; or both, as Luke XXII.
1. yet supposing he did so; both upon the former diversities of accounts, may
be said to keep it on the XIV. day at Even: Our Savior rightly reckoning the
Beginning of the day, from the Evening: And the Jews then reckoning it amiss,
as vulgarly, and the Romans then did, from the morning following. But all this
is only tendered to consideration. And yet this rather then that Jesus should
not be said to eat the Passover at that time; But only a like thing, which
they please to conceive, and call, without all ground save their own
imagination, a commemorative Passover, commemorative of that which was to be
kept the next day.

Eden] A Region in Mesopotamia or Chaldea, Acts VII. 2, compared with Genesis XI.
31. It signifies Delicacy or Delight, Psalm. XXXVI. 8. Esaias XLVII. 8. In the
Eastern part whereof, and not only Eastward from Jurie was this Garden
planted. See Esaias XXXVII. 12. Ezekiel. XXVII. 23.

Ethiopia] Heb. Cush, Called so from the son of Cham, Ham, chapter X. 6. 1 Chronicles.
I. 8, 10. The Ethiopians or Cushites seem first to inhabit some parts of
Arabia, on the North-side of the Red Sea: And after to settle themselves on the
South Side of it, and South of Egypt; whence we read in Authors of the Asian
and African Ethiopians. And in Scripture we read of Zerah their King, who came
out against Asa, with the hughest host that Gods Word does mention, 2 Chronicles.
XIV. 9. And of Tirhakah that came forth against Sennacherib, Esaias XXXVII. 9. Of
Candace the Queen, Acts VIII. 27. Of those two great and good Eunuchs,
Proselytes; the one Jeremies deliverer, Jer. XXXVIII. and the other baptized by
Philip, Acts VIII. 27, -- 39. And of Zipporah the wife of Moses Number. XII. The
Ethiopians were kinsmen and allies to the Egyptians; coming both of Cham; near
neighbors and confederates, Esaias XVIII. 1. and XX. 4. Jer. XIII. 23. and XLVI.
9. Ezekiel. XXX. 9. See more in the Annotations on Jer. XIII. 23.

A Tree is mentioned, and the Fruit of it. v. 17. and chapter III. 1, 2, 3, 6. But
the Apple Tree, or what kind of Tree, is not specified.

Cherubims] And so, Number. VII. 89. 1 Samuel IV. 4. 1 King. VII. 29. Esaias. XXXVII.
16. Ezekiel. X. throughout that Vision; and chapter XLI. 18. Heb. IX. 5. and in sundry
other places. And in like sort we have the word Seraphims, Esaias VI. 2, 6. And
this for expression-sake of our English plural by the letter ( s): whereas the
words might have been rendered Cherubs and Seraphs, or Cherubim and Seraphim;
that being the termination plural in the Original Hebrew; as also in the
Chaldee, and Syriak. And so is rightly left out in the word Baalim, in all
places. Of Cherubin see my Annotations on Ezekiel. IX. 3. and X. 1, 3, -- 10, and
v. 14, -- 22. and XI. 22.

Offering] Offering is here mentioned. v. 4. Called Sacrifice, Heb. XI. 4. And
as this; so other nominated Mosaical and Levitical Rites and Ceremonies, were
in use before the times of Levi, and Moses. As,

2. Beasts, and Fowls, clean and unclean; at the time of the Flood; chapter VII.

3. Priests, Altars, Burnt-Offerings, Drink Offerings, VIII. 20. and XIV. 18.
and XXII. 13. and XXXV. 14.

4. Eating of Blood forbidden, chapter IV. 4.

5. Oil in use for Consecration; XXVIII. 18. and XXXV. 14.

6. Marrying the brothers widow, to raise up seed to the brother deceased; chapter
XXXVIII. 8, 9, 26.

Called his name] Names afterward usually imposed at the time of Circum^sion;
Abraham; plainly in John the Baptist, and others. By the Jews some of Gods
Titles were many times inserted into the Composure of the names of their
children, as plentifully appears. And the manner of many Heathens was to impose,
or insert the names of their Idols and Pagan Deities upon, or into the names of
their children, and of their Kings and Favorites, Romans XVI. 1, 14, 15. 1 Cor.
I. 12. 1 Thessalonians. I. 1. And hence we have among the Babylonians, from their
Idols, Bell, Nebo, and Merodach, these Names, of Belteshazzar, Dan. I. 7. and
IV. 8. and Belshazzar, Dan. V. 1. And Merodach-Baladan, Esaias XXXIX. 1. and
Evil-Merodach, 2 Kings XXV. 27. And Nebonatsar Na^opolatsar, and
Nebuchadnetsar. And in the same names are many times a change of letters, like
letters put some times one for another; as Merodach is called Berodach, 2 King.
XX. 12. As Dibon the name of a City, Numb. XI. 30. is called Dimon, Esaias XV.
9. And Nebuchadnezzar is written also in Scripture Nebuchadnetsar, Ier. XXII.
25. and Nebuchadrezzar, and Nebuchadretzer, Ier. XXI. 2. and XXIV. 1. Sometimes
letters, or syllables are transposed, and left out, and added: And so there is
much variation in one and the same name: Esaias is called also Ieshajah, and
Ieshajahu; Hezekiah is called and written Ezekias, Chiskijah, 2 King. XVIII. 1.
Chiskijahu, XXXVI. 1. Jechiskijab, Micah I. 1. Iechiskijahu, Esaias I. 1.
Iehojacin is called also Iechoniah, Iechonias, Coniah, Conijahu. I omit others
not much unlike. Yea sometimes in Scripture diverse men have diverse dissonant
names; some 2, some 3, as 1 King. XV. 2, 10. compared with 2 Chronicles. XI. 20. and
Chapter XIII. 2. And as further may be seen at large in the Great Annotations upon
1 Chronicles. III. 1, 15, 16. and VI. 1, 20, 24. and VIII. 5, 33. and Chapter XI. and
Chapter XVIII. 10, 16. and Chapter XX. 7. And diverse places have two several names; as
in 2 Samuel VIII. 8. compared with 1 Chronicles. XX. 4. And many others.

Adam] Adam lived to the 243 year of Methuselah.

Seth] Seth was borne in the 130th year of Adams age, And so likely soon after
the murder of Abel by Cain. In which space of near 130 years, so many might be
borne, as might justly occasion that speech of guilty Cain, Every one that
finds me shall slay me.

Enoch] Enoch lived so many years before his Translation, viz. 365. And his
Prophecy mentioned, Jude v. 14, 15. is not intimated in the Old Testament.

Methuselah] Methuselah lived to the 98 year of Shem.

Methuselah] Methuselah the longest liver, Chapter V. and VII. 6.

Noah] Of Noah's sons, Japhet was the eldest, Shem the second, and Cham the
youngest, Genesis VII. 1. and IX. 24. and X. 21. and XI. 10.

Shem] Shem was two years younger then Japhet, Chapter V. 32. and VII. I. and Chapter
XI. 10. and lived to the fiftieth year of Isaac. And so Shem is the only
person in Scripture that lived to see his posterity of the tenth generation.
And seems to be Melchizedech, Genesis XIV. 18. Heb. VII. I. etc.

These 120 years, c. VI. 3. begin 20 years before Noah had any children.

Cubits] Of Cubits, Ezekiel. XL. 5.

Flood] These 150 days c. c. VII. 11. to the Resting of the Ark on the seventh
month, 17 day, XIII. 4. do show those month to consist of 30 days apiece.
And the number of the months cannot be doubted of. Here is mention made of the
1, 2, 7, 10. Which shows the year to differ little from ours now.

Noah] Noah lived 950 years, c. IX. 29. being born in the 1056 year of the
World; and dying in the year 2006. two years before Abraham was born; He so
lived to see his children or posterity of the ninth generation.

Iles] Isles are taken, Jer. XXV. 22. Ezekiel. XXXVII. 3, 15. Esaias XX. 6. And
sometimes for Islands likewise, being remote and transmarine parts, as Esaias
XLII. 1, 5. and XLII. 4, 10. and XLIX. 1. and LI. 5. and LX. 9.

Babel] See my observations on Dan.

Sidon] Sidon, in Hebrew Tsidon, Josh. XI. 8. and Chapter XIX. 28. Ancienter by
much then Tire. See my Annotations on Zech. IX. 2.

Arphaxad] Man's life halfed, Chapter V. And again shortened about another half at
the building of the Tower of Babel, X. 25. and XI. 19. And well-nigh the third
time, between the times of Abraham and Moses, XXV. 7. Psalm. XC. 10.

Abram] Abram borne, Terah, Genesis XI. 32. and XII. 4. Acts VII. 4.

Ur] Chapter XI. 31, 32. Acts VII. 2, 3, 4. show Ur to be in Mesopotamia, and Abram
to be called there. And after Terahs death at Haran, then he had a new Call,
Genesis XII. 1. And else the Hebrew Perasha upon Terahs death, Chapter XI. 32. had
been unfit.

Egypt] Egypt, Mitzrajim, or Misraim. So called from the son of Ham of that
name, Genesis X. 6. whence also it is called, the Land of Ham, Psalm. CV. 27. and
CVI. 22. It is called also Rahab, Esaias LI. 9. from her pride and power, Esaias
XXX. 7. Ezekiel. XXX. 6. It is the ancientest Kingdom that we read of; except it
be the Kingdom of Assyria, by Cush, the other son of Ham, Genesis X. 8. -- 12.
The Kings of Egypt mentioned in Scripture, are Pharaoh (which after seems to
be a common name to their Kings; as Ptolomie, whence Bartholomew that is
Bar-Ptolomie, the son of Ptolomie, was to them in the times of the Macedonian
or Greekish divided Empire) or many Pharaohs; as in the days of Abraham, Genesis
XII. 15. Of Jacob and Joseph, Genesis XXXVII. 36. and Chapter XLI. 1. and XLVI. 5. and
L. 4. Of Moses, Exodus I. 11. and Chapter XVIII. 10. Heb. XI. 24. Of Solomon, 1
King. III. 1. Shishak is the name of the King of Egypt in Solomon's time, and in
Rehoboams time, 1 King. XI. 40. and Chapter XIV. 25. 2. Chron. XII. 2, 9. So, a
Kings name of Egypt in Hoshea's time, 2 King. XVII. 4. Pharaoh in Ezekiah's
time, 2 King. XVIII. 21. Pharaoh Necho (deemed to be the son of Psammetichus)
in Josias his time, and in Jehojakims time, 2 King. XXIII. 29. and Chapter XXIV. 7.
Jer. XLVI. 2. Pharaoh. and Pharaoh-Hophra, in Zedekiahs; and in the Prophet
Ezekiels time, Jer. XXXVII. 5, 7, 11. and XLIV. 30 Ezekiel. XXIX. 2, 3. and Chapter
XXX. 21. and Chapter XXXI. 2. and Chapter XXXII. 2, 31.

Sarai] Sarai fair; XII. 11, 12. And she the only woman, whose whole age is
recorded in Scripture, XXIII. 1.

That Prophetical promise, Genesis XV. 13. makes not the Israelites to be 400
years in Egypt; But rather is thus rightly understood; That Abraham's Seed, that
is, Isaac and Jacob, should be strangers in a Land that was not theirs; that
is, in Canaan 190; years from the birth of Isaac, to Jacobs going down into
Egypt, XXV. 26. and XLVII. 9. And Jacobs posterity were strangers in Egypt,
from his going down thither, till their bringing forth by Moses, 210 years; not
400 years there: Moses himself being the son of Jochebed, the daughter of
Levi, Number. XXVI. 59. and grandchilde of Kohath; And Levi, and Koath went down
into Egypt with Jacob, XLVI. 11. And Machir the son of Manasseh: And Jair the
grandchilde of Hezrom, living in Moses his time, Number. XXXII. 40, 41. And Achan
the third from Zarah living in Joshuahs time, Josh. VII. 1. 18. 1 Chronicles. II. 6,
7. And thus 190 and 210 make up those 400 years, in this Prophetical promise
mentioned. And the Samaritan Bible or Text here; and the LXX. in Exodus XII. 40.
do thus declare this point; though their insertion and addition there be of
their own mind and meaning; and no part of the sacred Text.

Name] Names changed, Abrams, and Sarai's here; so Jacobs, Joseph's, Naomies,
Pashurs, and others. See the Annotations on Esaias LXII. 4. and on Jer. XXIII. 6.
and XXXIII. 16.

Abram] Abram signifies an high or lofty Father; Abraham, a Father of a great
multitude. He is called, The Friend of God, 2 Chronicles. XX. 7. Esaias XLI. 8. Jam.
II. 23.

Sarai] Sarai signifies my Lady, Sarah a Lady, or Princess, without
restriction; The Title being so enlarged.

Ishmael] Ishmael was 13 years old when he was circumcised, XVII. 25. And so
above 15. or rather 17 at Isaacs weaning, when he and his mother were cast out
of Abraham's family, XXI. 5, 8, 14, 15.

Three measures] viz. 1 Log. Lev. XIV. 10. the least measure. 2 Cab, 2 King.
VI. 25. 3 Hin, Exodus XXIX. 40. Levit. XXIII. 13. Ezekiel. IV. 11. 4 Omer or Homer,
or Gnomer, being the quantity of a man's daily eating of Manna, and the tenth
part of an Ephah, Exodus XVI. 16. 36. 5 Seah, translated measure or Satum, in
this Text, Genesis XVIII. 6. and 2 King. VII. 1. 6 Ephah, containing ten Omers,
Exodus XVI. 36. 7 Bate or Bath, containing likewise ten Omers; and being both
the tenth part of a Cor, and Chomer, Ezekiel. XLV. 11, 14. 8 Lethec, translated
half an Omer, or rather half a Chomer, Hos. III. 2. 9 Cor, and 10 Chomer, each
equal, and containing ten Bates or Ephahs apiece, Ezekiel. XLV. 11, 14. Thus far
Scripture. The particular assignations of their several Capacities are usually
made thus, viz: The Log to contain the quantity of six hen-eggs-shels of
Palestine, the same with Sextarium Romanum, and is about our half pint (yet
some make it a pint.) The Cab to contain four Logs, i. e. a quart of our
measure, or 24 egs-shels; (yet some say a pottle) The Hin to contain six Logs,
i. e. 36. egs-shels (some say 12 Logs, or 72. egs-shels) or about three quarts.
An Omer to contain one Cab and an half, and a fifth part, about our three
pintes and an half, or a pottle, the tenth part of an Ephah. Seah to contain
two Hins, or six Cabs, i. e. a gallon and an half, or Modius Romanus, the third
part of an Ephah. Ephah to contain ten Omers or Pottles, i. e. four gallons
and an half; or about three Seahs; and to be Medimnus Atticus, (yet some make
it to contain eight gallons; and so four Ephahs to contain our barrel; some
to contain near ten gallons: or about the measure of our bushel, or half a
bushel and a pottle.) Bate or Bath is of the same measure for liquid things, as
Ephah is for dry things. Lethec to contain five Ephahs, or fifteen Seahs, or
Sata, or Modii, that is, two bushels, six gallons, and one pottle; or half a
Chomer. Chomer, and Cor are both of the same measure, either equal; and
contains certainly, as was said, ten Bates or Ephahs apiece, or two Lethecs.
Cor is often translated Measures. And thus uncertain are we for the grounds of
these measures of Capacities.

Abimelech] And XXVI. Palestine; as Pharaoh to the Kings of Egypt; Benhadad to
the Kings of Syria; Candace to the Queens of Ethiopia; Caesar to the Roman
Emperors.

Hebron] Hebron called also Kiriath-Arba, Arba, the the father of Anak, where
Anak lived, and his sons and the Anakims, all Giants. Here Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob dwelled, and were buried here in the Cave of Macpelah, before Mamre, the
same is Hebron. Here Sarah died, and was buried in that Cave: And Rebekah, and
Leah were likewise buried here. Hence Joseph was sent to see the welfare of his
brethren. And hither the Spies came that were sent by Moses to spy out the
Land. Hoham the King of Hebron was one of the five Kings hid in the Cave, and
slain and hanged up by Joshuah: And it seems another King of Hebron soon
after slain by him. And he and Caleb slew the Anakims dwelling here. This City
fell to the Tribe of Judah; and was seated in a mountain of Judah: and
together with the Suburbs of it, was given to the Priests; and to be a City of
refuge: But the Fields, and Villages of it were given to Caleb that good Spy.
To the top of an hill before Hebron, Sampson carried the Gate of Gaza. David
having sent to them of Hebron a Present of the spoil which he got of the
Amalekites, in the rescue of Ziklag, was commanded by God to go hither. And
here at Hebron he was made King, and reigned seven years and six months: had
six sons borne him here, of six several wives. Hither Abner cameto David; and
being murdered by Joab, was by David mournfully buried here. Hither
Ishbosheths head was brought, and buried in Abners grave; and his murderers by
David hanged here. Hither came all Israel to make David King over all Israel.
And afterward Absalom being borne here, pretended a vow to be performed here;
and rebelling against his father made himself King here. This City was first
built seven years before Zoan in Egypt. And in King Rehoboams time was repaired
and fortified by him.

Abraham] Abraham alive when Jacob was 15 years old, XXI. 5. and XXV. 7, 26.
And so Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were living at the same time, Heb. XI. 9.

Esau] Esau sold his Birthright for bread and pottage, XXV. 34. for one morsel
of meat, as it is, Heb. XII. 16.

Isaac] Isaac blind above 43 years. Jacob, XXV. 26. And blind at the blessing
of Jacob, XXVII. 1. And Jacob was then 77. years old, as appears by his age of
130 when he stood before Pharaoh, XLVII. 9. And the age of Joseph being then 39
or 40, viz. 30 when he was advanced by Pharaoh, XLI. 46. And after that, seven
years of plenty, and two of famine passed ere Jacob came down, XLV. 6. And
Joseph was borne in the 14 year after Jacobs coming to Laban, XXX. 25. and
XXXI. 41. And Jacob came to Laban presently after the foresaid blessing, XXVII.
42. etc. XXVIII. 1, 2. And so the 14 years before Joseph was borne, and 39 of
Joseph's age after, being taken out of Jacobs 130. leaves him to be 77. when
Isaac blessed him. And Jacobs 77. being added to Isaacs 60 when Jacob was
borne, makes Isaac to be 137. when he was blind, and blessed Jacob. And Isaac
dying at 180, XXXV. 28. must so needs be blind 43 years at the least.

Esau] Esau could not prevail with Isaac to bring him to repent of his
blessing Jacob, Esau sought it of Isaac with tears, XXVII. 33, 34. Heb. XII. 17.

Iacob] Jacob being 77 years old, Leah and Rachel, in the first year of his
coming to Laban, [Laban by inversion of the letters is Nabal] and at or before
the beginning of the 14 years service for them. This appears by his twelve
children; Dinah being one: and by the Sequence of their births, within those 14
years, Ch XXIX. and XXX. which are not possible to be, in that manner, and order
borne, within the compass only of the last seven years: And having seven of
them by Leah her self; who yet left bearing a while after her fourth son: and
Reuben her eldest son being so old to gather Mandrakes in the field a year
before Issachar, her fifth child, was borne by her. And this is further
evidenced by the age of Judah, being but fifty upon this account it self, that
is, 10 years elder then Joseph, when yet he, and his grandchildren by Tamar,
both Hezron and Hamul came down with Jacob into Egypt, XLVI. 12. whereby it
also appears, that Judah marrying at 17 years of age, which was the first year
of Jacobs return from Laban the Syrian into Canaan, XXXVIII. 1, 2, 3. Then
both Er, and Onan, and Pharez must needs marry each when they were about 12 or
13 years old, which was rare in that age of the world. And this truth of the
time of Jacobs marriage will stand well with the computation of time by the
ages and acts of Judah, and his posterity; and with a right rendition of those
texts, Genesis XXIX. 20, 21, 25, 27, 28, 30. which should be somewhat altered in
our English translations. Here then those large Annotations 1651. making Jacob
to marry both Leah and Rachel at the end of the first seven years service: And
the twelve children to be borne within the compass of the seven later years:
And Judah to be but three years elder then Joseph; And to marry at fourteen
years of age: And Er and Onan to marry at fourteen apiece: And Hezron and
Hamul, to be borne in Egypt, and to come down with Jacob only in the loins of
their father Pharez; (wherein yet there remains a contradiction in them, as
appears by comparing together their Annotations on Genesis XXXVIII. 1. and XLVI.
12, 27. do in all the said particulars seem to me to miss the right; and at
least to require a more serious review and consideration. See the said
Annotations on Genesis XXIX. 27, 30. and XXXVIII. 1, 2, 6. and XLVI. 12.

Sacks] Sacks, saccus; and Amen are the words that hold most, in most languages.

Benjamin] Benjamin not 24 years old when he came into Egypt, Padan-Aram, out
of Genesis XXXV. 24, 26. and so to be 33 years old at that time; yet is he called
a Lad, Genesis XLIII. 8. and XLIV. 22, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34. and a little one, v.
20. And yet at that time said to be the father of ten sons, Genesis XLVI. 21.
And two of them, Naaman, and Ard, (if not more) seem to be his grandchildren,
Number. XXVI. 40. But not borne in Egypt: no more then Hezron and Hamul were borne
there. And so both Benjamin, and his eldest son Belah must marry very young:
as the like was observed in Er, Onan, and Pharez, before.

The number] The number of the souls that came out of Jacobs loins, and came
down with him into Egypt, Genesis XLVI. 26. And this is the exact number. For
Joseph and his two children came not down with Jacob into Egypt, but were in
Egypt before. And leaving out Er and Onan, that were dead before in Canaan; and
reckoning in Hezron and Hamul, the grandchildren of Judah by Tamar; as the
express letter of the Text does in both points require, the said number of 66.
does rightly arise. And to imagine otherwise, that Hezron and Hamul were borne
in Egypt, and did go down thither with Jacob only virtually in the loins of
their father Pharez, it does not only contradict the Text, as was said; but
also does overthrow the whole intent and drift of the Record, Catalogue, and
Genealogy in that chapter; which is to show the small number that went down
personally with Jacob into Egypt, Deuteronomy. XXVI. 5. That thereby wonderful
multiplication of their posterity in Egypt, Exodus XII. 37. and in little more
then a year after, Number. I. 45, 46. by Gods blessing might the more gloriously
appear. And if some; or any of those mentioned in the said Catalogue, went down
only virtually in the loins of their parents; in that sense as well might
46000; yea 600000. be said to have descended with Jacob into Egypt.

Again, the number of the souls of the house of Jacob which came into Egypt,
are truly told to be 70. Genesis 46. 27. Exodus I. 5. Deuteronomy. X. 22. So justly
reckoning Jacob himself, and Joseph with his two sons, who were then in Egypt
already. And so these 70. are made up of those sums, 33. 16. 14. 7. set down
in Genesis XLVI. 15, 18, 22, 25.

Again, the number is told to be 75. by Stephen, and Luke recording Stephens
speech, Acts VII. 14. Here, denying any corruption of the Text; some would lay
a failer of memory upon Stephen; as the like again in v. 16. as not being so
privileged in this sudden Speech, as the holy Penmen were inspired for the
writing of Scripture: And thereupon say, That Luke dealt tfaihfully in relating
what Stephen spoke. Others say, That Stephen herein did wittingly and willingly
follow the Translation of the LXX. Interpreters on Genesis XLVI. 27. and Exodus I.
5. As in diverse citations the holy Writers of the New Testament do; That
Translation being then in high esteem, and almost only in use. Yet the five
persons superadded by them seem not to be those which the LXX. fetch out of 1 Chronicles. VII. 14, 20. But rather all those that are named, Gen, XLVI. namely
Jacobs four wives, and Er, and Onan; which make up 75. in all, leaving out
Jacob himself.

Exodus.
EXODUS Contains an History of 141 years, and some few days over; And not of
about 146 years. This truth appears thus; From the death of Joseph, to the
birth of Moses were 60. years, and either 56. or 65. or 72. or 80. And this
assertion of 60. years is thus gathered. The Israelites being in Egypt, from
the going down of Jacob thither, till Moses brought them out thence, 210 years;
as has been showed on Genesis XV. 13. And Joseph being 40 years old when his
father Jacob came down; as being 30 when Pharaoh advanced him, Genesis XLI. 46.
And after that, seven years of Plenty passing, and the third year of Famine in
being, when Jacob came down. And Joseph living 110 years, Genesis L. 22. So leaves
70 of his life to be spent in Egypt, after Jacobs coming down thither. And
Moses being 80 years old when he brought the Israelites out of Egypt, Exodus
VII. 7. So leaves just 60 years, between Joseph's death, and Moses his birth.
For those three numbers, of Joseph's 70. and the said interval of 60, and Moses
his 80. make up the said sum of 210 years. Now to those 60 years before the
Birth of Moses, add those 80 years of his age, Exodus VII. 7. And the time
spent about getting leave of Pharaoh for their departure, Exodus Chapter III. to the
XII. which was some small part of year, viz: within one month: And their
coming forth on the first month, the 15 day, Number. XXXIII. 3. And their coming
into the Wilderness of Sinai; in the third month, Exodus XIX. 1. where the Law
was given, Exodus XX. And their making and erecting of the Tabernacle, in the
next year, first month, first day, Exodus XL. 1. And so the sum of 141 years,
and few days does arise; which contains the whole History of Exodus. Whereof
140 years, within few days, are comprised in the two first Chapters; And one
year, and few days are spent in the rest of the Book.

His sister] His sister, Miriam; who was elder then Moses, or Aaron: And Aaron
elder then Moses by three years, Exodus VII. 7. All three were the children of
Iochebed the daughter of Levi, by Amram the grandson of Levi, Exodus VI. 16,
18, 20. Number. XXVI. 59. 1 Chronicles. VI. 3.

Moses] Moses, the Egyptian, 3 are not mentioned in the Old Testament: But by
Saint Stephen, Acts VII. 22, 23.

Iethro] Iethro who is likewise called Iether, Exodus IV. 18. and Hobab, Number. X.
29. Judge. IV. 11. were the names of Moses his father-in-law. And Kenite, Judge.
I. 16. seems to be his name Patronymical. And Revel, and Raguel seem to be
the names of Jethros father, Exodus II. 18. Number. X. 29.

Horeb] Horeb here, and Sinai, Exodus XVI. 1. and XIX. 11. are the same
mountain; or two tops of the same mountain: called Sinai, from the bush, Exodus
III. 2. or bushes growing there, and thereabouts in that wilderness, Chapter XIX.
1. As Mount Sion, and Mount Moriah were much alike.

A Token] This token or sign was to come to pass afterward; Esaias VII. 14.
and XXXVII. 30. Ier. XLIII. 9, 10. and Chapter LI. 63, 64. Among other reasons, to
assure there the truth of the Promise, by the quality of the Promise
foretelling such events.

No lie] No lie in this Petition to Pharaoh: assertion, Chapter V. 3.

Will not] The foreknowledge of God does not impeach or trench upon the
Free Will of Pharaoh.

Borrow] No wrong in that borrowing, and spoiling the Egyptians, Exodus Chapter XI.
2. and Chapter XII. 35, 36.

The Magicians] The Magicians of Egypt, Iannes and Iambres, the two prime of
them are named in the New, 2 Timothy III. 8.

The Red-sea] And so in the Greek Erythraeum, Acts VII. 36. Heb. XI. 29.
signifying red: And so the Latins from them. So called, either from the
seeming color of the water from the abundance of reddish bulrushes therein; or
the red sand and gravel in it; or red Coral growing in it; or red sandy
mountains adjoining to it; or why not from Edom, as the Edomean Sea, 1 King.
IX. 26. He being called Red from his red color; and the red Pottage, Genesis XXV.
25, 30. But the likeliest reason is from the Hebrew appellation, calling it the
sea of weeds, or sedge, mare algsum, of flag, or rush, or tange, rack or reet,
in Latin alga, Jonah II. 5. which reddish weeds in abundance grew in it, being
but shoaly; and specially about the bancks of it.

Neither rose] The Plague of Darkness in Egypt seems to obstruct both
Candlelight, and Fire-light.

This moneth] The beginning of the year being here changed from the time
wherein formerly it was, Egypt; a little before our Easter, and about our
Vernal Equinoctial, as it then stood; This argues the Creation of the World to
have been at that time when the Jews year formerly began: And the time of
Noah's Flood to begin the 17th day of the second month of that year. Which year
is known to commence its Beginning from the Autumnal Equinoctial, as it then
stood. From whence, even after this Change, the year of Jubilee, and
Sabbath-year, and year for some Civil accounts did continue still to have and
enjoy their former Beginnings; as we see, Levit. XXV. 8, 9, 10. Exodus XXIII.
11, 16. and Chapter XXXIV. 22.

In the evening] The Paschal Lamb is appointed here to be killed and eaten,
Even; or, as it is in the Hebrew, at or between the two Evenings; And so, Number.
IX. 3. Lev. XXIII. 5. And so kept by our Savior at Even, Matthew. XXVI. 20. Now
the better to know the Even, and two Evenings, we must first know, That the
Artificial Day is divided, from Sunne-rising to Sunsetting, into twelve hours,
John XI. 9. Matthew. XX. 6, 12. Acts II. 15. which hours are sometimes longer,
sometimes shorter, as the course of the Sun measures them. And again, that
day seems to have a division into three equal parts, allotting four hours to
each part. Or into four equal parts, allotting three hours to each part. And so
the first part is from their Sunne-rising, to our ninth hour: the second from
our ninth to our twelfth, or Noone, and Midday: the third from that, to our
three in the afternoon: the fourth from that, to Sunsetting. And sometimes
there is taken into the first of these, the time from Daylight to Sunrising:
And into the last of these, the time from Sunsetting to night and darkness,
as Matthew. XVI. 2. and XXVII. 57. John XX. 19. And both these comprise the whole
days Fasting, 2 Samuel I. 12. Now the Even in Scripture is most properly, and
usually expressed, and defined strictly by the Going down, or Setting of the
Sun. So in the purifying of the Unclean, Levit. XXII. 6, 7. Deuteronomy. XXIII. 11.
And so in that case of the King of Ai, Josh. VIII. 29. And of Ahab, 2 Chronicles.
XVIII. 34. And of those five Kings in the Cave of Makkedah, Josh. X. 26, 27.
And so in Mark I. 32. And so it is expressly for the Passover it self, Deuteronomy.
XVI. 6. To which acceptance of the Even agrees that, Psalm. CIV. 23. Mark XI.
11, 19. Luke XXIV. 29. Acts IV. 3. and XXVIII. 23. Yet in Scripture the Evening
is sometimes taken in a larger extent and latitude, for the latter part of the
Day, beginning from the declining of the Sun at Midday; or from the abating
of the heat and force of it, at our three in the afternoon: As may be clearly
gathered from Mat. XIV. v. 15, -- 23. Mark VI. 35, 47. Luke IX. 12. And as it
is usual taken with us in our ordinary salutations. Now at, or between the two
Evenings, is mentioned, as for the yearly Passover; so for the daily Evening
Sacrifice, Exodus XXIX. 39. Number. XXVIII. 4. And for the daily burning of Incense
on the Incense-Altar: And for the daily dressing and lighting of the Lamps in
the Tabernacle, Exodus XXX. 8. So that in these four cases the meaning of the
phrase seems to be the same; Noting out one certain time; and these two
Evenings in the larger, or stricter signification, to be contiguous, or
continued rather; to be that Communis terminus, which couples the end of the
day, and the beginning of the night together; or the two extremities of our
Evening-tide, whereof the former belongs to the end and shutting up of the
natural day preceding, and the later to the beginning of the night, which
leads on, and ushers in the natural or civil day following, as the first part
of it. So that this time is a participle of both, or a Borderer betwixt both,
as the large Annotations fitly express it.

Two side-posts] In this first Passover each Head of a family served as a
Priest: Rites were enjoined, which were not observed or required afterward;
And the second month also allowed for it, Number. IX. 11 And other seven days, 2 Chronicles. XXX. 23.

No manner of work] On diverse Feast-dayes of the Jews it was not lawful for
them to do any servile work; kind or manner of work, save that which every man
must eat. But on the Sabbath day, (and so likely on the day of expiation) that
it self was unlawful; or to kindle a fire on it, Exodus XII. 16. and Chapter XVI. 5,
23. and Chapter XXXV. 2, 3. And much more, to do any manner of work upon it, Neh.
XIII. v. 15, -- 22. Jer. XVII. 21, 22. though for the making of the Tabernacle
it self, Exodus XXXI. 11, 12, 13. or at any time, in earing-time, or harvest,
Exodus XXXIV. 21. And that upon pain of death, Exodus XXXV. 2.

For ever] Many Legal Ceremonies, for ever; all which yet ended at the coming
of Christ in the flesh. And some such enjoined in like terms, yet ended in the
year of Jubilee, Exodus XXI. 6. Levit. XXV. 40. Of this see more in the
Observations on Deuteronomy. XV. 17.

430 years] These do commence from the first Promise made to Abram, Ur of the
Chaldees, whence 30 of the years are made up thus; viz: 5. in Haran; 11 in
Canaan, when Ishmael was borne, Gen, XVI. 3. And 14 years of Ishmaels age, when
Isaac was borne, Genesis XVII. 25. and Chapter XVIII. 10. and XVI. 16. and XXI. 5. And
the 400. begin from Isaacs birth; as was showed on Genesis XV. 13.

By day in a Pillar of a cloud] The Pillar of a cloud by day, and of fire by
night, Exodus XIII. 21. 22. Nehem. IX. 12, 19. Number. XIV. 14. Or rather seem to
be one Pillar, Exodus XIV. 19, 20, 24. Spread as a cloud by day, to cover them
from heat; and gathered up into a Pillar of fire by night, to guide them. Out
of which God spoke unto them, Psalm. XCIX. 7. Number. XII. 5, 10. Deuteronomy. XXXI. 15.
See the Annotations on Esaias IV. 5.

Migdol] A strong City or Fort, Bethshemesh in Egypt, not far from the
Red Sea, Number. XXXIII. 7, 8. Jer XLIV. 1.

Before the Testimony] This command for Aaron to lay up the Pot of Manna before
the Lord, Exodus XXXIII. 29. and Chapter XXXVII, 1, etc.

An Omer] The Omer and Ephah here seem quite altered in that Visionary New
State of Israel, Ezekiel. XLV. 11. Unless Gnomer and Chomer be two several
measures; which I rather incline unto; and conceive the truth to be this; That
(...) Exodus XVI. 36. is the tenth part of an Ephah, as is there set down;
whereunto accords that ver. 16. it being the measure of the eating of Manna
sufficient for a man by the day. But (...) Ezekiel. XLV. contains ten Ephahs or
Baths, both being of the same measure, v. 11. and 14. And hereunto accords
that, Esaias V. 10. where one (...) (for so the word is there written, as it is
in Ezekiel. XLV.) yields but one Ephah. i. e. the tenth part of the seed, it being
a judgment of famine there denounced. See also, Levit. XXVII. 16. And this may
serve for the better explication of my Annotations upon that place of Ezekiel,
contained in the second Edition of the great Annotations printed 1651.

Rock] Rocks twice smitten: Rock, Exodus XVII. 6. And that water going likely
into the Red Sea; and so failing them in the 32. Station at Ezion-gaber; Upon
their new murmuring, another Rock was smitten 39 years after, Number. 20. 1, --
13. And both called the waters of Meribah.

Went up] Moses nine or ten times goes up to the Lord on Mount Sinai. Exodus
XIX. 3, 7, 8, 10, 14, 20, 21, 25. and Chapter XX. 21. and Chapter XXIV. 3, 12, 13, 15,
18. and Chapter XXXII. 7, 15, 30. and Chapter XXXIII. 6, 7, 21. and Chapter XXXIV. 2, 29,
34.

Moses spake] This speech, Heb. XII. 21.

Priests] So, v. 24. These Priests probably seem to be the fathers of the
families. The young men, Exodus XXIV. 5. might possibly be of those Primogeniti
or Firstborn, which God first challenged to himself within one quarter of a
year before, Exodus XIII. 2. and Chapter XXII. 29. And for them the Levites were
taken in afterward, Number. III. 12, 13, 40, 41, 45. and Chapter VIII. 18. Or else
such as Moses pleased to employ in slaying and dressing at least of these
Sacrifices: Called young men likely, as those servants of the King of Assyria
are called in the Original young men, 2 King. XIX. 6.

An Altar] These Altars mentioned in this verse, v. 25, 26. were allowed and
appointed for the time: much differing from those by appointment made when the
Tabernacle, and Temple, were erected, and builded, Exodus XXVII. 1, etc. 2 Chronicles. IV. 1. Of Altars see more on Levit. XVII. 3.

In the seventh] In the Seventh and Sabbatical year, September, as the Iubile
did, The Book of the Law was to be read publicly and solemnly in the beginning
of that year; The Land was to rest from Culture; Lendings vouchsafed to poor
Hebrews, and then due, were to be released, and intermitted, if not clean
remitted, Luke VI. 35. Hebrew servants, both men and women, though bought, if
not redeemed before, were to go out free, if themselves would, and that
liberally furnished, Exodus XXI. 2, -- 7. and XXIII. 11, 16. Levit. XXV. 4, 5,
6, 7, 20, 21, 22. Deuteronomy. XV. 1, -- 18. Jer. XXXIV. 14.

Who has betrothed her to himself] The Hebrew Text has (...) signifying Not,
Who has not betroathed her. But the Hebrew Critics commonly called Masorets,
put for it in the magin (...), signifying to him; so observing a various
reading. And indeed they observe diverse readings in sundry places of Scripture;
but about no one word so many, as about this; as may be seen, Levit. XI. 21.
and Chapter XXV. 30. 1 Samuel II. 3. 2 Kings VIII. 10. 1 Chronicles. XI. 20. Ezra IV. 2.
Job XIII. 15. Psalm. C. 3. Esaias IX. 3. and XLIX. 5. and LXIII. 9. And in many of
these, both senses come to one; reading the Negative by way of interrogation.
See the Annotations on Job 13. 15.

From mine Altar] The Tabernacle, Exodus XXI. 14. 1 King. 1. 50, 51. and Chapter 11.
28.

An Oath] An oath is pnt to the Party suspected, to accuse, v. 11. Somewhat
like an Answer to a Bill in Chancery; or to the oath called ex officio;

Males] Women among the Jews, as not Circumcised; Exodus XXIII. 17. and Chapter
XXXIV. 23, 24. Deuteronomy. XVI. 16. Yet is this no ground to debar women from the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper more then from the Sacrament of Baptism: the
partition wall being now broken down by Christ, and male and female in him are
all one, Gal. III. 8.

Thy bounds] The bounds of the Land of Canaan were Larger, Ge^. XV. 18. Exodus
XXIII. 31. Deuteronomy. I. 7. and Chapter 11. 24. Josh. I. 4. Narrower, Number. XXXIV. 3.
etc. Number. XIII. 21. 1 King. VIII. 65. 2 Chronicles. VII. 8. Judge. XX. 1.


The larger bounds were never possessed and inhabited by the Israelites; at
most made Tributary only in the days of David, and Solomon. And the default
might be no wise in God; but in the Israelites sinning and breaking with God,
Deuteronomy. XIX. 8, 9. Yea the narrower bounds, by reason of their sins, were
scarce at any time fully possessed.

In the Arke] In the Arc were the two Tables of the Law and Covenant, Exodus
XL. 20. And nothing else, 1 Kings VIII. 9. 2. Chron. V. 10. which Tables are
called the Testimony, Exodus XXV. 16, 21. and Chapter XXX. 6. and Chapter XL. 20. And
the Arc is called The Arc of the Testimony, Exodus XXV. 22. and Chapter XXVI. 33.
and Chapter XXX, 6, 26. And the Mercie-seate is said to be upon the Testimony,
Levit. XVI. 13. By the Arc was laid and kept the Pot of Manna, before the
Testimony, Exodus XVI. 34. And Aarons Rod, before the Testimony, Number. XVII. 10.
And that Censer, Levit. XVI. 12. Heb. IX. 4. And the Book of the Law, in the
side of the Arc, or on the outside of it, Deuteronomy. XXXI. 26. Not only those
Pieces of it, Exodus XVII. 14. and Chapter XXIV. 4. and Chapter XXXIV. 27. and Deuteronomy.
XXXI. 9, 22. But the whole Law and writings, and inspired Books of Moses. And
this seems to some to be the Book found in Josiah's time; and to have been
lost in the days of wicked Manasseh, and Amon: Though the matters of that
Book, when it was read to Josiah, and to all the people, seemed so strange unto
them, as if no Copy of it at all,

Lamps to burn alwayes] The Lamps may seem to burn night and day; Exodus III.
7, 8. Levit. XXIV. 2, 3. At least some of them in the daytime.

Tabernacle] Moses his Tent is called the Tabernacle. Sam. III. 3. And the
Temple diverse times by the name of the Tabernacle, and Sanctuary, and Tents of
the Lord, 2 Chronicles. XXXI. 2.

Forty days and forty nights] Moses twice fasted 40 days, Exodus XXXIV. 28.
Deuteronomy. IX. 18. and Chapter X. 10. And some conceive thrice out of Deuteronomy. IX. 25. Yet
this is not likely. Elias once; and our Savior once. Of Fasting, see the
Annotations on Joel I. 14.

Skin of his face shone] By reflexive rays and beams of the Divine splendour:
Trent Bible renders the word; And Painters commonly picture him. The Hebrew
word (...) a substantive signifies an Horn; but (...) the Verb signifies to
shine. And so Saint Paul interprets it, 2 Cor. III. 7.

Looking-glasses] Looking-glasses made not of Glasses, Ezra VIII. 27. and of
much use; and specially for armor inwarre, as Virgil often mentions.

Talents. Shekels] Shekel comes from Shakal, to weigh; And thence may our
English word scale come. A Shekel is 20. Gerahs, Exodus XXX. 13. Ezekiel. XLV. 12.
or two Bekahs, Exodus XXXVIII. 26. The Shekel is half an ounce in silver, or 2
s. 6d. And so the Gerah, 1 d. ob. and the Bekah 1 s. 3 d. The Talent is 3000
Shekels; which appears thus in the Text; The 603550 men are taxed at a Bekah a
piece. This makes 301775 Shekels. Now reckoning 3000 Shekels to a Talent; The
301775 Shekels make up 100 Talents, and 1775 Shekels; according to the sum
there specified, v. 25, 27, 28. And counting the Shekel at 2 s. 6d, the Talent
so comes to 375 l. starling. The Shekel of gold was of the same weight with
that of silver; but of far greater value; of ten to one with the Jews, as
may be gathered out of 1 Chronicles. XXII. 14. And so their Shekel of gold comes to
1 l. 5 s. their Talent of Gold comes to 3750. l. But gold now in Christendom
is at an higher rate. By silverings, as, 2 Samuel XVIII. 11, 12. Matthew. XXVI. 15.
usually Shekels are understood. See the Annotations on Ezekiel. IV. 10. And on
Esther III. 9.

Veil of the Covering] That hanged before,

Lamps to be set in order] Dressing them every morning, Chapter XXX. 7, 8. if not
at morning too: there being no windows in the Tabernacle; and so burning
always, Chapter XXXVII. 20. continually, Levit. XXIV. 2.

Blessed them] The offerers,

Of the Gongregation] Where Priests,

Everlasting] That their posterity should not need to be anointed again.
Everlasting see the Observations on Deuteronomy. XV. 17.

A Cloud] Even that Cloud, Exodus XIII. 21, 22. miraculously removed hither.

Not able] The manner therefore of the clouds abode,

Leviticus.
LEVITICUS takes up only the time of one month; viz: the first month of the
second year of their coming out of Egypt; whiles yet they stayed at Mount
Sinai: Compare together, Exodus XL. 2, 17. Levit. I. 1. and Chap. XXVII. 34. and
Number. I. 1. And this was in the 2509 year of the world; thus, 1656. to the
Flood. Thence to Abrams birth, in the 130 year of Terah, 352. Thence, to
Isaac's birth, 100. Thence, to Jacob's birth, 60. Thence, to Jacob's going down
into Egypt 130. Thence to the coming out of Egypt 210: and one year after their
coming forth; in all 2509. And not in the year of the world 2455. or 2514. This
Book contains principally the Function and Offices of the Levites; And
Ceremonials concerning Sacrifices, and Feasts, Rites, and Purifications:
Delivered by God to Moses out of the Tabernacle of the Congregation when it was
newly reared, Levit. I. 1. And accordingly is that, Levit. XXV. 1. to be
expounded.

The month of this Book may seem to be thus spent, taken up, and subdivided,
viz:

1. Day; The Tabernacle, Altar, and all other things belonging to the
Sanctuary, reared, placed, anointed, Exodus XL. Levit. VIII.

The Consecration of Aaron, and his sons, Commanded, Exodus XXIX. Begun, Exodus
XL. fully finished, Levit. VIII. in the space of seven days.

And seven days to make an Atonement for the Altar, and sanctify it, Exodus
XXIX. 37.

8. Day; The Princes Offerings of six Wagons, and twelve Oxen, for carriage
and service of the Tabernacle. Their Offerings at the Dedication of the Altar;
each Prince on his day: which so continued twelve days, Number. VII. And likely
during that time of twelve days, Moses received from the Lord, out of the
Tabernacle of the Congregation, those Laws for Sacrifices, and Offerings,
Levit. Chapter I, -- VII.

8. Day; The Consecration of Aaron, and his sons, being ended, Aaron does
first Sacrifice, Levit. IX.

In the sacrifices and offerings Levitically are considerable; Principally, and
more Generally: The Persons, Offerer or Bringer, Lev. 1. 4. and 3. 2. and 7. 30.
Sacrificer, Priests, Lev. 1. 6. 2 Chronicles. 29. 24. Now wine or strong drink,
When, etc. Lev. 10. 9. Levites, in some part, and in some cases, 2 Chronicles. 29.
34. and chapter 35. 11* -- 14.

Place, Lev. 17. 3. -- 9. Deuteronomy. 12. 5, -- 14. and chapter 16 5, 6. Fire Came down
from Heaven, Lev 19. 24. See further, 1 Kings 18. 38. 1 Chronicles. 21. 26. 2 Chronicles.
7. 1. Must never be suffered to go out, Lev. 6. 12, 13. notwithstanding their
journeys in the wilderness, Numb. 4 13.
Fat in Sacrifices, always to be burnt, and what fat, Lev. 3. 16, 17. Other
cases, when Not to be eaten, Leviticus 7. 23, 25. To be eaten, Leviticus 7. 23,
25. Nehemiah 8. 10. To be used otherwise, Liviticus 7. 24.

Oil, L^viticus 2. and 14. Exodus 29. Ezra 7. 22. Salt, Levit. 2. 13. Ezekiel. 43.
24. Mar. 9. 49. Ezra 6. 9. and 7. 22. Blood Never to be eaten, Genesis 9. 4. Lev.
7. 26, 27. and 17. 10, -- 14. 1 Samuel 14. 13. Deuteronomy. 12. 16 23, 24, 25. In
sacrifices, Sprinkled, sometimes Before the vail of the Sanctuary, and upon the
horns of the Altar of incense, Lev. 4. 6, 7, 17, 18. Upon the horns of the
Altar of burnt-offerings, Lev. 4. 25, 30. 34. Round about upon the Altar of
Burnt-offering, Lev. 1. 5, 11. and 3, 2, 8, 13. and 7, 2.
Wrung out at the side of the Altar, Lev. 1* 15. and 5. 9. Poured out at the
side of the Altar, or at the bottom of the Altar, Leviticus 4 7, 18. 25, 30,
34, and 8 15.


Particularly: The Kinds and sorts of them. Burnt-offering, or Holocaust, Lev.
1. Matter of Cattle, Herd, Oxen or Bullocks. Males. Flock, Sheep. Males.
Goats. Males.

Foul, Tuttle-Doves. Young Pigeons.

Manner and Law of it, Lev. 1 and chapter 6. 9, -- 13. and chapter 7. 8. Numb. 10. 10.
and chapter 15. 5, 8, 11, 12.
Meat Offering, Lev. 2. Matter of Fine flower. No Honey. Leaven.
v. 11. Oil, No Honey. Leaven.
v. 11. Incense. No Honey. Leaven.
v. 11. Salt. No Honey. Leaven.
v. 11. Or of first fruits in the ear. No Honey. Leaven.
v. 11. No Honey.


Manner, and Law of it, Lev. 2. and chapter 6. 14 -- 18. and 7. 9, 10 and 10. 12,
13. Numb. 15. 1, -- 16. and 18. 9, 10.
Drink Offering. Matter, wine. Manner, Measure and Law of it, Lev 23. 13, 18,
37. Numb. 6. 15, 17 and chapter 15. 5, 7, 10, 24. and chapter 28. 7, -- 31. and chapter 29.
6, 11, -- 39. 1 Chronicles. 9. 29. and 29. 21. 2 Chronicles. 29. 35. Ezra 7. 17. Ezekiel.
45. 17. Jer. 44. 17. 2 Kings 16. 13, 15. Deuteronomy. 32 38. Ezra 7. 12.
Meat and drink offerings ever joined together, Numb. 16. 35, -- 12. And joined
almost to all other sacrifices, Numb. 6. 15, 17. 1 Chronicles. 21. 23. and 29. 21. 1
Kings 8. 64. Ezra 7. 17. 2 Chronicles. 29. 35, Peace Offerings; Or Gratulatory of
Thanksgiving, Lev. 3. Matter of Herd; Ox or Bullock. male or female. Flock.
Lamb. male or female. Goat. male or female.

Manner and Law of it, Lev. 3. and chapter 7. 11, -- 34. and 10. 14, 15. and chapter
22. 23, 29, 30. Numb. 10. 10. touching the wave-breast and heave-shoulder. See,
Lev. 7. 30, -- 34.
Sin-offering of ignorance, Lev. 4. Of the High Priest; the matter and manner
of it, Lev. 4. 1, - 12. and 6. 30. and 10. 16, 17, 18. Whole Congregation; the
matter and manner of it, Lev. 4. 13, -- 21. and 6. 30. Numb, 15. 22, -- 26.
Ruler; the matter (a male) and manner of it, Lev. 4. 22, -- 26. and chapter 6. 25,
-- 29. Vulgar; the matter, (a female) and manner of it, Lev. 4. 27, -- 35. and
6, 25, -- 29. Number. 15. 27, 28. and 18 9, 10
Trespasse-offering, for sins of Ignorance, Lev. 5. in Diverse things, chapter 51,
-- 13. And therein after confession, both the matter (female) and manner of it.
Holy things Lev. 5. 15.-19. by Diminution or Sacrilege; matter and manner of
it, adding the fifth part, with thy estimation. Otherwise; matter and manner of
it, with thy estimation.

Knowledge, by Weakness in diverse cases, with the matter (a Ram) and manner of
it, Lev. 6. 1. -- 8. Numb. 5. 6, 7, 8. adding a fifth part with thy estimation.
Presumption; there is no sacrifice for it but death, Number. 15. 30, -- 36.

As the sin-offering is, so is the trespasse-offering; there is one law for
them, Lev. 7. 1, -- 7. And in some things they are hardly distinguishable. And
the trespasse-offering seems to be for the greater offenses.
Times, wherein several sorts of them were to beused. And so some were Voluntary
free-will-offerings, At pleasure; as many times the whole burnt-offerings, and
peace offerings; See those at the Deduction of the Ark, 1 Kings 8. 5. 2 Samuel 6.
13, 17. Dedication of the Temple, 1 Kings 8. 63. Walls of Jerusalem, Nehem. 12.
43.

Upon voluntary Promise by Vow, Lev. 22. 23. and Deuteronomy. 12. 17, 26. and 23. 21.
See here the Law of the Nazarites, Numb 6.
Enjoined upon Fixed Times; Daily, morning and evening, Exodus 29, 38. Numb. 28.
3, -- 8, Weekly, on the Sabbath Day, Numb. 28. 9, 10. Monthly, on the first
day, Numb. 28. 11, -- 15. and 10. 10. Ps. 81. 3 Esaias 1. 13. Yearly
at Feasts 3. Solemn, of Passover, and Unleavened bread Lev. 23. Weeks. Deuteronomy.
16. Tabernacles. Deuteronomy. 16.
Others for one day, viz. of First Fruits, Lev. 23 9. -- 15. Blowing of
trumpets, Lev. 23. 24, 25.

Fast of expiation, Lev. 16. and ch 23, 27. -- 32.
Incident occassions; more Extraordinary; as at the Consecration of Aaron, and
his sons, Lev. 8. Exodus 29. and chapter 40. See Aarons first-offerings, Lev. 9.
Levities, Numb. 8.
Dedication of the Altar, Numbers 7. 10, -- 88.
Ordi^^ Purification and cleansing of Women after childe-birth. Lev. 12. 13,
14, 15. chapters. Leper. Lev. 12. 13, 14, 15. chapters. Men, in their issues.
Lev. 12. 13, 14, 15. chapters. Women in their (...) Lev. 12. 13, 14, 15.
chapters.







9. Day; Nadab, and Abihu offer Incense with strange fire; and are slain,
Levit. X. 11, 12, 13. Days Seem those Laws given from the Lord, to Moses and
Aaron, touching Beasts, Fishes, Fowls, clean and unclean, Chapter XI. Moses, for
Purification of Women in childbirth, Chapter XII. Moses and Aaron; for Leprosies,
and their cleansings, Chapter XIII. XIV. For issues of men and women, and their
cleansings, Chapter XV.

14. Day; Celebration of the Passover, Number. IX. whether the Feast of
unleavened Bread, for seven days, was added hereunto, is not expressed. After
the death of Nadab and Abihu, Moses receives Laws from the Lord, touching the
High Priests coming into the most Holy Place, once a year, to make an
Atonement, on the tenth day of the seventh month. And the manner of it, Chapter
XVI. Place of Sacrificing. And touching Blood, Chapter XVII. Unlawful mixtures, and
Lusts; and other sins. And the Punishments of them, Chapter XVIII, XIX, XX.
Priests; their Holiness; Honor: and cleansing, Chapter XXI, XXII. Feasts, Chapter
XXIII. Oil, and Lamps. And Shewbread, Chapter XXIV. 1, -- 9.
Shelomiths son blasphemeth, Chapter XXIV. 10, -- 14. Thereafter, Moses receives
Laws from the Lord; touching Blasphemy, and Murder, Chap. XXIV. 15 -- 23.
Sabbath-year: and Jubilee; Chapter 25. Idolatry, and Religiousnesse: with Blessings
and Curses, Chapter XXVI. Vows and Tithes, Chap. XXVII.

For the better understanding, and remembering of this Book; And specially of
the Offerings, and Sacrifices therein contained, The Table ensuing, and the
Directions thereof, may give some part of help and furtherance; though the same
be not in all points perfect and complete.

Sacrifices then are of a Divine Institution. And were indeed practiced by
Adam, and his children; and in all ages. But by Moses enlarged with many
Observations, Circumstances, and Prefigurations contained in them. Yet not
principally commanded; nor so much as Moral duties of Piety, and Honesty, 1 Samuel 15. 22. Psalm. L. 5, -- 16. Mark XII. 33. Hos. VI. 6. Matthew. XII. 7. as
Joel II. 13. Esaias I. 11. and Jer. VI. 20. Amos V. 21. Jer. VII. 21, 22, 23.

Of the Cattell] The kinds of Beasts and Birds, Levit. XIV. 4. in the
cleansing of the Leper, was not properly a Sacrifice. These Creatures for
Sacrifice, were of common use for man's sustenance and maintenance; And so were
lawful to be eaten in civil and common use, Deuteronomy. XIV. 4, 26. and Chapter XII.
15, 21. And they were easy to be had. As also Bread, Flower, Cakes, Wafers,
Wine, Salt, Oil, Frankincense, used most in the Meat, and Drink Offerings;
And such likewise are Water, Bread and Wine, in our Sacraments. See Levit. I,
II, III, IV. Chapter and Chapter VII. v. 11, 12, 13.

A Burnt-Sacrifice] In all Burnt-Offerings; Levit. I. and Chapter VI. 22, 23, 30.

In all other Sin Offerings; and Trespasse-Offerings; besides the fat, and
kidneys, burnt to the Lord: All the Flesh was the Priests, and to be eaten by
him, and his. And so in all other Meat Offerings, Levit. VI. 16, 17, 18, 26,
29. and Chapter VII. 6, 7, 9, 10, 14.

In the Peace Offerings, the Wave-breast; and heave, or right shoulder, were
the Priests, to be eaten by him, and his: And the rest of the Flesh belonged to
the bringer of the Peace Offering, to be eaten by him and his, Levit. VII. 31,
32, 33, 34. and v. 15, -- 21.

The Levites had no part in any Offerings.

Burnt-Offerings used for Sinne-Offerings, in Jobs time; Job XLII: 8.

At the doore] Killed there. Because thither it was lawful for the Offerer or
Bringer of it to come, that he might put his hand upon the head of the
Sacrifice, Lev. I. 3, 4. and III. 2, 8, 13. and IV. 15, 24, 29, 33.

Leaven] Leaven generally forbid in Meat Offerings; Lev. VII. 13. and Chapter
XXIII. 17.

Confesse]

That soul shall be cut off from his people] This Punishment as it is awarded
here against the eating of the flesh of the Peace Offering, Genesis XVII. 14. who
eat leavened bread during the Feast of the Passover, Exodus XII. 15, 19. who
do any work on the Sabbath Day, Exodus XXXI. 14. who eat of the fat of Beasts
of which men offer Sacrifices, Levit. VII. 25. who eat Blood, v. 27. and Chapter
XVII. 10, 14. who bring not the Sacrifice to the door of the Tabernacle, to be
killed there, not elsewhere, Levit. XVII. 4, 9. who eat of the Sacrifice of
Peace Offering on the third day, Levit. XIX. 8. who give of their Seed to
Moloch, Levit. XX. 2, 3. or kill not such a sinner, v. 4, 5. who go a whoring
after Wizzards, and such as have familiar spirits, v. 6. who commit incest, v.
17. or lie with a woman in her sickness, v. 18. who goes unto the holy things
which the children of Israel hallow unto the Lord, having his uncleanness upon
him, Levit. XXII. 3. who does any work, or is not afflicted on the Fast Day of
Atonement, Levit. XXIII. 29, 30. who keep not the Passover, Number. IX. 13. who
sin presumptuously, Number. XV. 30, 31. who being unclean, do not purify
themselves, Number. XIX. 13, 20. who being idolaters, come to a Prophet to enquire
concerning the Lord, Ezekiel. XIV. 8. This kind of punishment has variation of
phrases in the expressions in Scripture, thus, shall be cut off, utterly cut
off, cut off from Israel, from the Congregation of Israel, from among the
Congregation, in the sight of their people, from the midst of my people, cut
off from the earth; cut off from my presence: which likely do import various
kinds, and degrees of punishments, according to the nature of the sins
spoken to in them. How far this phrase advances the Jewish Excommunication,
I leave to further consideration.

The unclean might eat of common meats; as the child-bed-woman, Levit. XII.
But in no case of Sacred meats, as, Leviticus VII. 20.

Fat] the Fat of other clean Beasts then of such as were fit for Sacrifice,
Levit. VII. 25. The Fat also of the flesh, or body of the beast sacrificed
might lawfully be eaten, Neh. VIII. 10. Esaias XXV. 6. and LV. 2. But the Fat or
Suet that was about the flanck, and the kidneys, or about and upon the
entrails, Levit. III. 3, 4. was reserved out of all Sacrifices as Gods portion,
to be burnt upon his Altar, Levit. III. 15, 16. and IV. 8, 10. and XVII. 6.
Deuteronomy. XXXII. 38. 1 Samuel II. 15, 16. And is forbidden therefore to be eaten by
any, Levit. III. 17. and XVII. 23, 25.

Take Aaron] On the same day, Moses began to consecrate, and anoint the
Tabernacle, Altar, and all things belonging to them; As also Aaron and his
sons, Exodus XL. 1, -- 17. Levit. VIII. 1, -- 36.

Anointed] Aaron and all his sons were at first anointed, v. 30. Number. III. 3.
XXXV. 25. Psalm. CXXXIII. 2. Not the Levites. And the High Priest only was
anointed afterward, Exodus XXIX. 29, 30. Levit. XVI. 32. We read often of the
Anointing of Kings, 1 Samuel X. 1. XVI. 13. 2 Samuel 11. 4. 1 Kings I. 39. 2 Kings
IX. 6. XXIII. 30. Psalm. LXXXIX. 20. But never of Prophets. That of Elisaeus, 1
Kings XIX. 16. seems not to have been done with material oil; see ver. 19.
As neither that of Hazael to be King of Syria; compare 1 Kings XIX. 15. with 2
Kings VIII. 13. nor that of Absolon, 2 Samuel XIX. 10. nor that of Cyrus, Esaias
XLV. 1. there being no such custom of oiling Kings in his Country: But
anointing in those places is taken simply, without that Ceremony, for designing
them to their Offices.

Burned] Moses at the Consecration of Aaron, ver. 20. 21, 28. But upon Aarons
first Sacrificing, fire came out from before the Lord, out of the Sanctuary, or
came down from heaven rather, Levit. IX. 24. which must never after be suffered
to go out.

Nadab and Abihu] Nadab and Abihu took Strange or Common Fire, Number. XVI. 35.
that is, from heaven, or the Sanctuary, or from the Altar of burnt-Offering,
like lightning, struck them with sudden death; not consuming their bodies, or
their coats, Levit. X. 4, 5.

Some Names of some Beasts, Esaias III. 18, -- 23. and on Jer. XVII. 3.

Hoof] The Beasts, ver. 26. Deuteronomy. XIV. 6.

Fins] Fish (here we meet with a phrase of a flesh of fish, Levit. XI. 11. and,
Number. XI. 22. as well as, 1 Cor. XV. 39.) that had Fins and Scales, were
likewise clean, and to be eaten, Deuteronomy. XIV. 9, 10.

Come not] The High Priest must enter into the most Holy place but once in the
year, Levit. XVI. 29, 34. Exodus XXX. 10. Heb. IX. 7. That is, for his Priestly
Ministration and Expiation. And then he was to be clothed, not with the
glorious garments which were peculiar to the High Priest; but with those which
were Common to him with the inferior Priests, Levit. XVI. 4. as being a day of
Humiliation and Afflicting the soul, Levit. XVI. 29. Yet upon other necessary
occasions, he might enter in at other times, as at the taking down, and setting
up of the Tabernacle in their removals and journeys in the Wilderness; And
when they took thence the Arc, upon several occasions, as Josh. VI. 4. 1.
Sam. IV. 3.

Not to the doore] No Sacrifices must be offered, Tabernacle, Levit. XVII. 3,
-- 9. Yet upon Extraordinary, and necessary Occasions, God commands, Deuteronomy.
XXVII. 5, 6, 7, 8. And holy men of Prophetical spirits, though not Priests, did
Sacrifice; and for a present time and use, did make and use other Altars; as
Samuel, 1 Samuel VII. 9, 17. and Chapter XI. 15. and Chapter XVI. 2, 5. And David, 2 Samuel
VI. 13. and XXIV. 18, 25. And Solomon, 1 King. VIII. 64. And Elijah, 1 King.
XVIII. 32. And Gideon, and Manoah, See Judge. II. 5. and VI. 26. and XIII. 16,
19. and XXI. 4.

Blood] Blood, to make an atonement for their souls, Levit. XVII. Type of the
Messiah his Blood, Romans 3. 25. Ephesians. I. 7. Col. I. 14, 20. Heb. IX. 12, 22.
which is the principal cause of the prohibition of the eating of Blood.

Defiled] The dignity and estimation of the Priest, principaly of the
High Priest. See v. 4, 7, 8, 9 -- 15. and v. 21, 23. is remarkable.

Burnt] The Capital punishments among the Jews, Burning, Genesis XXXVIII. 24.
Levit. XXI. 9. Josh. VII. 15. Stoning, Levit. XX. 2, 27. and 24. 14, 16, 23.
Hanging, Number. XXV. 4. Deuteronomy. XXI. 22. And in aftertimes, by example of the
Romans, Crucifying, and Beheading, as in our Savior, and John Baptist.

Superfluous] In a Freewill-Offering, Superfluous, or lacking in his parts, was
accepted.

To the Feasts, Levit. XXIII. are added, the Feasts of the New-Moones, Number.
XXVIII. 11, -- 15. 1 Chronicles. 23. 31. 2 Chronicles. II. 4. and Chapter VIII. 13. The Feast
of Purim, Esth. IX. 17, 19, 22, 26, 28. And of that Dedication, John X. 22.

Sabbath] Sabbath is called Sabbath of Rest, or Rest of Rest; and so, v. 32.
And Sabbath sometimes signifies besides the seventh day weekly, other
Feast-dayes also, as Levit. XXIII. 11, 24, 32, 39. And sometimes the whole
week; as Levit. XXIII. 15. Luke XVIII. 12. John XX. 1. Of the Sabbath Day, see
the Annotations on Jer. XVII. 21, 22, 24, 27.

The seventh moneth] The seventh month had as many Feasts in it, Levit. XXIII.
Deuteronomy. XVI. And the only set Fast Day.

Of blowing of Trumpets] The Feast of blowing Trumpets was the first day of the
seventh month; Beside the Feast of the New-Moone, Levit. XXIII. v. 24. And the
year of Jubilee began with Blowing of Trumpets on the tenth day of that month;
which also was the day of Expiation, Levit. XXV. 9. And the Feast of
Tabernacles for seven days followed after in the same month.

Twelve Cakes] The twelve Cakes of Show bread, and of a good bigness, set in
two rows, six on a row, seem to be two rows in Longitude upon the Table, one
by another; And so the Frankincense upon each Cake; rather then in Altitude one
upon another; And so but one Frankincense upon either row; See v. 6, 7. The
Table being two Cubits long, and one Cubit broad, Exodus XXV. 23. And the
Frankincense being to be burned every Sabbath, Levit, XXIV. 7, 9. yet some make
them to be two rows; six upon one another in either row, on heaps in height. In
the Temple there were ten Tables of Shewbread, five on the right hand, and
five on the left; 1 Chronicles. 28. 16. 2 Chronicles. IV. 8.

A Jubile] The Jubile-year had all the privileges of the Sabbath-year, Levit.
XXV.

Fruit for three years] Viz: Esaias XXXVII. 10.

Numbers.
THis Book begins with the year of the World, Not the 2455, or 2544: But the
2514, or rather 2510 and a little over. Thus, 2369, to the end of Genesis, and
death of Joseph. Thence 60 to the birth of Moses. Thence 80 to the coming of
the Israelites out of Egypt. And thence, 1 year, and one month, to the
beginning of this Book; which is the second year, second month, first day of
their coming out.

It contains an History, not of 39, years; but expressly of 38. years and 9
months, Number. I. 1. and Chapter XXXIII. 48, 49. compared with Deuteronomy. I. 3, 4, 5.
That in Number. IX. 1, etc. is but a Rehearsal of what was both given in charge,
and was done before. And some other like Repetitions there are.

603550.] Egypt it self 400 years, then their spawning or multiplying there had
been very small; considering that from three persons that came out of the Arc
with Noah, within the space of 400 years to the time of Abraham; issued such
infinite numbers, and troops of people, in several Kingdoms, and Countries in
the world; as out of the Sacred Text and Story, does plainly appear.

The Order of the Camp, and march of the Israelites in the Wilderness, Chapter II.
and III. is thus; viz:

The Tabernacle in the midst and Center of all the Host.

Round about the Tabernacle, the Levites camped and marched, viz: On the West,
the Gershonites; Number. III. 23. South, the Kohathites, Number. III. 29. North, the
Merarites; Number. III. 35. East, Moses and Aaron, and his sons, Number. III. 38
Males from a month old and upwards 7500. 8600. 6200.
22300.

Round about the Levites; at a good distance, ( Josh. III. 4.) Camped, and
Marched, on the East Side, Judah; and in his Camp Issachar, and Zebulun; likely
on either side, or each hand of Judah; he being in the midst. And so in the
other Camps following. South Side, Reuben; and in his Camp, Simeon and Gad.
West Side, Ephraim; and in his Camp, Manasse, and Benjamin. North-side, Dan;
and in his Camp, Asher, and Naphtali. Number. II. and X. Chap.


In all, 603550. And this is the same number of Males, from twenty years old
and upwards, when they gave a Bekah, or ten Gerahs each man, that is half a
Shekel, after the Shekel of the Sanctuary, to the building of the Tabernacle,
Exodus XXXVIII. 26. As was commanded, Exodus XXX. 11, -- 16. In the last
numbering in the wilderness, in the fourtieth year, after the death of Aaron,
and the death of that Generation, for their rebellion, and murmuring, Number. XIV.
29, -- 35. The males from 20 years old and upwards, all that were able to go to
war, were 601730. The Levites still numbered, not with them, but by
themselves, Number. XXVI. 51.

22000.] ver. 22, 28, 34. which make up 22300. being all the males from a
month old and upwards. And the Firstborn males of all the children of Israel
in the twelve Tribes, from a month old, and upwards, being 22273. Chapter III. 43.
(which argues at least twenty seven males in each family): And the surplusage
of 273. verse 46. being redeemed at five Shekels apiece, amounting to 1375.
Shekels, verse 50: All this argues the foresaid 300. male-Levites to be
wittingly left out in the casting up of the sum; most likely omitted so,
Because they were such Firstborn of the Levites, as were born from the time of
the coming out of Egypt to the time of this reckoning; and in that regard were
sanctified to God as his own, by his Law and challenge, Exodus XIII. 2. and so
could not come into the number of the other Levites which were to be changed
for the Firstborn of the other Tribes, and in their stead to be substituted,
and appropriated to God and his service.

This number of the Levites was very far less then were of each other Tribe,
Chapter III. with Chapter I. The number of the least Tribe, from twenty years old and
upward, males able to go forth to war, being 3200. Of the greatest, 74600.
And the number of the male-Levites from a month old and upwards, being only
22300.

The charge of Aaron, Eleazar, and Ithamar, distinctly; and of the Kohathites,
Gershonites, and Merarites, severally, is prescribed in the taking down, and
carrying, and setting up of the Tabernacle. See Chapter X. 17, 21.

From thirty] The Levites at the age of thirty years, entered into the full
possession of their Offices, to wait upon the service of the Tabernacle, Number.
IV. 3. At the age of twenty five they entered, or might enter upon them, as
Novices, and subservients in some secondary, or inferior administrations, as
Probationers, and Proficients, Number. VIII. 24. And when the Temple should be
builded, they were ordered to begin and enter at twenty years of age, 1 Chronicles.
XXIII. ver. 24 -- 27. Ezra III. 8. And that by David's appointment together with
the Prophets, Gad and Nathan, 2 Chronicles. VIII. 14. and Chapter XXIX. 25.

They continued in their Offices till fifty. Number. IV. 3, 47. At fifty they
ceased waiting upon the service of the Tabernacle, but were Overseers there,
Chapter VIII. 25, 26. And in their several Cities, as being well experienced in the
Judicial Laws, they judged of matters brought before them. The Levites Offices
distinct from the Priests, are set down in many particulars, 1 Chronicles. XXIII.
28, -- 32.

David in his time by divine warrant does distribute them, for the service of
the Temple, into three sorts, to three several Functions, and Offices. One was
to Attend the Priests, and to be helpful and subservient unto them in their
several Services. Of these there are sundry Orders set down, 1 Chronicles. XXIII.
and XXIV. Chapters. A second to solemnize the Service of God, with all manner of
Music; by Voice; and Instruments, both winded, and stringed. The third sort
was to be Porters. Of whom, 1 Chronicles. XXIII. 5. and Chapter XXVI. and 2 Chronicles.
XXIII. 4, 5, 6, 19. and XXXV. 15. Their Orders are set down, 1 Chronicles. XXV.
These three Sorts being divided by Lot into twenty four Orders, or Courses, as
the Priests were; That the first Course of these might attend with the first
Course of the Priests; and leave the Temple, when they left it.

The Levites also had other Offices, over the Treasures of the house of God;
and of the Dedicate things; and for the outward business over Israel for
officers, and Judges, in all business of the Lord, and in the service of the
King, 1 Chronicles. XXVI. 20, -- 32. over diverse Tribes. See further, 1 Chronicles.
XXIII. 28, -- 32.

Even those] Levites numbered, males from thirty years old to fifty, are 8580.
Upon which reckoning there was then one such Levite for every seventy such
males in Israel. In David's time, the Levites (besides the Priests) from thirty
years old to fifty, were 38000. 1 Chronicles. XXIII. 3.

She] The Blessing of conceaving Seed, divorce her Husband, Mar. X. 12.

Woman] Women might be Nazarites, Number. VI. 2. And such likely was Sampsons
mother, Judge. XIII. 4.

The word Nazarite signifies one that is separate: And the name Pharisee is of
the same signification. And of these Nazarites, some were for a certain time,
of months, or years, at their own choice, by their own special vow; as Acts
XVIII. 18. and Chapter XXI. 24. Of whom these Laws here are chiefly to be
understood. Some for term of life; as Sampson, Judge. XIII. 5. and so Samuel, 1 Samuel I. 11, 28. And John Baptist, Luke I. 15. Our Savior was not a Nazarite,
as has been commonly mis-conceived, out of a mis-translation, and
misunderstanding of that text, Matthew. II. 23.

Offered] At the Consecration of the Tabernacle, Gershonites, for carriage.

Four Wagons and eight Oxen, to the Merarites, Number. VII. 7, 8. as they had the
more need.

The Kohathites Levites were to carry upon their shoulders, Number. VII. 9. 2 Samuel
VI. 6. 1 Chronicles. XV. 2, 13, 15. And what it was, see Number. III. 31. and IV. 15.

The Priests, Aaron and his sons being so few, were not then to Carry, but to
Cover, Number. IV. ver. 5, -- 15. Deuteronomy. XXXI. 25. But afterward growing more in
number, they only were to carry the Arc, as Josh. III. 3, 6, 8, 13, 14, 15,
17. and IV. 3, 9, 10, 11, 18. and chapter VI. 4, 6. and 2 Samuel XV. 29. and not very
rarely; as some writing on Josh. III, 3. and on 1 Chronicles. XV. 15. do conceive.

Altar] The Altar of Burnt-Offering had seven days spent for the Consecration
and Expiation of it to sanctify it, Exodus XXIX. 37. (As likewise for Ezekiels
Altar, Ezekiel. XLIII. 18, -- 27.) Yet twelve days spent at the Dedication of it,
Number. VII.

Silver charger] The silver Vessels of Chargers and Bowls, Exodus XXXVII.

From off the Mercy-seat] Moses hears the voice of one speaking to him from off
the Mercy-seat, Number. Exodus XXV. 22. Whereas formerly the Lord spoke out of the
Tabernacle of the Congregation, Levit. I. 1. Number. I. 1.

Take the Levites] The Consecration of the Levites was done in one day. seven
days. Which was so appointed, Exodus XXIX. 35. and so executed, Levit. VIII.
33, 35.

Certain men] the second month is extended to more days then are here
mentioned, v. 10. As in Hezekiah's time, 2 Chronicles. XXX. 2. 15.

Priests] The blowing of Trumpets is to be used by the Priests alone, Number. X.
8. 2 Chronicles. XXIX. 26. And that, in Convocating Assemblies; in journeying
through the wilderness; in going forth to war, Number. X. 2, -- 9. and Chapter
XXXI. 6. 2 Chronicles. XIII. 12, 14. in the first day, and tenth day, of the seventh
month, Number. XXIX. 1. Levit. XXV. 9. in the New Moons, Number. X. 10. Psalm.
LXXXI. 3. In all their solemn Feasts; over their Burnt-Offerings, and
Peace Offerings, Number. X. 10. And upon Extraordinary Occasions, of Fasts, and
Humiliations. Joel II. 1, 15, Or of Joy and Gladness, Number. X. 10. as when
David brought in the Arc to the place which he had prepared for it, 1 Chronicles.
XV. 24, 28. And appointed Priests to minister before it, 1 Chronicles. XVI. 6, 42.
And when Solomon brought the Arc into the Oracle, he mightily had multiplied
the number of Trumpets, and had 120 Priests sounding them at that Solemnity, 2 Chronicles. V. 12, 13. And at the Dedication of the Temple, the Priests sounded
Trumpets, 2 Chronicles. V. 12. and VII. 6. As also at the laying of the foundation
of the second Temple by Zerubbabel, Ezra III. 10. And the Dedication of the
Walls of Jerusalem by Nehemiah, chapt. XII. 35. And in Hezeki^h's joyful
Reformation, 2 Chronicles. XXIX. 26, 27, 28. Besides, there were civil Trumpets for
civil use, sounded by others then Priests; As in War, Judge. VII. 2 Samuel II.
28. At the Coronations of Kings, as of Solomon; Jehu; and Joash. And upon other
occasions.

The Levites used other Instruments of Music, and not Trumpets, 1 Chronicles. XV.
19, 20, 21. and Chapter XVI. 5. 2 Cron. V. 12. and Chapter VII. 6. and Chapter XXIX. 25,
26, 27, 28. And used them, and song, at the daily Sacrifices, and all Festival
Sacrifices, 1 Chronicles. XXIII. 30, 31. And happily in the night, 1 Chronicles. IX. 33.
Psalm. CXXXIV. 1.

On the] The Israelites journeyed from Mount Sinai, a year within thirteen
days, Exodus XIX. I.) See v. 12. Deuteronomy. I. 6, 7.

Hobab] Jethro, or Hobab, Revel or Raguel, a Midianite, and father-in-Law of
Moses, comes to Moses to Horeb, and brings to him his wife, and two sons. And
Moses upon his counsel, appointing very many Rulers, and Judges over the
people, Jethro returns into his own Land, Exodus XVIII. Deuteronomy. I. 9, -- 18. He
(rather then his supposed son Hobab, the supposed brother-in-law of Moses)
being come again, as it seems, thither toward the end of that year, and
entreated there by Moses to stay and go along with them, refuses to do so; Yet
being again prayed and pressed by Moses thereunto, in this Text he either
yields, (no reply being mentioned); or not long after, both he, and his
house, and kindred, return to Moses; (It may be, warned by Moses to come then;
as Saul in his time warned them to depart from the Amalakites, 1 Samuel XV. 6)
and so were saved from that destruction of the Midianites, Number. XXXI. which
return is plainly gathered out of Number. XXIV. 21. Judge. I. 16. and IV. 11. and 1 Samuel XV. 6. 1 Chronicles. II. 55. Jer. XXXV. 6. compared with 2 King. X. 15, 23.

Seventy men] These LXX. Elders, were appointed about a year after those many
Rulers, and Judges, Exodus XVIII. They prophesied, and did not cease for the
time; like whereunto was the case of Saul, 1 Samuel X. 10. God by this sign
sealing so, and at first honoring their Vocation; though this extraordinary
Gift ceased afterward. These LXX. are added to assist Moses in the Government
of this People in the Wilderness. Yet it seems from hence in afterages the
Jews took their rise of Constituting their Sanedrim or Synedrion of LXX.
Elders for their Senate, and Supreme Court of Judicature in that Nation. Of
LXX. see Ezekiel. VIII. 11. Exodus XXIV. 1, 9. Luke X. 1, 17.

Quailes] Quails given the second time, Exodus XVI. 13. those being at their
eighth Station, in the Wilderness of Sin, and before they came to Sinai. These
at the thirteenth Station, and after they left Mount Sinai* in Kibroth
Hattaavah: And continuing for a full month, Psalm. LXXVIII. 26, -- 31.

Ethiopian] Zipporah called an Ethiopian or Cushite, Ethiopia, or part of
Arabia, wherein Midian stood or bordered with it; Arabia containing other
Nations also lying Northward upon the Arabic Gulf, or Red Sea. Miriam her
sister-in-law, seems to envy her, and fall foul upon Moses: and being first
and deepest in the fault more then Aaron, is exemplarily punished.

The man Moses] The commendation of Moses, Number. XII. 3, -- 8.

Kadesh] Kadesh is Kadesh-Barneah in the Wilderness of Paran, Canaan, in a
Mountain of the Amorites, Deuteronomy. I. 19, 20. nigh to Mount Seir, ver. 44. whence
Moses sent the Spies, Number. XII. 16. and Chapter XIII. 26. and XXXIV. 4. Josh. XV.
3. Being the fifteenth station of the Israelites, Deuteronomy. I. 2, 19. and II. 14.
and IX. 23. Josh. XIV. 6, 7. and XV. 3. The Israelites abode at Kadesh-barneah,
and compassed Mount Seir about the space of thirty eight years, compared with
Deuteronomy. I. 2, 46 and II. 14.

Another Kadesh was a City in the uttermost border of Edom, or Idumea toward
Ezion-Gaber, and the Red Sea, Number. XXXIII. 36. Deuteronomy. II. 8. and in the
Wilderness Sin, by the waters of Meribah, and the 33. Station of the
Israelites. Thither they came in the fourtieth year, first month. And there
Miriam died, four months before Aaron, who died in the next Station at Hor.
Hence Moses sent Messengers to the King of Edom, Number. XX. 1, 14, 15, 16, 22,
and XXVII. 14. and XXXIII. 36, 37, 38. Deuteronomy. XXXII. 51. Judge. XI. 17.

Forty years] These forty years wandering in the Wilderness, sending of Spies
to search the Land; but from their coming out of Egypt, Number. XXXIII. 3, 38.
Josh. IV. 19. Deuteronomy. VIII. 2. This appears also out of the ages of Moses and
Aaron, Exodus VII. 7. compared with Number. XXXIII. 39. and Deuteronomy. XXXIV. 7. After
the Return of the Spies, the Israelites continued in the Wilderness but thirty
eight years, and odd months; which yet are said to be forty years, as the
next full number. So Gideons seventy sons, Judge. VIII. 30. are said to be
slain, Ch, IX. 5, 18, 56. though Jothan one of them escaped. And so the
Disciples are called 11. to whom Jesus appeared on the day of his Resurrection
at Evening, when yet Thomas was absent, Mark XVI. 14. Luke XXIV. 33, -- 40.
John XX. 19, -- 25. compared together. And so the LXX. Elders are said to be
gathered, and set round about the Tabernacle, when yet Eldad and Medad came
not, Number. XI. 24. And not unlike is that of David's reign forty years, 2 Samuel
V. 4, 5. when yet six months were over and above. And Solomon's Building the
Temple in seven years, 1 King. VI. 30. when yet six months are to be added, by
comparing v. 1. and last.

Hormah] This History at Hormah is another, from that at Hormah, Number. XXI. 1,
2, 3. See another Hormah, Judge. I. 17.

And all the men] Compared with Chapter the Children of Korah were not swallowed up
of the earth, likely miraculously saved: Or rather, they departing from their
fathers tent, according to that command of God, and Moses, ver. 24, and 26. And
of their race came such as made some of our Psalms, or at least were famous
Singers in the Temple; and Samuel also, the great Prophet, and Judge in Israel,
1 Chronicles. VI. 33, -- 38.

Broad plates] The Altar thus covered twice with Plates of brass; Exodus
XXXVIII. 2.

Altar] The Levites might not approach to the Altar to minister at it, nor eat
of the Sacrifices.

The First-fruits] First Fruits seem to be of many sorts; Levit. XXIII. 10.
Secondly, Two Wave-Loaves, of two tenth deals, at the Feast of Pentecost or
weeks, Number. XXVIII. 26. Levit. XXIII. 15, 16, 17, 20. Thirdly, A Cake of the
first of their doughs, for an Heave Offering, Number. XV. 20, 21. Fourthly,
brought in a Basket, in the seventh month, when all their fruits were gathered
in, as most understand that place, Deuteronomy. XXVI. 1, -- 11. First Fruits enjoined
without any set or certain proportion or stint, Deuteronomy. XVIII. 4. Of these, and
other kinds of First Fruits, see more in this Text, And Exodus XXII. 29. and
XXIII. 19. and XXXIV. 22, 26. Levit. II. 12, 14, 15, 16. Deuteronomy. XVIII. 4. Ezekiel.
XLIV. 30.

The tenth] So, ver. 21. Tithes, and their kinds and sorts; thus; Tithes of
the yearly increase of all things in the Land paid to the Levites, after the
First fruits had been first deducted, and brought to the Priests, Exodus XXXIV.
26. Levit. XXIII. 10. Out of the nine parts remaining, there seems another
Tenth taken, set apart for their Journeys, Sacrifices, and Feastings, thrice a
year at Jerusalem; and therefore brought up thither, and there eaten by the
owners, their families, and the Levites, as most probably appears out of Deuteronomy.
XII. 5, 6, 7, 11, 12, 17, 18, 26. and Chapter XIV. 22, -- 26. And this second Tithe
seems every third year to be distributed to the poor. Or rather a third Tithe
every third year, not carried to Jerusalem, and eaten there; But gathered for
these charitable uses only, and to be eaten any where throughout the Land,
Deuteronomy. XIV. 28, 29. and XXVI. 12, 13. And this third year is therefore called
the year of Tything, Deuteronomy. XXVI. 12. Amos IV. 4.

Of Tithes see more, 2 Chronicles. XXXI. 4, -- 19. Nehem. X. 32, -- 39. and XII. 44,
47. and XIII. 5, 12, 13. Mal. III. 8, 10. Luke XI. 42. and XVIII. 12. Heb. VII.
2, -- 9.

The great maintenance of the Levites, appears in that the whole Tribe of Levi
being three or four times less in number then any other Tribe, yet had they
distinguished from all the Priests, the Tithes of all the Tribes, and so more
then any one other Tribe; Besides their thirty five Cities and Suburbs, whereof
five were Cities of Refuge; Josh. XXI. one belonging to the Kohathites Levites;
two to the Gershonites, and two to the Merarites. In all twice at least more
Cities then some other Tribes had that were twice their number. See also that,
Number. XXXI. 30, 47.

The greater maintenance of the Priests appears, in that being but three
persons at first, at least of ripe and mature age, yet they had the Tithes
yearly of all the Levites Tithes, which were at first 8580 of thirty years old,
and upwards; and so about the hundred part of all the fruits and increase of
all Israel. And as the numbers of the Priests multiplied afterward, so did in
all probability the number of the other Tribes. They had also all the
First Fruits of all things, from all persons, throughout the twelve Tribes,
even of their doughs and bakings, Deuteronomy. XVIII. 4. Number. XV. 20, 21. which, as
some think, exceeded their Tithes aforesaid. They had also all the Firstborn
of Oxen, Sheep, and Goats, which were given to them in kind; And the
Redemption money of the Firstborn of Men, and of unclean Beasts and cattle,
Number. III. 46 -- 52. Exodus XXXIV. 19. 20, and Chapter XXII. 29, 30. Deuteronomy. XV. 19.
They had also all Oblations, both Voluntary, and by Vow; And the Redemption of
Things, and of Persons, Devoted to God: And all Sacrifices for Sins and for
Trespasses, and the Meat and Drink Offerings, and Heave-offerings; And the
Breast and Shoulder in Peace Offerings, Deuteronomy. XVIII. 3. And the Skins of the
whole Burnt-offerings. And all their Tithes, First Fruits and Oblations were to
be of the best and choicest sorts, Number. XVIII. 12, 29. Besides these they had
thirteen Cities, and Suburbs, and Privileges belonging to them, whereof one
was a City of Refuge, Josh XXI. 13. See Number. XVIII. 8, -- 19. And that also
Number. XXXI. 28, 29, 37, 38, 39, 40, 50. Levit. X. 12, 13, 14, 15. and Chapter XXVII.
21, 28. See the Annotations on Number. XVIII. 29.

Rock] At Rephidim by Mount Sinai, Exodus XVII. 1, -- 7. being the eleventh
Station of the Israelites, Number. XXXIII. 14. Moses with his miraculous Rod,
struck the Rock in Horeb, in a due obedience to Gods commandment, and waters
came forth: And he named the place Massah, and Meribah, Exodus XVII. 5, 6, 7.
But at Kadesh in the Wilderness of Zin, where Miriam died, being the thirty
third Station, Number. XXXIII. 36. Moses, with Aarons miraculous Rod (for he took
it from before the Lord, as he commanded him), having his spirit provoked by
the rebellious people, smiles the Rock twice without any such command, or
commission to smite at all. And he, and Aaron likewise, speak unadvisedly with
their lips, uttering words of passion and incredulity, and so rebelling against
Gods commandment. And thereupon they not sanctifying the Lord in the eyes of
the children of Israel; He was sanctified in them, by his excluding them from
entrance into the Land of Canaan. And this also is called the water of Meribah,
or Strife; as here, so Chapter XXVII. 14. Psalm. CVI. 32, 33.

Aaron] Aaron, dies seven months and seven days before Moses, at Mount Hor,
(the Place called Mosera, Deuteronomy. X 6.) in the thirty fourth Station. For Aaron
dying in the fourtieth year, fifth month, first day, Number. XXXIII. 38. And that
compared with the months mourning for Moses, Deuteronomy. XXXIV. 8. and three days
preparation to pass over Jordan, Josh. I. 1. and Chapter III. 2. And their coming
out of Jordan, on the first month, tenth day, Josh. IV. 19. Do show that Moses
died in the twelfth month, seventh day: And so seven months, and seven days
after Aaron. In which short interval of time, many, and mighty things were done
and achieved; as among other things, Sihon, and Og, and their Kingdoms
conquered; the Midianites almost destroyed; among whom Balaam was slain, Josh.
XIII. 22. and the book of Deuteronomie written, Number. XXI. and XXXI. Deuteronomy. I. 1,
3.

Fiery Serpents only in the later part of the fourtieth year, Aarons death.

Heshbon] Heshbon a chief City in Moab; Sihon King of the Amorites, Deuteronomy. I. 4.
afterward of Gad; and out of that Tribe, given to the Merarites, Josh. XIII.
26. and XXI. 38, 39, 40. 1 Chronicles. VI. 80, 81. Afterward recovered by the
Moabites; and wasted by Shalmanesar, Esaias XV. 4. and XVI. 8, 9. and after by
the Babylonians, Jer. XLVIII. 45. There may seem to be another Heshbon of the
Ammonites, Jer. XLIX. 2, 3. And one in the Tribe of Reuben, Number. XXXII. 37.
Josh. XIII. 15, 17. Heshbon signifies Devises; And an allusion is made to the
name, Jer. XLVIII. 2. in the judgment there denounced against it; like to this
is English, There is mischief devised against the Devises, the name of a town
with us.

Balak] Balak needed not to have hired Balaam, Number. XXII. and XXIII. and XXIV.
if he had known the prohibition of God to Israel, Deuteronomy. II. 9. which they
obeyed, Judge. II. 15, 17, 18, 25. 2 Chronicles. XX. 10. Yet that part, which was
great, of the Lands of Moab, which Sihon had lately conquered from Vehab, King
of Moab, as Tremelius translates, Number. XXI. 26. the Israelites conquering
Sihon, in that right possessed it, Number. XXXIII. 49. Deuteronomy. I. 5. and XXXIV. 1,
5, 6, 8. and it was given to the Reubenites, and Gadites, Josh. XIII.

Unicorne] So Deuteronomy. Job XXXIX. 9, 10. Psalm. XXII. 21. and XXIX. 6. and XCII.
10. Esaias XXXIV. 7. Yet the translation of the word is doubted of; or at least
the nature of the beast, such as the Pensil of our Painters does portray out
unto us; because no such beast was known or seen by any man. And the Unicornes
horn so deemed, is of some strange Fish, not of any known Beast. Some learned
render the word Bufale, or Buff; or else the wild Ox called by the Latins
Urus; eminent for bigness, strength, horns, and untamable fierceness.

Advertise thee] Balaam called a South-sayer, Josh. XIII. 22. and a Prophet, 2
Pet. II. 16. gives this advertisement to Balak, which seems to have a relation
to that which follows in the residue of that Chapter. Yet besides he gives
counsel to Balak, or at least after to the Midianites to draw the Israelites
into sin, Number. XXXI. 16. which coming so to pass, He himself in his return,
is slain by the sword amongst the Midianites, Number. XXXI. 8. in that
Expedition, wherein Joshuah, though not named, may seem to be the General, and
Phineas chief of the Priests, sounding Trumpets in that war, wherein 12000.
Israelites, not having one man slain, did yet slay five Kings of Midian, (or
Dukes of Sihon, dwelling in the Country; as it is, Josh. XIII. 21.) and all
the males of that populous Nation (save such as escaped by flight, whose
posterities in the days of Gideon came to prevail against Israel, Judge. VI.
1, 2.) And they took a mighty prey and booty; whereout, after Purifications of
themselves, and the Prey, there was paid a tribute and portion to the Priests,
and a portion to the Levites; and a voluntary Oblation after made by the
Captains to the Lord, Number. XXXI.

Of the 24000. Cor. X. 8. likely were the vulgar sort that died in the
slaughter, Number. XXV. 5. and the other thousand were the heads of the people
hung up, ver. 4. without supposing any Pestilence at that time. Or if by
Plague, Number. XXV. 9. Psalm CVI. 30. we understand the Pestilence, then most
probably, the 23000. died of it; and the other thousand by Hanging, and
Slaughter.

22200.] Moab; in the fourtieth year of their wandering in the Wilderness,
Simeon was far the least in number, and Judah the most. And the whole number
of fighting men of the twelve Tribes, after that generation died in the
Wilderness, upon that judgment, Numb. XIV. 29, -- 35. and upon sundry other
judgments besides, was now 1820. less in number, then in the former numbering
at Mount Sinai, thirty nine years before.

23000.] And so but 700 more then they were in the former numbering at Sinai,
Chapter III. Number. XIII. and XIV.

Sin] This Wilderness differs from Zin, ver. 36. This being the eighth Station
of the Israelites: that of Zin the thirty third, which is Kadesh, where Miriam
died, as was said, Number. XXXIII. 11, 36.

Rephidim] See the Observations on Chapter

Abarim] Pluraly; Number. XXXIII. 47. in the Confines of the Amorites, and
Moabites; whereof the tops had several names, as Nebo, Pisgah, Pehor: But Mount
Sinai was none of them, being far enough of.

Salt Sea] Is not that Lake of Genesareth. Sodom, and Gomorrah, Admah, and
Zeboim had stood, Deuteronomy. XXIX. 23. Hos. XI. 8.

Riblah] Riblah in the Land of Hamath, part of the East border of Canaan, near
the North quarter. Here Pharaoh-Nechoh put Jehoahaz in bonds, 2 Kings XXIII.
33. And Nebuchadnezzar put King Zedekiah in bonds, and put out his eyes, 2
King. XXV. 6, 7. And slew the High Priest, and second Priest, and the sons of
Zedekiah, and other prime men, ver. 18, -- 21. Jer. LII. 10, 27. This Riblah
seems to be that which was afterward called Antiochia in Syria. Of this see my
Annotations on Ezekiel. XI. 10, 11.

Chinnereth] Number. XXXIV. 11. Deuteronomy. III. 17. Josh. XI. 2. and XII. 27. and XIX.
35. is called in the New Testament Genezareth. Luke V. 1. which Lake is also
called the Sea of Galilee, Matthew. IV. 18. Mark I. 16. And the Sea of Tiberias,
Josh. XXI. 1. And absolutely the Sea, Matthew. XVII. 27.

Suburbs] The Suburbs of the Cities of the Priests, utmost Bounds and Borders
of each Quarter, East, West, North, and South.

Forty eight Cities] See Josh. Chron. 6. compared together; and the Great
Annotations upon the said sixth Chapter.

Shall not be guilty] The innocent man, murder.

Only to the family] Israelites might marry wives of other Tribes, Number. XXXVI.
Yea, of other Nations if they were Proselytes; and not of those Nations which
God expressly devoted to destruction, Deuteronomy. VII. 3. and XXI. 10, -- 13. Of
their marriages with Heathens, and mixing the holy seed, See Ezra IX. and X.
Chapter Neh. IX. 2. and X. 30. and XIII. 3. 23, -- 30.

Deuteronomie.
DEUTERONOMIE was written in the year of the world, not 2493. But in the year
2553. or rather 2548. thirty eight years, and odd months, from the time of
the beginning of the Book of Numbers. And about 1450 years before Christ's time.

It contains to the fifteenth Verse of the last Chapter, an History of one
month, and seven days, viz: From month eleven, day one, to month twelve,
day seven; at which time Moses died; as has been formerly gathered upon Aarons
death. See and compare together Deuteronomy. I. 3. and XXXIV. 8. and Josh. IV. 19. In
which short time the Book was written by Moses; And, besides sundry
Repetitions, and Explications, other new Laws given; A second Edition, as it
were, of the Covenant made with the new Generation; with some other
Consequences, and last Acts of Moses.

The last Chapter of Deuteronomie was written after Moses his death. As
likewise the Conclusion of the Book of Jeremie, was written after his Death,
Jer. LI. 64. and LII. 31, 34. And that XXXIV. Chapter contains one month more,
of the Israelites mourning for the death of Moses.

This Book of Deuteronomie, and that of the Psalms, are of chief note in the
Old Testament, for the Life of Religion, the spiritual power of Worship and
Obedience in the inner man.

Yet this Book of Deuteronomie seems not to be that which was to be written
very plainly upon great stones plaistered, in Mount Ebal; For that was the
Decalogue only, or those Blessings and Curses, only, Deuteronomy. XXVII. 2, -- 26.
Josh. VIII. 30, 35. Nor seems it to be this book of Deuteronomie only that was
to be Copied out by the King, and He to read therein all the days of his life,
Deuteronomy. XVII. v. 18, 19, 20. Not yet seems it to be this book only, that was to
be solemnly read by the Priests, every seventh or Sabbatical year in the Feast
of Tabernacles, in the audience of all the people, Chapt. XXXI. 9, -- 13. As in
the three foresaid particulars some would have it. Nor yet is it this Book
only; or that Song only, Deuteronomy. XXXII. that was to be put and placed by the
Priests, in, at, or by the side of the Arc of the Covenant, Deuteronomy. XXXI. 25,
26. But the whole book of the Law, the five Books of Moses were to be Copied
out by the King, read in every Sabbath-year, and laid up and preserved safe by
the Arc of the Testimony.

The Judicial Laws, most of all mentioned in this Book, and peculiarly
belonging to the Country and People of the Jews, are grounded upon an equity
of Right Reason for that Country and People. And so far are useful to all
others.

The ten first Chapters are most-what of precedent Passages, Repetitions of
what things were formerly done; with Exhortations to Obedience intermixed.
Moses yet herein not binding himself to an exact order in observation of the
times, and places.

These] Is an Inscription of the whole book, Moses delivered, and did, what in
this book is contained.

Eleven] The eleven days journey end either at Kadesh-barneah; Mount Seir, and
Kadesh-barneah, it ends at, and in the Plains of Moab. Both which ser^^ to
show how soon they might have come from Horeb or Sinai to Canaan; had they not
provoked God by their sin, Number. XIV. instead of that eleven days journey, to
keep them wandering in the wilderness 38. years after.

Horeb] Horeb and Mount Sinai are taken for the same, Exodus III 1. See on that
Text, Deuteronomy. I. 2, 6, 19. and IV. 10, 15. and V. 2. and IX. 8. 1 King. XIX. 8
Mal. IV. 4. They being close neighbors, or rather two tops of the same Mount.
The Israelites abode almost a year there, Deuteronomy. I. 6. Exodus XIX. 1 Number. X. 11.

Og that dwelt at Ashteroth, Edrei, another of his royal Cities, Chapter III. 1.
Number. XXI. 33. Josh. XIII. 12, 31. and XII. 4.

Angry] Gods anger at Moses here mentioned, Kadesh-barnea, Number. XIII. and XIV.
But in the fourtieth year at that other Kadesh, when and where Miriam died,
Number. XX. 1, 2, 12.

Many dayes] The Israelites abode in Kadesh many days. Seir many days: The
space in which they came from Kadesh-barnea, till they came over the brook
Zered, or pitched in the Valley of Zared, in Moab, being their thirty ninth
Station, was thirty eight years; which was in the beginning of the fourtieth
year of their coming out of Egypt, Deuteronomy. II. 1, 2, 3, 7, 14. some take thirty
seven years and a half of this time to be spent at Kadesh-barnea: And sure the
most of it was spent there; and the lesser and later part of it in compassing
Mount Seir: And the other half year spent in coming from Mount Seir to Zered.
See Deuteronomy. II. 7.

Distress not] And so, v. 19. The Israelites forbidden to distress the
Moabites, and Ammonites; or to possess their Lands. Yet what Sihon had lately
conquered from them, and possessed; which was no small part of their Countries,
all that, the Israelites conquering Sihon, by right of that Conquest, did
fairly possess, Josh. XIII. 15, -- 25. Judge. XI. 12, -- 27.

Gyants] There are mentioned Anakims, Deuteronomy. II. 11, 20. and Chapter III. 11, 13.
Number. XIII. 33. See further, Genesis VI. 4, 1 Samuel XVII. 4. and 2 Samuel XXI. 16, --
22.

Mount Sion, which is Hermon] Called by the Sidonians Syrion, by the Amorites
Shenir, in the Valley of Lebanon, Deuteronomy. III. 9. and IV. 48. Josh. XI. 17. and
XIII. 5. and XII. 5. 1 Chronicles. V. 23. And Mount Sion, that strong hold, in the
City of David, being the South-part of Jerusalem, and not seated on the
North-side of it, 2 Samuel V. 7, 9. 1 King. VIII. 1. Psalm. II. 6. and IX. 11. and
XLVIII. 2. (upon which Text see the Annotations) are two differing Mountains,
and far asunder. They differ also in their Original Characters and letters;
the former being written (...) and the later (...); though the New Testament
write the later also Sion, Romans IX. 33 (...) XI. 26. As likewise the Hebrew
(...) is written Sidon; And (...) is written Tire, Matthew. XI. 21, 22.

Called] We may not conceive a miracle in Moses voice,

My Commandments] So it is in the Masorets marginal reading. Moses, expounding
the sense and meaning of Gods words that went next before,

Seventh day] Some words are added by Moses to those uttered by God on Mount
Sinai, Exodus XX. 10, 11. as an Explication of them. And also a Reason is given
of the fourth Commandment differing altogether from that Reason in Exodus XX.
11. which Reason here yet evinceth not, that therefore God brought the
Israelites out of Egypt on the Sabbath Day. But the putting of Wife before
House, ver. 21. contrary to that order of House before Wife, in Exodus XX. 17.
confounds the late Papists silly shift in dividing the last Commandment into
two, to make up ten, Deuteronomy. IV. 13. to color thereby their taking away the
second Commandment; or shufling of it into the first: so that by them is not
known which is the ninth, and which the tenth Commandment.

Seven Nations] So many are here reckoned. Josh. III. 10. Six in Exodus XXXIII.
2. Deuteronomy. XX. 17. Judge. III. 5. In many places fewer. In Genesis XV. 19, 20, 21.
ten Nations are reckoned. And among them the Philistines are never mentioned.
Yet all the inhabitants of the whole Land go many times under the names of
Canaanites, and Amorites; as Genesis XXIV. 3. and Chapter XV. 16.

Utterly destroy them] Such is Gods Command; v. 16. See Exodus XXXIV. 11, 12.
Deuteronomy. IX. 3. and XX. 16, 17. Yet this was not a thing to be done in one year,
or in Ioshuah's Lifetime, Josh. XXIII. 4, 5, 13. Judge. l. 9, 21, 27, 29, 30,
31, 33, 34. But by little and little, Exodus XXIII. 29, 30. Deuteronomy. VII. 22. Yet
God justly threatens and blames them for their neglect in Conquering and
Expelling them, Number. XXXIII. 55, 56. Josh. XXIII. 13. Judge. II. 3, 21, 22, 23.
And he never gave them the possession of their full Bounds, as of Tire, Sidon,
and of all the Land of the Philistines, because they kept not for their part
the Condition of their Covenant with him, Judge. II. 20, 21.

Neither shall thou] Marriage forbid with the Canaanites strictly. Ezra IX. 1,
2. Neh. XIII. 23. A reason is given, Deuteronomy. VII. 4. Neh. XIII. 26. Exodus XXXIV.
16. The mischief of that marriage between Jehoram the son of Iehoshaphat King
of Judah, and Athaliah the daughter of Ahab King of Israel, is recorded, 2
King. VIII. 18. Yet in case they became Proselytes, Converts to the true
Religion; the marriage with all of them seems lawful: as in that case, Deuteronomy.
XXI. 10, 13. And in the case of Rahab, and Ruth; of the wife of Joseph in
Egypt: of the wife of Moses; of Maacah the daughter of the King of Geshur with
David; and of Pharaohs daughter with Solomon. And this made Jacobs sons
propound or pretend the condition of Circumcision to Shechem, and the
Shechemites, Gen, XXXIV. 14, 15, 16. In the New Testament, we read the
prohibition, 2 Cor. VI. 14. And the precept, 1 Cor. VII. 12 -- 16. which rules
touching Infidels seem to serve for the case of gross Heretics, and
Apostates. Against unlawful marriages see more, Judge. III. 6, 7. and XIV. 2, 3.
1 King. XI. 2. Ezra IX. and X. Chapters, Neh. X. 30. and XIII. 3, 30.

Rayment] The raiment waxing not old on the Israelites in the Wilderness,
Deuteronomy. XXIX. 5. Neh. IX. 21.

This day] Is taken sometimes properly: sometimes as for a short time; here.
Sometimes for a longer time indefinitely, as Hester I. 18. And the Phrase since
yesterday, and the third day, is sometimes taken properly, or for a short time,
Genesis XXXI. 2, 5. Exodus IV. 10. and XXI. 36. 2 Samuel III. 17. Job. VIII. 9.
Sometimes for a long time, 1 Samuel XIV. 21. and XIX. 7. 2 King. XIII. 5. 1 Chronicles
XI. 2. (As likewise to morrow is taken, sometimes for a short time, as 1 Samuel
XXVIII. 19. Sometimes for a long time, as Josh. IV. 6, 21.) Sometimes for
never. Josh. III. 4. 1 Samuel IV. 7. Of to day, and to morrow, see Josh. XXII.
18. and IV. 6, 21. Esaias XXII. 13. Matthew. 6. 30. 1 Cor. XV. 32.

Arke] Besides that famous Arc for the Tables of the Covenant, Exodus XXXVII.
1, etc. There seems here one formerly made, for present use, wherein the
Tables by Gods commandment were first put. And possibly this Arc with the
Tables might be put into that famous Arc built afterward, Exodus XXXVII. Deuteronomy.
X 5.

Journey] These verses seem to be as a Parenthesis inserted by Moses: v. 6, 7.
are more distinctly and orderly recorded, Number. XXXIII. 30, -- 39. without any
coming or returning, again and again, to one and the same place.

Altars] Idolaters had their Priests, Jer. VII. 31. XIX. 5. Ezekiel. XVI. 20, 21.
and XX. 26, 31. Feasts, Incense, costly clothes, and other services of them.
See Deuteronomy. VII. 5. and XII. 31. and sundry other places, as Esaias I. 29. and
LVII. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. and LXV. 3, 4, 11. and LXVI. 3. Amos II. 8. 1 Cor. VIII.
10. and X. 21. Jer. X. 9. XVII. 2. And see their eager rage after idolatry,
Ezekiel. XVI. 15, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, 31.

A poor man] Private poor rather then public beggars were, Matthew. XXVI. 11.

For ever] Ever, has reference, Exodus XXI. 6. 1 Samuel I. 22. and XXV II. 12. 2
King. V. 27. 2 Chronicles. XIII. 5. Psalm. XXXVII. 18, 27. and LXXXIX. 1 Esaias XIII.
20. and XIV. 20. and XXV. 8. and XXXIII. 20. and XXXIV. 10. Jer. VII. and XVII.
4, 25. and XXV. 5. and XXXI. 40. and XXXV. 19. and L. 39. and LI. 26, 62. Lam.
V. 20. Sometimes to the term of a man's life. 1 Kings I. 31. Dan. III. 9. Josh.
8. 28. Genesis XLIII. 9. 1 Samuel I. 22. 1 Chronicles. XXVIII. 4. Psalm. XXXVII. 27, 29.
and CXIX. 44, 98. Esaias XXXII. 17. Sometimes to the year of Jubilee, As in this
Text, and Exodus XXI. 6. compared with Levit. XXV. 40. Sometimes to so long as
the conditions annexed to a thing are observed, 2 Chronicles. XX. 7. 1 Samuel II. 30.
Sometimes to the continuance of a State of polity, Number. X. 8. See the
Annotations on 1 Kings VIII. 13. Sometimes to the Time and Coming of the
Messiah, 1 Chronicles. XV. 2. and XVII. 12, 14, 22, 23, 27. and in many places of
the Prophets. Sometimes to eternity, Exodus III. 15. and XV. 18. Deuteronomy. XXXII.
40. Luke I. 33. And so never is taken sometimes for a long time: sometimes for
almost all times of a man's life, Luke XV. 29. Sometimes for a man's life, 2 Samuel
XII. 10. Sometimes for eternity.

The flock and the herd] Oxen, Exodus XIII. 6, 7. Number. XXVIII. 16, -- 24. 2 Chronicles. XXXV. 7, 8. 9. and Chapter XXX. 24. All which Festival time is called the
Passover, and so Joh. XVIII. 28. A Lamb, or a Kid, might be used for the
Passover properly so called, on the fourteenth day, at the going down of the
Sun, Exodus XII. 5. Deuteronomy. XVI. 6.

A matter too hard] As Judges and Officers were to be appointed in all Cities
in Canaan, Deuteronomy. XVI. 18, 19, 20. So here the highest Court of Judicature over
the whole Land, in difficult Causes, and for matters of Appeal, was appointed
to be in that one place which the Lord should choose; which in aftertimes
appeared to be the City Jerusalem. And here it is not sure and evident whether
this Supreme Court were to be one, mixed of the Priests, and the Civil Judge
jointly; Or (though this not so likely) two distinct Courts, Ecclesiastical,
and Civil; both Supreme in their kind. Judgment of death was awarded upon
presumptuous disobedience to their Sentence. And more of this Supreme Court
Moses does not deliver. Yet upon this, the Jews in after-ages grounded their
great Sanhedrin in Jerusalem; and not upon the LXX. Number. XI. For those were
only added to assist Moses in his troublesome government of that unruly Camp
of the Jews in the Wilderness; as likewise those Rulers and Judges, Exodus
XVIII.

The Priests due] Of the very great maintenance of the Priests, Number.

Three Cities more] Three other Cities of Refuge,

To Battel] The Law of war, Deuteronomy. XX. 1, 10, -- 18. and Chapter VII. 2, 3, 16,
23, 24. and Exodus XXXIV. 11, -- 16. enjoined by God to the Israelites, was
various, according to the several Cities and Nations against whom, whether
near, or very far off, Deuteronomy. XX. 15, 16, 17. and according to the several
Causes and Occasions, whereupon they were to wage it: And is best expounded by
their Practices in Scripture recorded.

Against the Amalakites, see the injunction, Exodus XVII. 14, 16. Deuteronomy. XXV. 17,
18, 19. Against the Midianites, see that, Number. XXXI. Where they slew all the
males they could, even to the malechildren; and every woman that had known man,
and took the spoil, and all their cattle, flocks, and goods, as a prey to
themselves.

Against the Amorites, Sihon, and Og, (included in the seven Nations, or in the
same condition with them) See Number. XXI. and Deuteronomy. II. 34, 35. and Chapter III. 6,
7. where they slew the men, women and children. But all the Cattle, and spoil,
they took for a prey to themselves.

Against Jericho, see Josh. VI. 17, -- 26. where the City, the first that
withstood them in the Land of Canaan, was singularly accursed, and all therein,
ver. 17, 18, 24, 26. 1 King. XVI. 34. And accordingly they slew man and woman,
young and old, and Ox, and Sheep, and Ass: Only the silver and the gold, and
the vessels of brass and iron, they put into the Treasury of the House of the
Lord, as God commanded; keeping nothing to themselves: And as Achan, with his,
and all he had, perished; They being first stoned, and then burnt for the
transgression: So Rahab, her parents, brethren, and all that she had, were
saved, upon the special cause and occasion of her Faith in hiding the Spies.

Against Ai, See Josh. VIII. 2, 26, 27. where they slew all, as at Jericho:
only the spoil, and cattle thereof, they took as a prey to themselves.

Against the five Kings of the Amorites: And against seven; See Josh. X. 10,
28, 30, 32, 33, 35, 37, 39, 40. where they slew all the souls that breathed; as
they did at Jericho: But for the spoil, and cattle, they did as at Ai and took
them as a prey to themselves.

Against all those Kings at the waters of Merom, and presently after, they did
the like, Josh. XI. 11, 12, 13, 14.

The Gibeonites, upon a crafty contrivance, got to be spared, and obtained a
league to live. And though all the congregation murmured against the Princes for
it, yet because of the oath, Joshuah and the Princes only adjudged them to
bondage, to be hewers of wood, and drawers of water for the House of God for
ever, Josh. IX. 13, -- 27. And Saul afterward in a wrong zeal, slaying many
of them, was punished for it, in his sons, 2 Samuel XXI. 1, -- 9.

Many other of the seven Nations were not conquered, Or so conquered, as
brought only under Tribute, See Deuteronomy. VII. 22. Josh. XIII. 1, -- 6. and XIII.
3. and XV. 63. and XVI. 10. and XVII. 12, 13. Judge. I. 1, 19, 21, 27, -- 36.
For which yet the Israelites were reproved, Judge. II. 1, 2, 3. And doomed so,
as we read, Judge. II. 21, 22, 23. according to that Prediction, Number. XXXIII.
55. and Threatening, Josh. XXIII. 13. And of the Race of the seven Nations, see
that in the days of Solomon, 1 King. IX. 20, 21.

And if that Law of war, Deuteronomy. XX. 10, -- 15. should be extended to the seven
Nations also; yet they deprived themselves of the benefit of it, in not
yielding to conditions of peace; or staying to be besieged; But engaging first,
and beginning the war upon the Israelites; as appears mainly in Josh. Chapter X.
and XI.

The Captive^, a beautiful woman] Seems a permission and Indulgence, in case
of war; rather then an Allowance; As appears by the displeasing Rites before
the marriage; and the slight dismission. It is not much unlike that Bill of
Divorce, Deuteronomy. XXIV. 1. Matthew. XIX. 8. And the case of Usury; as some account
that, Deuteronomy. XXIII. 20.

Two wives] Moses supposing the practice of having two wives together, Deuteronomy.
XXI. 15, 16, 17.

Hanged is accursed] That Curse seems not to be for the kind of punishment;
Number. XXV. 4. John XVI. 26. 2 Samuel XXI. 6. It is true of Christ, Gal. III. 13.
Josh. XIX. 31. by reason of all our horrible sins laid upon him, I mean the
debt of our sins; He becoming our Surety; and so sin for us, 2 Cor. V. 21.
that is, a Sacrifice for sin; as Sacrifices for sin in the Levitical Law are
termed sometimes by the name of sin. The imputation of Guilt would seem to
make him a sinner.

Not weare] That difference of Apparel,

If a man] Is understood of an unmarried man, Exodus XXII. 16, 17. The
difference is in enticing her there; and in laying hold on her here, though not
violently to ravish her. And therefore the Offender is ordered and punished
somewhat less there; and more here.

An Ammonite] The Israelite was to respect more, Rome, by birth, or purchase
Acts XVI. 37, 38. and XXII. 25, -- 28. were thereby invested with the
Privileges of Romans. The Moabite, and Ammonite were not to be so privileged
in their tenth generation: which yet must be understood, either of the men
only, or else with exception of some such singular Cases, as was that of Ruth,
Chapter IV. 10.

Upon Mount] The Tribe of Levi was to stand on Mount Gerizim, Ephraim by
Sichem, with five other Tribes, whereof Joseph is one: And the six other Tribes
to stand on Mount Ebal. And so the Priests called Levites, Deuteronomy. XXVII. 14. may
seem to stand with the Ark in the narrow valley between both: And there
turning to Mount Ebal, to pronounce the Curses, whereunto all the people and
Tribes on Mount Ebal were to say Amen. The other part concerning the Blessings
is not expressed; but in all points, and circumstances easily to be gathered
and understood, Deuteronomy. XI. 26, -- 30. and XXVII. 12, -- 26 This was done in the
first year of their coming over Jordan Josh. VIII. 32, -- 35. when, and where
were read likewise all the words of the Law of Moses, before all the
Congregation of Israel.

With ships] Ships, besides the Ark of Noah, Jacobs blessing of Zebulun, Genesis
XLIX. 13. and in Moses his threatening the Israelites in this place.

Not given] Gods hand in giving and working of Grace. See Chapter XXX. 6. Jer.
XXIV. 7. and XXXI. 33. and XXXII. 39. Ezekiel. XI. 19, 20. and Chapter XXXVI. 26, 27.
Heb. VIII. 10, 11. John VI. 44, 45, 65 Phil. I. 29. and II. 13. Ephesians. II. 8.
2. Tim. II. 25. And he gives grace to the remnant which is according to the
election of Grace, Matthew. XI. 25. and XIII. 11. Mark IV. 11, 12, John XII. 39.
Romans XI. 7. Ephesians. I. 5. 2 Chronicles. XXX. 12.

Mount] This Mount Hor, Aaron died, Number. XX. 25, 26. was South of Judea. And
Mount Hor, on the North-bounds of Judea, Number. XXXIV. 7. are far differing and
distant mountains.

King in Jeshurum] Moses King in Ieshurum, Tribes, does omit Simeon, if we
account him not included in Judah, as his Lot in the division of Canaan fell
within the Lot and Tribe of Judah; and their expeditions against their enemies
in conquering their own shares were joint, and undertaken together, Josh.
XVIII. and XIX. Judge. I 3.

Dwell between his shoulders] That is, Jerusalem. For though the Southern, and
Superior part of Jerusalem, where Mount Sion was, and which was called the City
of David, did belong to the Tribe of Judah; yet the Northern, and inferior
part of it, where Mount Moriah was, whereon the Temple was built, belonged to
the Tribe of Benjamin. The huge deep valley of Mello between the two Mountains,
being filled up and levelled by Solomon; so that thence afterward, Sion, and
Moriah, might be called two tops of one Mountain, Sion the higher top, and
Moriah the lower.

Died] The time of Moses his death was in the fourtieth year, Egypt; and one
hundred and twentieth year of his age. See upon Aarons death, Number. XXXIII. 38.

No man knoweth] The reason of concealing the place of the Burial of Moses;
Michael the Archangel his contending with the Devil, and disputing about the
body of Moses, Jude ver. 9. was not revealed in the Scripture of the Old
Testament. And this dispute might be, lest the Israelites knowing it, might
carry it with them (as Joseph's bones) into Canaan, into which God had said,
That he should not enter; or rather, That the people might not idolize it.

Joshua.
THE Book of Joshua was not probably written by him; though of, and concerning
him; For besides some things contained in it, which are deemed by some, to be
done after his death; As that concerning Caleb and his daughter Achsah, Chapter XV.
16, -- 19. And most surely the Conquering of Leshem or Laish by the Danites,
Chapter XIX. 47. Judge. XVIII. 7. -- 29. And those things recorded, Chapter XXIV. 29, --
33. Some other things seem to plead, That it was written by some Prophet Long
after his death. Whence that phrase remains unto this day, is so frequently
used, Chapter IV. 9. and Chapter VI. 25. and VII. 26. and VIII. 29, and IX. 27. and X.
27. and XIII. 13. and XIV. 14. and XV. 63. And the Book of Iasher is named, Chapter
X. 13. which seems written at soonest in David's time, as recording an Act of
his, 2 Samuel I. 18. unless we say, This Book of Iasher in Joshua's time, to be
continued on, and enlarged in aftertimes, by adding and inserting memorable
acts in after-ages; And so in David's time. And further the Mountains of Judah,
and the Mountains of Israel are mentioned, Josh. XI. 21. Which many possibly
seem to intimate the Book to be written after the division of the Nation into
the two Kingdoms of Judah and Israel.

Joshua was the Tribe of Ephraim, Number. XIII. 8. 1 Chronicles. VII. 27. And he lived
one hundred and ten years, Chapter XXIV. 29. and was six full years in conquering
the Land; and in the seventh fell to the Dividing of it by Lot; as is gathered
out of the age of Caleb, Josh. XIV. 7, 10. And diverse years Joshua lived and
governed after that time; but how many, it does not appear out of this Book:
yet is gathered out of other places to be ten years more: and so this Book to
contain an History of seventeen years, from the Beginning of his Government to
his Death. The truth of this account stands upon this computation; from the
coming out of Egypt, to the fourth of Solomon, are four hundred and eighty
years, 1 King. VI. 1. which are made up thus; forty years in the Wilderness;
seventeen of Joshua; two hundred ninety nine of the Judges; counting in the
twenty of Sampson, as coincident and concurring with the first twenty years of
Eli; twenty years more of Eli; twenty of Samuel; forty of Saul; forty of
David; four of Solomon: In all, 480.

Within three dayes] This Edict and Proclamation of three days, Jordan, set
down here, does begin and commence after the History of the two Spies, and
their return to Joshua; which History yet is recorded after in the Chapter
following. And thereupon the mention of the said three days is taken up again
the second time, Chapter III. 2. when new directions are given for their Passage,
and the manner of it.

Rahab] Rahab, Harlot, because at least she had been so, though now a believing
Convert, ver. 9, 10, 11. Heb. XI. 31. James II. 25. She had her house on the
wall of Jericho, ver. 15. which fell not when the rest of wall fell, Chapter VI.
20, 22.

In framing her excuses for the Spies sake, she bewrayes her infirmity, in
making equivocations, or untruths rather, ver. 4, 5. In transacting with the
Spies, some speeches seem to pass between them after they were let down the
wall, ver. 18.

In pleading for her family, she makes no mention of an Husband, ver. 13. and
Chapter VI. 23.

She was after married to Salmon, eldest son of Nahshon, which Nahshon was
great-grand-childe to Hezron or Esrom that went down with Jacob into Egppt,
Genesis XLVI. 12. And was Prince of Judah, at the numbering of the people, Number. I.
7. at the marshalling of the Camps, Number. II. 3. at the Dedication of the Altar,
Number. VII. 12. and at the setting forward in their journeys, Number. X. 14. But
died in the Wilderness, Number. XIV. 29. This marriage of Rahab to Salmon, now
Prince of Judah, is not recorded in the Old Testament: But mentioned, Matthew. I.
5. in the Genealogy of our Savior; wherein, as Rachab; so Thamar, Ruth, and
Bathshebah, are mentioned. Now there being four hundred and eighty years from
the coming of the children of Israel out of Egypt to the Building of the
Temple, in the fourth year of Solomon, 1 Kings VI. 1. whereof forty years were
spent in the wilderness, and seventy in David's life time, 2 Samuel V. 4. and
four in Solomon's reign; The Remaining time between Rahabs receiving the Spies,
and David's Birth must be 366. which may, and must be made up in some such
reckoning as this; viz. Supposing Rahab to be eighteen years old when she
received the Spies; and sixty six when she did bear Boaz to Salmon; then of
necessity must Boaz beget Obed, and Obed beget Iesse, and Iesse beget David,
each about the age of 106. Which well considered, evidenceth and evinceth these
two things. 1. That the years of the six Oppressors in the times of the Judges,
Chapter III. 8, 14. and IV. 3. and VI. 1. and X. 8. and XIII. 1. which amount to
111. years, cannot be reckoned distinct and apart; But are to be included
within the years of the Judges, and of the Rest of the Land. For otherwise the
years between Rahabs receiving the two Spies, and David's birth, would rise to
477. which cannot be true. And secondly, that the years 480. which is that
famous Link of time, 1 King. VI. 1. cannot possibly be forced to any more then
480. much less to 580. as some learned men of late would have it; and contrary
to that sacred text, 1 King. VI. 1. which never received any veri^^s Lection;
and contrary to the clear evidence and notation of pa^^^cular times set down in
Scripture, which exacty make up that sum of 480. as was now showed: viz.
forty in the Wilderness; seventeen in Ioshuah's Government; 299. in the
Judges times, eighty in Eli, Samuel, and Saul's times; forty in David's; and
four in Solomon's.

Ark] The Ark here leads the way before the host, Jordan and Canaan; without
any more mention of the Pillar of Cloud and Fire.

Two thousand Cubits] The distance of two thousand Cubits from the Ark, Josh.
III. 4. was on either side of it; and seems to be the same distance that was
kept from it, in their Campings or Pitchings, and in their Journeyings in the
Wilderness: And may well be deemed to be the Sabbath-dayes journey mentioned,
Acts I. 12. Comparing together John XI. 18. and Luke XXIV. 50.

Rose up upon an heap] When the Israelites passed through Jordan, not as a wall
unto them, on the right hand, and on the left; as likely they were when Elias,
and Elizeus divided them with a mantle, 2 King. II. 8, 14. And as certainly the
waters of the redsea were, Exodus 14. 21, 22. But God stopped the waters of the
river that came down from above, and they stood and rose upon an heap, very
far from the City Adam: And thereupon those waters that came down from Adam
to the Salt and Dead Sea, and Lake of Sodom and Asphaltites, did run away,
failed, were cut off.

Midst] The often mentioning the midst of the river of Jordan to be the place
where the Priests feet stood bearing the Ark of the Lord; Gilgal, Josh. III.
17. and IV. 3, 5, 8, 9, 10, 18. does induce me to take the word midst in its
proper signification, having no manner of inconvenience in it for so doing,
rather then to transfer it to the Channel close by the further side and banck.

Passed over] The place of their passage over Jordan, Beth-barah, in the Tribe
of Reuben, beyond Jordan, Judge. VII. 24. And Bethabara, John. I. 28. (not
Bethania, as the Trent-Bible erroneously there has it) where John baptized
Jesus; as well as others. And Betharabah seems to be a City not far from the
Passage on the other side, a City of Benjamin, bordering upon Judah, Josh. XV.
6. 61. and XVIII. 22. Though some not so rightly place the foresaid town higher
upon the river more then twenty miles above Adam; and far off from the border
of Judah. At this Passage the Altar Ed seems to be builded in the Tribe of
Reuben, Josh. XXII. 11.

Twelve men] Reuben, Gad, are here included in the twelve; though their
Possessions were beyond Jordan. And of these two Tribes, and half Manasseh,
about forty thousand armed men passed over Jordan to the war, ver. 13. which
were yet but a few more then one third part of their military men, Number. XXVI.
7, 18, 34. The rest stayed behind for their many necessary occasions.

Came up] They came over Jordan, Circumcised the eleventh; And did eat the
Passover on the fourteenth, Chapter V. 2, 10. Both which were omitted in the
wilderness; at least since the Return of the twelve Spies, and after that
Passover at Mount Sinai, Number. IX. 5. See Josh. V. 5, 7. And on the XVI. day
Manna ceased, ver. 12.

The second time] Not that these were Circumcised once before. ver. 7. It was
neglected, or omitted many years for some reasons. And at this time upon many
reasons renewed, and again enjoined by God. See the Annotations upon this text.

Gilgal] Of this place, Hos. IV. 15.

A man] This Captain of the Lords host, Gabriel, or any other created Angel;
but Michael the Archangel, Jude 9. Michael the great Prince of Gods people,
Dan. X. 21. and XII. 1. the Angel of the Covenant, Mal. III. 1. Christ the
Son of God; Appearing here, and sundry other times, in the shape of man, as a
foregoing presage and prologue, to typifie his future Incarnation. And this
appears, by Joshua's Adoration of him, as his Lord Jehovah, Chapter VI. 2. and by
His acceptance of it, which an Angel would have refused, Apoc. XIX. 10. by his
Commanding Joshua to put off his shoes, because the place was holy; like to
that, Exodus III. 5. Not that the Place was capable of any inherent holiness in
it self, but hallowed by Gods holy presence in it, and in that relation only
so esteemed; and which ceased so to be when his Presence was withdrawn from it.
This Captain instructs Joshua about the manner of besieging, and conquering
Jericho, Chapter VI. 2, -- 5.

Seventh day] Sabbath Day must needs be one of the seven wherein the Camp of
Israel did march round about the walls of Jericho; Sabbath.

Priests shall blow with the Trumpets] Priests, not Levites. And Priests, not
Levites carry the Ark. See the Observations on Number. X. 8. and on Chapter VII. v. 1,
-- 9.

Achan] Achan is called also Achar, Chron. II. 7. which signifies a Troubler;
and the Place of his execution is called the Valley of Achor, v. 26., that is
trouble. He was Grandchild of Zabdi; otherwise called Zimri, 1 Chronicles. II. 6.

Ai] Ai is called Hai, Genesis XII. 8. and Aijah, Neh. XI. 31. in the tribe of
Benjamin, very near to Bethel, Ezra II. 28. Neh. VII. 32. and differs from that
Ai, situate between Heshbon and Rabbah, in the tribe of God; yet taken by the
Ammonites; whereof see Jeremie XLIX. 3.

Bethaven] Bethaven, and Bethel, two distinct towns, not far asunder, near
the North bounds of the Tribe of Benjamin. Yet Hosea calls Bethel by the name
of Bethaven, the house of vanity, and vain Idols, in scorn and derision, for
Jeroboams golden Calf there set up, Hos. IV. 15. and V. 8. and X. 5. See the
Observations on 1 King. XII. 29, 32.

Taketh] By Divine instinct and command Lots are here used; In which case their
judgment is infallible. Of Lots, see my Annotations on Jonah. I. 7.

And his sonnes] Gods severe judgment upon his whole family, ver. 24, 25. is
warranted by Him, who is sole Dispensor, and Sovereigne Lord over his own Law,
Deuteronomy. XXIV. 16. And at the most, his Sacrilege, was but the Occasion, not the
Cause of Gods judgment upon his family; They having sin enough in themselves
otherwise, for Gods justice to work upon, though they had no hand in this
sacrilegious act.

Ambush] God appoints both the End, and the Means, 1 Chronicles. XIV. 14, 15. And
Gods people having the assurance of Gods Particular Promises, do yet carefully
use the Means; as Josh. XI. 7. and X. 9. Acts XXVII. 24, 31. Judge. XX. 28, 29.
Stratagems in war are lawful.

Chose out] Not likely that the 30000. did lie in wait behind Ai Westward,
between Ai and Bethel; but only 5000. ver. 12, 17.

Gibeon] Gibeon was a great City, Chapter X. 2. and XI. 19. allotted afterward to
Benjamin; and out of that Tribe to the Priests, Chapter XXI. 13, 17. The
Tabernacle, and Altar were here in David's and Solomon's time, 1 Chronicles. XXI. 20.
2 Chronicles. I. 3. David orders the service of it here, 1 Chronicles. XVI. 30. Solomon
sacrifices at this High Place: God appears to him here: And he brings the
Tabernacle, and Altar thence, to the Treasuries of the Temple, 1 King. III. 4.
Here Joshua vanquished the five Kings of the Amorites, Chapter X. And had the Sun
stand still upon his prayer. Here David smote the Philistines, 1 Chronicles. XIV.
16. By the poole of Gibeon was that mortal fight between twelve of Abners, and
twelve of Ioabs men; whence the place was called the field of strong men in
Gibeon. Here Abner in his flight slays Asabel the brother of Ioab; And Ioab
pursues Abner by the way of the Wilderness of Gibeon, 2 Samuel II. 12, 16, 24.
and Chapter III. 30. At the great stone in Gibeon Ioab slew Amasa, his
Cousen-german, 2 Samuel XX. 8. And by the great waters that are in Gibeon,
Iohanan fights, and puts to flight Ishmael, Ier. XLI. 12. The Gibeonites were
Hivites, Josh. IX. 7. yet called also by the more general name of Amorites, 2 Samuel XXI. 2. They were those which in aftertimes were called Nethinims, etc.
that is, Deodands, given and devoted to that Drudgery, ver. 23, 27. Of whom see
2 Samuel XXI. 2. 1 Chronicles. IX. 2. Ezra II. 43, 58, 62, 70. and VII. 7, 24. and
VIII. 17, 20. Neh. VII. 46, 60, 73. and X. 28. and XI. 3, 21. Something like to
these were those other of these Nations, on whom Solomon did raise a tribute of
Bondage, 1 King. IX. 20, 21. Of whom see more on that place.

The Oath and League made with the Gibeonites, and their Cities, ver. 17.
though surreptitiously and fraudulently gotten, and also rashly granted, yet
seems in the substance of it to be lawful; otherwise an unlawful Oath should
be broken: whereas this was kept with all faithfulness; Joshua fighting in
their defense, and that by the Lords approbation and encouragement, Chapter X. 7,
8. And this seems lawful, because they sued for Peace before they were
besieged; and willingly submitted to all Conditions, without any reservation of
their Lands, Goods, Laws, Liberties, much less of their superstitions and
idolatries, (which otherwise might have ensnared the Israelites); but of their
Lives only, and they to be employed in the Israelites service. Cities, and
People of other Nations then these, very far off, might be received upon
far easier terms and conditions. But upon all these Conditions, others of
these Nations themselves might have been spared their lives. Yet God in his
providence so ordered, That there was not a City that made peace with the
Israelities, saving these Hittites of Gibeon only, and their Cities: All other
they took in battle; for it was of the Lord so to harden their hearts, that
they might be destroyed, Chapter XI. 19, 20. And therefore, the Congregation here
murmured unjustly (happily through ignorance) against Joshua, and the Princes,
for this League and Oath: And Saul was justly punished, and that grievously, in
his posterity; and the Land also with famine, many ages after this, because he
sought to slay and destroy them from remaining in any of the coasts of Israel,
contrary to this League and Oath; though Soul did it in a pretended or wrong
zeal to the children of Israel and Judah, 2 Samuel XXI. 1, -- 6.

Adoni-Zedek seems, Melchizede^, Genesis XIV. 18. But Adoni-bezeck, Judge. I. 7.
seems not any successor to this Adonizedeek, much less himself; He himself
being slain; ver. 23, 26. But Adoni-bezeck was Lord or King, not of Jerusalem;
but of Bezeck, in the Tribe of Judah; where Saul numbered against Nahash 330000.
men, 1 Samuel XI. 8.

Jerusalem, is called also Jebus, Judge. XIX. 10. 1 Chronicles. XI. 4, 5. of Jebusi
the son of Canaan, Genesis X. 16. And Salem, Genesis XIV. 18. Psalm. LXXVI. 2. The
name seems composed of them. If not; then of Jireh, and Salem, the place Salem
[Gen. XIV. 18. Psalm. LXXVI. 2.] where God appeared [ Genesis XXII. 14.] Or, Jiereh
Shalem, signifying the Vision of Peace, or Possession of Peace, or Peace shall
be seen or provided, a place of providence, Genesis XXII. 14. See Hebr. VII. 1,
2. And it is of the Dual number, being a double City, belonging to two Tribes,
Judah, and Benjamin; Josh. XV. 8, 63. and XVIII. 28. Judge. I. 8, 21. Jer.
XXXIX. 3. The Southern and higher part belonging to Judah, wherein the strong
hold of Zion was; taken at last by David presently after his anointing King
over all Israel; and built and called his City, 2 Samuel V. 6, -- 9. 1 Chronicles. XI.
4, -- 8. And became the Burial-place of the Kings of Judah. And David's
Sepulcher continued there till the Apostles times, Acts II. 29. near 1100.
years. And the Ark for a time, was placed there, 2 Samuel VI. 12, -- 17.
whereupon Zion is called the City of God, Gods holy Hill. The Northern, and
lower part, belonging to Benjamin; wherein the Temple stood, on Mount Moriah, 2
Chon. III. 1. Honorable things are spoken of this City, Psalm. LXXXVII. 2, 3.
This City is called the City of God, of the Lord of Hoasts, of the great King;
the holy place of the Tabernacles of the most High, Psalm. XLVI. 4. and XLVIII.
8. The Throne of the Lord, Jer. III. 17. Jehovah-Shammah (in that visionarie
Description) Ezekiel. XLVIII. 35. It is called the City of Solemnities, Esaias
XXXIII. 20. a City of Righteousness, Esaias V. 26. a City of Truth, Zech. VIII.
3. a Faithful City, Esaias I. 26. a City sought out, and not forsaken, Esaias LXII.
12. The walls thereof are called Salvation; and her gates Praise; and they are
ever in Gods sight, Esaias XLIX. 16. and LX. 18.

Hoham] These other four Kings were all South of Jerusalem: Judah.

Lachish] Of this City see the Annotations on Micah I. 13.

The Lord said] The Lord spoke to Joshua; Urim and Thummim.

Hailestones] Gods two Miracles in this battle. Egypt, Exodus IX. 18, -- 25.
which killed more Amorites then were slain by the sword; braining likely the
body of their host, as they fled, where they were thickest, and those that
were foremost in the flight; and not hurting the Pursuers, who were
intermingled, yet likely mostwhat in the Rear of the enemy. II. By the
miraculous standing still (upon Joshua's Prayer, first privately made, and
granted; after publicly pronounced in the sight of Israel) of the Sun, and
of the Moon; and with them of the whole frame of Heaven; about a whole day,
till the people had avenged themselves upon their enemies.

Jasher] The Book of Jasher records the Miracle. David's time, 2 Samuel I. 18. And
this Book being no part of Canonical inspired Scripture; but a Civil Chronicle
or Annals among the Jews, is since perished; as diverse others of like nature;
Among which are those books of Chronicles, not Canonical, but Civil, so often
cited in our two books of the Kings.

No day] That day in Hezekiah's time, King. XX. 11. But that, not till many
ages after; And this book first written.

Returned] If Joshua here resolved to return to Gilgal, Kadesh-barnea, unto
Gaza, in a short time, intervened, ver. 16, -- 42. before he actually returned
thither, ver. 43.

Ioshua] And c. XI. Joshua took Hebron, or Kiriath-Arba, and Debir, or
Kiriath-Sepher, and cut off the Anakims. Yet under the conduct of Caleb this
was perfected; Joshua assigning him, out of his army, the Tribe of Judah, for
his assistance therein, Chapter XIV. 6, -- 15. and Chapter XV. 13, -- 19. which thing
seems to be repeated, Judge. I. 10, -- 15. rather then a new Conquest made again
after the death of Joshua.

Goshen] And Chapter XI. Chapter XV. 51. This Goshen in Canaan; differing from that in
Egypt.

Sand] Hyperbolees much used in Scripture. Genesis XXII. 17. and XLI. 49. Judge.
VII. 12. and Chapter XX. 16. 1 Samuel XIII. 5. 2 Samuel I. 23. 1 King. I. 40. and IV.
20, 29. 2 King. XIX. 24. 1 Chronicles. XII. 8. and XVI. 33. 2 Chronicles. I. 9. and
XXVIII. 9. Job. XX. 6. and XXII. 24. and XL. 23. Psalm. VI. 6. Esaias XXXIV. 3, 5,
7, 9. and XLVIII. 19. Jer. IV. 24. and XV. 8. Joel. III. 18. Amos II. 9. and
IX. 13. John XXI. 25.

A long time] After the battle at the waters of Merom, Joshua did make war a
long time with all those Northern Kings in Canaan: about six years; as is
gathered out of Chapter XIV. 6, -- 15.

Arnon] Arnon the River, Iabbok; and both from rocky Mountains that lie in the
East part of the Tribe of Gad. It runs Southward, and falls into the
North-East corner of the Dead Sea. It is the border between Sihon, or Reuben on
the West, and Ammon on the East; and between Sihon or Reuben on the North, and
Moab on the South.

Iabbok] Iabbok the River, Arnon; but runs North a little; and after turns
his stream West; and falls into Jordan a little below the Sea of Galilee. It
divided the Land of Gilead between Sihon and Og; and afterward between Gad, on
the South, and half Manasseh on the North.

Remains yet] The Land both Conquered, Josh. XXIII. 4, 5. Begun at Gilgal,
Chapter XIV. 6. and Chapter XV. and Chapter XVI. and Chapter XVII. Resumed, and Perfected at
Shiloh, Chapter XVIII. and XIX. But we never read, That they did Conquer the whole
Land, and all their several Shares and Lots; through their own default and
breach of Covenant with God, by Disobedience, Chapt. XXIII. 13.

Aroer] The City Aroer was near the Rise of the River Arnon; Heshbon, Dibon,
and Ataroth; which being bordering Cities, are said to belong to them both,
sometimes to the one, sometimes to the other; To Reuben, Josh. XIII. 16, 17.
Number. XXXII. 37. To Gad, Josh. XXI. 39. Number. XXXII. 34. 1 Chronicles. VI. 81.

Distributed] The whole Country, be enlarged or lessened, according to the
greatness or smalnesse of the number that belonged to it, Number. XXVI. 53, --
56. and Chap. XXXIII. 54. which last point of division was left to the wisdom
of the High Priest, Joshua, and the Elders, whom God had appointed to divide
it, ver. 1. and Chapter XVII. 14, -- 18.

By lot] Lots fell out providentialy to the twelve Tribes, Jacob, Genesis XLIX.
and Moses, Deuteronomy. XXXIII. And so in the Cities of the Levites; the Lot cast the
thirteen Cities of the Priests in the Tribes of Judah, Benjamin, and Simeon,
which were nearest the Temple, Josh. XXI. 9, 10, 17. when it was builded.

Old] Calebs age, Kadeshbarnea was forty. At this Division of the Land eighty
five. So that forty five years intervened, viz. 38. in the wilderness, and
seven of Joshua's Government until this time. And Caleb here, ver. 9, -- 14.
And Joshua, Chapter XIX. 49, 50. did both ask, and both had certain inheritances
given them two, according to the word of the Lord. The City and Suburbs of
Hebron were given to the Priests, for a City of refuge: The fields and Villages
thereof to Caleb, Chapter XXI. 11, 12, 13.

Caleb] Not that Caleb, Chron. II. 18, 42. the son of Hezron, unless by
son we understand great-grand-childe; But Caleb that is constantly called the
son of Jephunne; And Othniel constantly called the son of Kenaz, are here
yet called brethren: And Othniel is again called the younger brother of Caleb,
Judge. I. 13. and III. 9. which could not be except by one mother: But Othniel
marrying the daughter of Caleb, ver, 17. And cosen-germans, Nephews, and the
like being often called brethren in Scripture, It is likely that either
Iephunne, and Kenaz were brethren, and so Caleb and Othniel cosen-germans; or
that Caleb and Kenaz were brethren, and so Othniel Calebs Nephew; or that the
Kenezite mentioned, Number. XXXII. 12. might be Grandfather to them both. But no
certainty appears for any further determination.

Separate] The bordering Cities of the children of Ephraim, Manasseh. See also,
chapter XVII. 8, 9. And as Ephraim had part in Manasseh, so Manasseh had Cities in
Issachar, and in Asher, chapter XVII. 11.

The Portion] Ten portions to Manasseh; ver. 2. And the portion of the sixth
son, who was Hopher, was divided into five portions among his grandchildren,
the daughters of Zelophahad; which so made up ten portions, though the five
last were but as big, as one of the former five.

One lot] Both Ephraim and Manasseh seek for a larger portion and Lot then what
did befall them in the General Division.

Shiloh] Shiloh was on the North-side of Bethel, Bethel to Shechem, on the
South of that Lebanon, Judge. XXI. 19. And so situated on the border between
Ephraim and Benjamin; yet belonged to Ephraim, not to Benjamin, Judge. XXI. 1,
21. There was the Tabernacle, as was formerly said. There were the Lots cast
for seven Tribes. Josh. XVIII. 8. Thence were the two Tribes and a half
dismissed to their Possessions, after the war, Josh. XXII. 9. And thither
were the whole Congregation of Israel gathered to go up to war against them,
upon a wrong surmise concerning the Altar Ed, ver. 12. Thither came all the
other Tribes to ask counsel of the Lord in their war against the Tribe of
Benjamin, and there was their Camp, Judge. XX. 18. and XXI. 12. and XIX. 18.
Thither came Elkanah and Hannah to worship; and Samuel ministered there before
the Lord, 1 Samuel I. 3. and II. 11. and III. 21. And there the Prophet Ahijah
dwelt in the days of the first Jeroboam, 1 King. XIV. 2.

Tabernacle] The Tabernacle, coming over Jordan, was first set up in Gilgal;
Not that Gilgal of the Nations, Josh. XII. 23. Genesis XIV. 1. Esaias IX. 1. (whence
happily Galilee might take its name); But that Gilgal in the Tribe of Benjamin,
Josh. IV. 19, 20. Afterward in Joshua's time it was set up here in Shiloh, in
the Tribe of Ephraim, near the Center of the Land; which was by Sichem, Chapter
XXIV. 1, 25, 26. And Bochim, Judge. II. 1, 5. may seem to be conjoined to it.
It may seem to be fetched thence for a present use, to that solemn Assembly
at Shechem, in Joshua's time, Chapter XXIV. 1, 26. But being returned to Shiloh, it
continued there above three hundred years, at least till the death of Eli, 1 Samuel I. 3, 9, 24. and II. 14. and III. 3, 21. and IV. 3. It may seem to be
again at Gilgal with the Ark, in Samuel and Saul's time, 1 Samuel X. 8. and Chapter
XI. 15. But soon after we surely find it to be at Nob in the Tribe of
Benjamin, near Anathoth, Neh. XI. 32. when David came thither in his flight
from Saul, 1 Samuel XXI. 1, -- 9. After that sacrilegious slaughter of eighty
five Priests by Saul at Nob, 1 Samuel XXII. 18. it was soon removed, in the days
of David, to Gibeon, in the same Tribe of Benjamin, (and not far from
Bethel;) the City first of the wily Gibeonites Hivites, but after given to the
Priests, Josh. IX. and chapter XXI. 17. See 1 Chronicles. XVI. 39, 40. and XXI. 29. and
2 Chronicles. I. 3, 5, 6, 13. 1 King. III. ver. 4, 5. And lastly, when Solomon had
built the Temple, he brought the Tabernacle thence to Jerusalem, 1 King. VIII.
4. 2 Chronicles. I. 3 5 6, 13. and chapter V. 5. And placed it likely in and among the
Treasuries of the Temple.

For the Ark see the Observations on 1 Samuel IV. 3.

Tabor] A Mountain in the Tribe of Issachar, Carmel. See Joshua XIX. 26 34.
Here Barak was with his ten thousand men against Sisera, Judge. IV. 6, 12, 14.
See more of this in my Annotations on Hos. V. 1.

Tyre] Called the strong City, Tsor in Hebrew, signifying a Rock; situate, like
Venice, in the Sea. A famous Port and Mart-town in Phoenicia, the lower part of
Syria, whence the whole Country is supposed to take the name of Syria,
omitting the letter [ t] in Tsor. More of this see in my Annotations on Amos.
I. 9.

Bethshemesh] A City in the Tribe of Naphtali, ver. 32. and 39. Judge. I. 33.
Another in the Tribe of Judah, given to the Priests, Josh. XXI. 16. 1 Chronicles.
VI. 59. 1 Samuel VI. 12. 2 King. XIV. 13. Another also in Egypt, Jer. XLIII. 13.
the same as is supposed with On, Genesis XLI. 45. by the Greeks called Heliopolis,
and now Damiata. The word signifies a City or House of the Sun. As also
Kirharesheth a City in Moab, Esaias XVI. 7. has the same denomination. And all,
because of Temples and Idol-service used there by the ancient inhabitants to
the Sun. From which the Jews sometimes were not altogether free, 2 King.
XXIII. 5, 11.

Cities of refuge] The six Cities of refuge belonged to the Levites; Hebron,
and Shechem, to the Koathites; Golan, and Kedesh to the Gershonites; Bezer and
Ramoth, to the Merarites, Josh. XX. and XXI Chapters.

In Galilee] Galilee is often mentioned in the Old Testament. chapter XXI. 32. 1
King. IX. 11. 2 King. XV. 29. 1 Chronicles. VI. 76. Esaias IX. 1. Galilee divided into
the Upper, in the Tribe of Naphtali; and the Lower, in the Tribe of Zabulon;
Jordan. The Upper is called Galilee of the Gentiles because both Populous, and
replenished with many Gentiles as lying nearest to them 1 King. IX. 11. Matthew.
XV. 21. Mar. VII. 31. And so is Harosheth, called Harosheth of the Gentiles,
Judge. IV. 2. as lying in that Tribe of Naphtali.

Thirteen] Thirteen Cities with their Suburbs in title and dominion given to
the Priests Josh. XXI. 4. See the Annotations on 1 Chronicles. VI. 59. Though one of
them at that time, was too much for their present use and habitation; we
reading but of three of them in number about fifty years before this time.

Called] The two Tribes and a half dismissed, Josh. XX. 11.

Divide] This Dividing the spoil with their brethren, Jordan, seems to relate
to that, Number. XXXI. 27. And David seems hereupon to revive and enact that Law
of like Division, 1 Saem. XXX. 24, 25.

Mention of the name] The not naming of Idols is mentioned, Exodus XXIII. 13.
Deuteronomy. XII. 3. Psalm. XVI. 4. And a like, Ephesians. V. 3. Yet the thing in it self
is not simply and absolutely unlawful.

Shechem] Shechem was a City in Mount Ephraim, Josh. XX. 7. North-North-East
from Shiloh, and Bethel; and close by Mount Gerizim, and Ebal Judge. IX. 7. Here
Abraham and Jacob had sojourned; And Jacobs two sons, Simeon and Levi, young
men, upon Dinah's ravishment, murdered the Citizens, Genesis XXXIV. Here after
Gideons death, the Citizens worshipped Baal-Berith; and rebelled with
Abimelech; and were after punished and spoiled by him, Judge. IX. This City in
Joshua's time was made a City of Refuge, and given to the Kohathite-Levites,
Josh. XXI. 21. And here Joshua made a Covenant with all the people to serve the
Lord, Chap. XXIV. ver. 25. The Mount Ephraim whereon the City stood, was famous
for Burials: Here they buried Joseph's bones in Shechem, in a parcel of ground
which Jacob bought of the children of Hamor or Emor, Josh. XXIV. 32. Acts VII.
16. Genesis XXXIII. 19. Here was great Joshua himself an Ephraimite, buried in his
inheritance in Timnath-Scrah, or Here Is, which is in Mount Ephraim, on the
North-side of the hill Goash, Josh. XXIV. 30. Judge. II. 9. And here was the
High Priest Eleazar buried in an Hill that pertained to Phineas his son, which
was given him in Mount Ephraim, Josh. XXIV. 33. Here Deborah dwelt, Judge. IV.
5. And Tola the Judge, chapter X. 1. Hither came Rehoboam to be made King: But
Jeroboam was there made King in his stead; who built or fortified the City, and
dwelt there, 1 King. XII. 1, 20, 25.

Judges.
THE Book of JUDGES contains an History, not of four hundred and ten years; but
of two hundred ninty and nine years. So, Counting the years of the VI.
Oppressors within the years and times of the Judges; as I have showed they
necessarily must, upon Rahabs marriage with Prince Salmon* Josh. II. And so
Expounding the Texts following, according to the truth of the times, thus; That
the Land had Rest by Othniel, in the fourtieth year after it was first settled
in Rest by Joshua at his Death, Judge. III. 11. not after the Death of Moses.
And again had Rest by Ehud in the eightieth year, after the former Rest by
Othniel, Chapter III. 30. And again had Rest by Deborah in the fourtieth year,
after the former Rest by Ehud, Chapter V. 31. And again had Rest by Gideon, in the
fourtieth year, after the former Rest by Deborah, Chapter VIII. 28. These make up
two hundred years. And then follow three of Abimelech; twenty three of Tolah;
twenty two of Jair; six of Jephthah; seven of Ibzan; ten of Elon; eight of
Abdon; twenty of Sampson, which make np the other ninty nine years; in all two
hunded, ninty nine. The text, Judge. IV. 3, 4. seems to accord with rhis
reckoning: and to account Jabins Oppression within the years of Deborah. But
yet counting, beside these, the times of the VI. Oppressors distinctly over and
above, which amount to one hundred and eleven years; and is according to the
seeming letter of the texts; And then forty years of Eli being added
thereunto, the sum arises to those 450. years mentioned by Paul, Acts XIII.
20. But reading the words of Saint Paul, as in order they stand there in the
Original; and after these things about four hundred and fifty years; he gave
them Judges until Samuel the Prophet; we may rather conceive the four hundred
and fifty years to comprehend all the time, from the choosing of the Fathers,
till the Division of the Land by Joshua; it being four hundred fifty two from
the Birth of Isaac, and four hundred forty seven from the Rejection of
Ishmael; both ways about four hundred and fifty, wherein those things
mentioned, ver. 18, 19, 20. were done and accomplished. And after that time he
gave them Judges until Samuel the Prophet: And after that time, He gave them
Kings. And thus the most learned Primate of all Ireland has it in his learned
Annals.

This Book seems written of, and concerning the Judges, (as the Book of Ruth
concerning Ruth;) And long after their times; As may seem to be gathered by
those phrases, remain unto this day, and the like, Chapter I. 21, 26. and VI. 24.
and X. 4. and XV. 19. And Chapter XVIII. 30. must needs have relation at soonest to
the captivity of the Arc in the days of Samuel, 1 Samuel IV. 17. Psalm. LXXVIII.
60, 61.

Asked] They asked the Lord; Phineas the High Priest; who by Urim and Thummim
makes answer, Number. XXVII. 21. Both which were on or in the Breastplate; and the
Breastplate was annexed to the Ephod, Exodus XXVIII. 28, 30. and XXXIX. 21.
which made David call for the Ephod, and High Priest, thereby to enquire of the
Lord, 1 Samuel XXIII. 9, 10, 11, 12. and Chapter XXVIII. 6. So Ezra II. 63. See more
on 1 Samuel XXIII. 9.

Bezek] Bezek a City in the tribe of Judah; Jerusalem, lying from it
South-West; and midway between (...) and Bethlehem.

Adoni-Bezek] Josh. X. 1.

Said, seventy Kings] His seventy Kings subdued, and mangled by him, must needs
be very petty Kings of Provinces, or Cities; if not such Princes as are now in
Germany, where all the brethren of a Prince are called Princes likewise. And
these seventy were such, as in the time of all his reign and tyranny
Adoni-bezek had subdued. He was brought from Bezek to Jerusalem to be made a
public example there.

Ierusalem] Judah had taken Jerusalem, i. e. that part of it which belonged to
Judah, Josh. XV. 8. yet so as the Jebusite still dwelt therein with the
children of Judah, ver. 63. even till David's time, 2 Samuel V. 6, 7, 8. And
Benjamin did the like, and no more, with their part of Jerusalem, Judge. I. 21.
yet both had little hold in it in that Levites time, Judge. XIX. 10, 11, 12. or
happily at that time had never got any hold in it at all.

Hebron] Of this City see the Observations on 2 Samuel

Caleb] Of Caleb see the Observations on Josh.

A South-Land] Or dry Land.

Kenite] and Chapter IV. 11. and Chapter V. 24. See 1 Chronicles. II. 55. Genesis XV. 19. Number.
XXIV. 21. 1 Samuel XV. 6. And see my Observations on Number. X. 29.

Palm Trees] Jericho. Of this see the Observations on Chapter III. 13.

Gaza] Judah took Gaza, Askelon, and Ekron: And lost them soon afterward, Chapter
III. 3.

Bethel] Of this see the Observations on 1 King. XXXII.

Beths^an] And the rest in this verse, were Cities in that half Tribe of
Manasseh that lay West of Jordan.

Angel] The Angel here seems to be no created Angel: Mal. III. 1. that
appeared to Moses in the Bush, Exodus III. 2. called Jehovah, ver. 4. and to
Joshua, Josh. V. 14. And to Gideon, Judge. VI. 16. And to Manoah, and his wife,
Chapter XIII. Of whom Jacob spoke, Genesis XLVIII. 24. And of whom God spoke unto
Moses, Exodus XXIII. 21, 22, 23. termed both Jehovah, Exodus XIII. 21. XIV. 10,
24. and his face, or presence, Exodus XXXIII. 14, 15. and an Angel, Exodus
XXXIII. 2. the Messiah, Acts VII. 38. the Son of God, Heb. I. 3. See on Judge.
XIII. 3. But whether this History fell out in the lifetime of Joshua, or after
his death, is somewhat more uncertain.

all the days of Joshua] Therefore the Angel's coming to Bochim, Joshua, and
those Elders.

Mount of Ephraim] Of this see the Observations on Joshua XXIV.

Baal and Ashtaroth] Of these see the Observations on Chapter

Judges] This Chapter seems to be a summarie of the bulk of this Book.

Left those Nations] Ver. and Chapter III. 1, 2, 4. See the Observations on Deuteronomy.
VII 1. and 2.

King of Mesopotamia] Heb. Aram-Naharaim, i. e. of Syria between the two
rivers, Tigris and Euphrates: Naharaim being of the Dual number.

Forty years] See the Observations on the beginning of this Book.

Palme-trees] Jericho, the City of Palme-trees, Deuteronomy. XXXIV. 3. Chron. XXVIII.
15. This was nigh Jordan on the West Side of it; and Gilgal in the East border
of Jericho, where Rahab entertained and hid the two Spies: And from the Plains
of Moab, Pisga and Shirtim, which were over against Jericho, on the East Side
of Jordan the Israelites passed over. Here the Israelites kept the Passover:
and the Captain of the Lords Host appeared to Joshua This was burnt, Josh. VI.
24. And the Re-builder of it cursed, ver. 26. And the same verified in Hiel, in
the days of Ahab, 1 King. XVI. 34. So that the Kenites being in it; and Eglons
possessing of it mentioned here; And that of David's ill-intreated messengers
residing here, 2 Samuel X. 5. must be meant of some mean buildings, or Forts
only in it, or rather by it. It fell by Lot to the Tribe of Benjamin, Josh.
XVIII. 21. Here was a College of the sons of the Prophets in the times of
Elias; and Eliseus: and the waters healed by Eliseus, Hither were sent back
courteously the many Jews captived by Pekah in the days of Ahaz, 2 Chronicles.
XXVIII. And in the Plains here was Zedekiah taken by Nebuchadnezzars forces.
And in the days of our Savior, he did herein, or hard by, give sight to
blind men; and converted Zacheus.

And he arose] Reverence to God and his Word, Number. XXIII. 18. 2 King. XX III.
2. 2 Chronicles. XXXIV. 31. Neh. VIII. 6.

Oxe-goad] Miraculous are the victories of Shamgar, Sampson slaying one
thousand of them with the jaw bone of an Ass, Chapter XV. 15, 16.

Jabin] This Jabin successor to that Jabin slain by Joshua, his City Hazor
burnt, Josh. XI 1, 10, 11, 13. Yet this successor or son, reinforceth
himself, and twenty years oppressed Israel; and was destroyed at last by
Deborah and Barak, ver. 24.

Hazor] A City in Naphtali, and upper Galilee, East from Rehob in Asher: and in
former times head of the neighboring Kingdoms, I^sh. XI. 10. There was
another Hazor, or two, in the Tribe of Judah, Josh. XV. 23, 25.

Haresheth of the Gentiles] Ver. 16. In Naphtali, about thirty miles East from
Hazor; near the South-bottome of the waters of Merom. Here he dwells, because
Joshua had burnt Hazor, Josh. XI. 11, 13.

Charets of iron] Much use of these in war; Observations on Chapter XX. 2. and on
2 Samuel VIII. 5.

A Prophetesse] See the Observations on Zeph. Sam. XVIII. 10.

at that time] Even when, and while Iabin oppressed them. So that those twenty
years, v. 3. are within those forty years of Deborah, V. 31.

Ramah] See the Annotations on Hos. Josh. XVIII. 25. and XIX. 29, 36. 1 Samuel I.
1. Those in Benjamin, Ephraim, and Judah, were the chief Places, famous by
Deborah, Samuel, Saul, and David; as the sacred Histories do record.

Barak] This Barak, Rahab, Gideon, Jephthah, Sampson, commended for their
Faith, Heb. XI. 31, 32. though weak in Faith; and not without their many
failings.

Tabor] In the South-part of Zebulon; not far from the river Kishon, as it
runs into the South-bottome of the Sea of Galilee. Of Tabor see more in the
Annotations on Hos. V. 1.

Of a Woman] Deborah, and Jael.

Zaanaim] Zaanaim by Kedesh in Naphtali, Barak dwelled.

Not a man left] Not a man left in the field to make any resistance, Psalm. XIV.
3. and LIII. 3. Romans III. 12.

Shamgar] Of him, Chapter III. 31. And of Jael, Chapter IV. 18.

Was there a speare] 1 Samuel XIII. 19.

From the noise] They could not fetch water without danger from the enemy.

Out of] Hence to the end of the Song, Deborah relates how the several Tribes
behaved themselves in this Expedition; with their praise, or dispraise. And
here Reuben, Gilead, and Dan, and Asher are blamed; and Meroz cursed: and Jael
the wife of Heber is blessed.

Roote] Most likely, understood of Deborah of Mount Ephraim, the firstrise and
mover of this Expedition; though some extend it to Joshua; and others
understand it of the Tribes of Judah and Simeon.

Amalek] Amalek joined here with the Canaanites, in this battle against the
Israelites.

After thee Benjamin] After Ephraim came Benjamin, to assist in this war.

Out of Machir] That half Tribe of Manasseh that dwelt within Canaan. For
though the one half of the children of Machir had their inheritance in Gilead,
Josh. XIII. 31. which is here blamed, ver. 17. yet the other half of Machirs
children had their inheritance within Canaan; West of Jordan, Josh. XVII. 1, 2.
who are here commended.

Barak] Not of Issachar: Naphtali, dwelling in Kedesh of Naphtali. Chapter IV. 6.

Divisions of Reuben] Divided among themselves touching this war; or divided
from the other Tribes, and deserting them in it.

Megiddo] Megiddo an eminent City which Manasseh had in Issachar, Josh. XVII.
11. not far from Jezreel, and the river Kishon. Joshua slew the King of it,
Josh. XII. 21. And Josiah was slain, or had his deaths wound, in the valley of
it, 2 King. XXIII. 29, 30. 2 Chronicles. XXXV. 34.

Taanach] Taanach a royal City, near Megiddo, Josh. XII. 21.

Took no gaine] Took none of Jabin; nor got any gain by this fight with Israel.

The Sta^s] The Stars in their stations; Joshua's time, Josh. X. and in Samuels
time, 1 Samuel VII. Or frighting them with dreadful noises, as in Iehorams time,
2 King. VII. 6.

Rest forty years] from that eightieth year mentioned, Chapter III. 30. See the
Annotations on Chapter III. 11. and the Observations on the beginning of this Book.

Midian] See the Annotations on Hab.

Angel] Christ the Angel of the Covenant. ver. 14, 15, 16, 22, 23.

Thy might] Which I now give thee; with my promise to assist thee; as ver. 16.

My Present] Not Sacrifice, Abraham entertained the Angels, Genesis XVIII. and
Manoab, Judge. XIII. 15.

Fire] Here fire comes out of a rock: Exodus XVII. 7.

Of seven years old] The same age that the tyranny and oppression of the
Midianites had arrived to.

And build an Altar] Gideon had Gods warrant and command for all, ver. 24.

That he may die] Their idolatrous zeal.

Ierubbaal] Gideon so called by his father; not in way of reproach, but of
honor rather. In 2 Samuel XI. 21. he is called Ierubbosheth. And so Eshbaal, and
Meribbaal, the son, and grandchilde of Saul, 1 Chronicles. VIII. 33, 34. are
called Ishbosheth, and Mephibosheth, 2 Samuel II. 8. and IV. 4.

Iezreel] As here in Iezreel the Midianites pitched; Saul's time, 1 Samuel XXIX.
1, 11. And hence came the news of Saul's death, 2 Samuel IV. 4. who was slain in
Mount Gilboa on the North-side of Iezreel. This Iezreel was not that in the
Tribe of Judah, Josh. XV. 56. But in Manasseh; toward Issachar; about twelve
miles Northward from Samaria. Ahab from Carmel rode hither, and Elijah did run
before his Chariot, 1 King. XVIII. 45, 46. Here Ahab gets Naboths Vineyard, and
came from Samaria in the Tribe of Ephraim hither to take possession, 1 King.
XXI. 18. having his habitations and Palaces in both Cities. And besides Gods
judgment upon Ahab himself, ver. 19. both Ioram, and Iezebel, the son, and
wife of Ahab, were slain here by Iehu; and also all that belonged to Ahab in
Iezreel: And the heads of Ahabs seventy sons were brought from Samaria to
Iezreel, 2 King. IX. and X Chapters.

Messengers] The Tribes here named were the next to Gideon, Iabin.

Fleece of wooll] Herein is Gods great condescension to Gideon,

From Mount Gilead] Or toward Mount Gilead.

The people] The three hundred lappers,

Fled] The places named here were in that half Manasseh where the overthrow was
given. Abelmeholah was the habitation of the Prophet Elizaeus in after-ages, 1
King. XIX. 19.

Succoth] And so of Penuel, ver. 8. See Genesis XXXIII. 17. and XXXII. 30. They,
and Karker were in the tribe of Gad.

Ishmaelites] Midianites and Ishmaelites seem confounded together: Genesis
XXXVII. 25, 27, 28.

Golden ear-rings] The weight and multitude of them. Exodus XXXII. 2. and XXXV.
22.

Ephod] See the Observations on 1 Samuel Hos. III. 4.

Ophrah] In the East border of this Western half Manasseh, near Jordan.

Baalim] Baalim in the Plural number, Ashtaroth of the plural number, and
feminine gender, seems to be so to their She-goddesses, Judge. II. 13. and X.
6. And there are sundry specifications of Baal; As Berith, and Baal-Berith
here, and Chapter IX. 4, 46. the God of the Shechemites. Peor and Baal-Peor, the
idol-god of the Moabites and Midianites, Number. XXV. 3, 17, 18. Baal-Zebub,
called also Beelzebub, or Beelzebul, the god of Ekron, 2 King. I. 2. And from
Baal, were names imposed, both upon persons, and places: as we read of Ethbaal,
the King of Sidon, Iezebels father, 1 King. XVI. 31. of Esh-baal, 1 Chronicles.
VIII. 32. of Baal-hanan, Genesis XXXVI. 38. of Jerubbaal, Judge. VI. 32. of
Merib-baal, the other name of Mephibosheth, 1 Chronicles. VIII. 34. As also of
Baal-Zephon, Exodus XIV. 2. and Baal-Meon, Josh. XVII. 17. And from other
particular Idols, specially among the Babylonians, were like denominations
taken. Whether Bell be a contraction, or in a diverse dialect, the same with
Baal, is not so certain. God himself also was called Baal; But refused after
to be so styled, because the name had been so commonly given to Idols, Hos. II.
16. Of Bell, see the Annotations on Esaias XLVI. 1. Ashteroth or Ashtoreth or
Ashtaroth is more specificaly the goddess of the Sidonians, 1 King XI. 5, 33.
2 King. XXIII. 13. and of the Philistines, 1 Samuel XXXI. 10. Take also these
other names of Idol-gods in Scripture; Chemosh, of the Moabites, and Ammonites,
Judge. XI. 24. 1 King. XI. 5, 7, 33. 2 King. XXIII. 13.

Dagon, of the Philistines, Judge. XVI. 23. 1 Samuel V. 2, -- 7. 1 Chronicles. X. 10.

Moloch, or Molech, or Milchom, of the Ammonites 1 King. XI. 5, 7, 33. 2 King.
XXIII. 13.

Bell, and Nebo, and Belteshazzar, and Merodach, and Succoth-Benoth, of the
Babylonians, Esaias XLVI. 1. Dan. IV. 8. 2 King. XVII. 30. Ier. L. 2.

Nishrosh, of the Assyrians, and Sennacherib, 2 King. XIX. 37.

Rimmon of the Syrians, 2 King. V. 18.

2 King. XVII. 30, 31.
Nergal, of the men of Cuth. Ashimah, of the men of Hamath; Nibhaz and Tartak,
of the Avites; Adrammelech, and Anammelech, of Se phervaim;
Siccuth, Chiun, and Remphan; named, Amos V. 26. Acts VII. 43.

The seven Planets under several names, by several Nations.

And from the Egyptian Apis the Bull, and Mevis the Cow, the Jews took their
Idol of the golden Calf or Ox, Psalm. CVI. 20. And Ieroboam's Calves.



These Idols are called (...) quasi (...) not gods, 1 Cor. VIII. 4. Ier. 2. 11.
and V. 7. and Chapter XVI. 20. or nothing worth, Ier. XI. 13. Vanities; They are
called Shames, Abominations, 1 King. XI. 5. Dungie, or Dunghil-gods, Deuteronomy.
XXIX. 17. Devils, Deuteronomy. XXXII. 17. 2 Chronicles. XI. 15. 1 Cor. X. 20, 21. Apoc. IX.
20. Psalm. CVI. 37. 2 King. XX. 1.

Shechem] See the Observations on Josh.

Threescore and ten persons] So ver. 18, 24, 56. and Chapter VIII. 30. The whole
number designed to slaughter, though the youngest of them Iotham escaped; and
Abimelech himself was the murderer. And this is a thing usual in the Scripture.
As Genesis XLII. 13. Number. XIV. 32, 33. 1 Cor. XV. 5.

Gerizim] Near Shechem.

Millo] See the Observations on 1 Samuel V. 9.

Iair] Not that Iair, Number. XXXII. 41. Deuteronomy. III. 14. But of his posterity, and
name.

Thirty Cities] That former Jair in the days of Moses, Chron. II. 22. though
the sons of Machir, the son of Manasseh, and the father of Gilead, and
grandfather of this Iair, had among them sixty Cities, in the days of Moses,
Josh. XIII. 30, 31, 32. But here this Iair, the Judge, had thirty sons and
they had thirty Cities, seven more then the former Iair had, all which they
called by the same name of Havoth-Iair, as their progenitor had called his
twenty three.

Philistines] In this time of their oppressing Israel, Sampson lived, and was a
Judge, and began to deliver them, Chapter XIII. 5.

Ammon] This was the fifth oppression; And Iephthah was the Judge and deliverer.

And that year] The last of the eighteen of their oppressing the Israelites.

Eighteen years] Which years of oppression fell upon the two Tribes and a half
beyond Jordan in Iairs time.

Passed over Iordan] In this eighteenth year the Ammonites proceeded Jordan.
And then Iephthah does vanquish them; and begin his six years of judging
Israel. And all this stands well with the Chronology of the times, viz: of two
hundred ninty nine years in the Book of the Judges; and of the four hundred and
eighty mentioned, 1 King VI. 1.

The Sidonians] Diverse of these Deliverances are not expressed in the holy
History.

Grieved] Gods compassion to his people.

Mizpeh] There is mention of the Land of Mizpeh, Hermon, Josh. XI. 3. But most
commonly there were Citiet of that name; And those builded on hills or high
places, as the word signifies, fit to set wath-towers upon, as our Beacons. We
read of diverse such in Scripture. One Mizpeh in Moab, 1 Samuel XXII. 3. Another
in Mount Gilead, in Manasseh, beyond Jordan, not far from the Tribe of Gad,
Josh. XIII. 26. Here Laban overtook Jacob, Genesis XXXI. 49. And here the
Israelites encamped against the Midianites, in this text, Judge. X. 17. And
Iephthah their Judge and General had his house here, Judge. XI. 11, 29, 34.
Another Mizpeh was in Judah, Josh. XV. 38. Likely that rebuilt by Asa, 1 King.
XV. 22. 2 Chronicles. XVI. 6. But the most famous Mizpeh was that in Benjamin upon
the border of it, Josh. XVIII. 26. which was near the middle of the Land; and
not far from Shiloh, which stood East from it. This was a Place and City fit
for general meetings and Assemblies of the Land. Thither all Israel assembled
against the Benjamites, Judge. XX. 1, 3. and XXI. 1. There Samuel brought all
Israel to public Repentance, 1 Samuel VII. 5, 6. And thither likewise, as to
Bethel and Gilgal, he came in c^rcuit from year to year; to judge Israel, ver.
16. There Saul was found out, and made King, 1 Samuel X. 17, 21. And there
Gedaliah was Governor; so made by Nebuchanezzar; and there slain by Ishmael,
2 King. XXV.

Tob] Some thirty miles East from the waters of Merom.

My Land.] No. It was the Land of the Moabites; after of Sihon; and from him
conquered by the Israelites, by Gods command and donation, ver. 21, 22.

Three hundred years] And four of five over, which are omitted for the
roundnesse of the number. As Chapter XX. 46. 2 Samuel V. 5. See the Observations on
Ch XX. 46.

A Vow] Of Vows, Annotations on Jonah. I. 16.

And I will offer it] These words of Jephthah's Vow do fairly admit a
Disjunctive acceptance of the letter Vau to be interpreted and rendered Or,
and not and. As it is likewise used in Genesis XXVI. 11. Exodus I. 10, and XXI. 15,
17. Deuteronomy. XVII. 9, 12. and XIX. 17. Judge. XV. 18. 1 Samuel VI. 3. Jer. VI. 20.
and IX. 12. and XIII. 23. and XVI. 2, 7. and XXI. 9. and in very many other
places.

Bewail my Virginity] Much more her death,

And she knew no man] But lived a Virgin,

To lament] Or talk with her, ver. 34.

Smote Ephraim] In a Wood, Ephraim, from that slaughter of the Ephraimites.
Where afterward Absalom was slain, and his army, 2 Samuel XVII. 6. Ephraim
having in truth no Wood, or Land, or portion of inheritance on that side of
Jordan Eastward.

Because they said] The Ephraimites said; the Gileadites are fugitives,
mungrels, the refuse of both Tribes. Or, the Gileadites being got between the
Ephraimites and Manassites; said to the Ephraimites, ye are but the fugitives
of Ephraim.

Took the Passages] As the Ephraimites were to return back from Gilead,

Shibboleth] Which signifies the stream of a river,

Forty years] These forty years of Oppression by the Philistines fall in with
the times of Sampson and Eli,

Angel] The Angel of the Lord, Manoah, Elohim, God, ver. 22. And by his wife,
Jehovah, ver. 23. He whose Name is Wonderful, ver. 18, 19. Esaias IX. 6.

Nazarite] Of Nazarites, Observations on Number. VI. 2.

Begin] Sampson did but begin only. For the Philistines prevailed, and Lorded
it over Israel, all the days of Sampson, Chapter XIV. 4. of Eli, of Samuel partly,
1. Sam. VII. 8. 13* and of Saul; slain by them. This deliverance was not
perfected till David's days.

Drink no Wine] The mother is thus forbidden, ver. 14. Likely because the
infant was to receive hutriment and suck from her.

If the Lord] A good plea, and comfort,

Sampson] Sampson's Birth has relation to that, Chapter X. 7. where the
Philistines are mentioned before the Ammonites. And he began to deliver Israel
being young; and died about forty.

To move him] Inspire him with magnanimous,

Timnath] In the Tribe of Dan: Ekron of the Philistines* Here Sampson intended
to have his first wife. And Judah had his sheep-shearing, Genesis XXXVIII. 12.
This City was given to the Tribe of Judah, Josh. XV. 57. And after, out of
that Tribe to Dan, Josh. XIX. 43. But the Philistines most what possessed it.
And in the days of wicked Ahaz, we read that they took it from him, 2 Chronicles*
XXVIII. 18. Some make this in Dan, and that in Judah to be diverse Cities.

Sampson] Sampson by extraordinary motion of the Lord, the lawful Dispenser
with his own Law, seeks a marriage, though a Nazarite, with a Philistine: had
thirty of the Philistines brought as companions to be with him at the nuptial
feast, to honor him in show; but more in jealousy and fear of him, seeing and
noting some things extraordinary in his person. His wife weeping before him the
seven days while the Feast lasted, but more after the third day, and most upon
the seventh and last day, he expounds his Riddle to her; and she to the
companions. He performs what he had promised thereupon: And in anger; for
their fraud, and her treachery, he went away; leaving them; and her too behind
him.

Foxes] The Lan^ was full of them.

Hip] Sampson hip and thigh, Lehi, that is, the jaw bone* of an Ass, upon that
occasion he called the place jaw bone, or Lehi: And at his prayer, had a Well
of water, which he therefore calls Enhakkore, springing in that place of Lehi,
to revive his spiri, being near dead with thirst.

Rock Etam] We read of a City of that name* 1 Chronicles. IV. 32. Called also
Ethar. Josh* XIX. 7. in the Tribe of Simeon; as it joins to the Tribe of Dan
and Judah; in the North-East corner of Simeon; and not very far from Zorah in
the South-East corner of Dan, where Sampson was borne, ver. 2. not meaning that
Dan, or that so far distinct portion of Dan, that lay in the North-bounds of
the Land of Canaan.

Of Judah] Judah joining to Dan,

Twenty years] These twenty years, Eli his forty, 1 Samuel IV. 18.

Gaza] See the Annotations on Amos I.

Harlot] Sampsons sin; yet upon repentance pardoned; and he registered among
those Worthies, Heb. XI. 32.

Took the doores] His strength came up to a miracle.

Before Hebron] Not so far as Hebron. Of Hebron, see the Observations on Genesis
XXIII. 2.

Sorek] The river or torrent of this name divides Dan, Simeon.

Delilah] The chief Passages of this part of the History are these; That
Delilah had a very great sum paid in hand for betraying of Sampson, ver. 5,
18. whose strength yet lay not in his hair, in the having of it; or in the
growing of it again; the hair being but a ceremonial sign of it; But in Gods
presence with him: And so his weakness, not in the losing of his hair; which
here he lost unwittingly, and unwillingly; But in the Lords departing from him,
for his sins, ver. 20. The shaver might easily have cut his throat, being
asleep: But Gods Providence was in and over all. And blind Sampson coming at
last to see his sins, and repent; And being brought into the magnificent
house and Idol-temple, containing about three thousand persons spectators upon
the roof of it, verily a wondrous building is moved by an extraordinary
instinct of Gods Spirit, in his last act, not to murder himself, but to
undervalue his own life, so as he might therewithal, as a Judge, and public
person execute Gods mighty vengeance upon his own, and Gods peoples enemies and
oppressors, ver. 30. wherein many make him a Type of Christ's victorious
conquest over our spiritual enemies, at and by his death: Or at least do take
an occasion, to use an Allusion from the one to the other.

Dagon] Dagon] seems to have his name from Dag, Sam. V. 4. A sea-Idol,
worshipped by them of Gaza, and the Philistines that dwelt on the seacoast; as
the Heathens did their Neptune or Triton. And the Idolaters do here ascribe it
to this Idol their god, that he delivered Sampson into their hand; and
therefore offer a great sacrifice to him. In his most stately Temple they
fastened the head of King Saul, 1 Chronicles. X. 10. And at Ashdod, by Dagon in the
house of Dagon (for he had many Temples) they placed the Ark of God, 1 Samuel V.
2. Of this again you may see more in the Observations upon that text, 1 Samuel V.
2.

These five last Chapters of Judges contain Histories of things done, soon
after the death of Joshua, Judge. People mentioned, Chapter II. 11, 12 in the times,
if not before the times, of all the Judges, whose times and Histories are
recorded, Chapter III. and along to the XVII. Chapter, without any interruption.
And this appears by very many Passages in these five last Chapters.

Cursedst] So Prove. King. VIII. 31. Levit. V. 1. Number. V. 21. And so it is
expounded, 1 These. V. 27. And so put to our Savior, Matthew. XXVI. 63. And so
used, 1 Samuel XIV. 24. 2 Chronicles. XVIII. 15. Neh. XIII. 25.

The Lord] Micha's mother dedicated this silver to the Lord Jehovah; Chapter XVIII.
18. to worship Jehovah in and by them; and not any false god. For in this point
of the Object or Thing worshipped, the Idolatries of the Jews, and of the
Heathens most what differed. See Exodus XXXII. 4, 5. 2 Chronicles. XXXIII. 17. Hos.
II. 16. The other nine hundred Shekels, it is like, she bestowed on house,
vestments, and other necessaries for that Idolatrous service.

An house of gods] So great was the Idolatry of the Jews at this time. And
their zeal great in their Idolatry, Chapter XVIII. 24.

Ephod] This Ephod, mentioned again, Chapter XVIII. 14. As likewise that of
Gideon, Chapter VIII. 27. were not like those Linen Ephods, Exodus XXVIII. 40. 1 Samuel II. 18. and Chapter XXII. 18. But like Aarons rich and glorious Ephod, Exodus
XXVIII. 6, -- 34. See the Annotations on Hos. III. 4. and the Observations on 1 Samuel XXIII. 9.

Teraphim] Or Theraphim, a word of the plural number; and still so used in
Scripture; signifies Images, or Idols; Hos. III. 4. 1 Samuel XV. 23. But of what
kind or fashion, it is uncertain; some conceive them to be made like men;
because Michal put one of them in David's bed, thereby to deceive her father
Saul's messengers, 1 Samuel XIX. 13. Some take them to be houshold-gods; and as
such in Labans house and family, Genesis XXXI. 19, 34. Some to be such as they
used to consult with as Oracles; as in the case of the Danites here, and Chapter
XVIII. 14, 17, 18, 20. and of Nebuchadnezzar, Ezekiel. XXI. 21. and in Zecharies
time, Zech. X. 2. Answers likely being given by the subtilty of the Devil, or
forgery of their Priests. And to workers with familiar spirits, and Wizards,
They are joined in Josiah's Reformation, 2 King. XXIII. 24. See the Annotations
on Hos. III. 4.

Consecrated] And ver. 12. The gross abuse of Consecration. As in Jeroboams
time, 1 King. XIII. 33.

No King] King here is taken, Saul's reign.

A Levite] A Levite borne or* Bethlehem. Judah, or sojourning there as a
stranger.

Where I may find a place] The necessitous state of the Levites, ver. 10, 11.

Danites sought] Their inheritance by lot is set down, Josh. XIX. 40. But they
got it not all; through their own sin and default, Judge. I. 34. And their
tribe being numerous, they sought out larger bounds, and more commodious
habitations, Josh. XIX. 47. And this, though mentioned in that text of Ishua,
yet fell out after his death, and the death of those Elders that outlived him;
likely soon after, but surely before the days of Sampson.

Mount Ephraim] See the Observations on Josh. 2. XXIV. 1.

Ask counsel] These Danites, ver. 14, 17.

Laish] Laish very far off from the body of the Tribe of Dan; Simeon, and
Judah, in the South-parts of the Land of Canaan, and this under Mount Libanon,
by Asher, and Naphtali, in the North-bounds. This City first burnt, and after
rebuilt by these Danites, they then called Dan; which is taken as the
North-bound of the Land of Canaan, as Chapter XX. 1. 1 Samuel III. 20. 2 Samuel III.
10. and elsewhere. And here Jeroboam did set up one of his golden Calves, 1
King. XII. 29.

Jonathan] A Levite the great grandchilde of Moses, Bethlehem-Judah; and so, as
of the family of Judah, Chapter XVII. 7. And though a Levite, yet taken and used as
a Priest; and consecrated thereunto by Micah an Ephraimitie, ver. 1, 12. Who
likewise had consecrated one of his own sons to become his Priest, ver. 5. And
this Jonathan forced to seek and shift for his maintenance and livelihood; and
to accept of one so poor and base, ver. 10. All this bespeaks the sad and
lamentable condition and coufusion of those times wherein they lived.

Captivity of the Land] This Idolatry of the Danites, in this City Dan,
continued until the day of the Captivity of the Land; that is, as it is
explained, ver. 31. all the time that the house of God was in Shiloh, till the
Philistines took the Arc, 1 Samuel IV. Psalm LXXVIII. 60, 61. which was at the
death of Eli.

A Concubine] Or a wife a Concubine. Viro-conjux, an half-wife, or secondarie
wife. We read in Scripture of Concubines, and Wives, variously: Of many wives
to one man, in the Old Testament. And this, not only in profane and evil
men, as in Lamech, Genesis IV. and Esau, and other; but also in good and godly
men, as in Jacob, David, and others. And among these many wives, we sometimes
find a kind of distinction of them into two sorts; One sort, the First, and
principal, and absolutely lawful wife, and Mistress; The other sort, but in a
secondary and inferior degree. And such as had no Dowries; nor solemn Rites
of reception; nor Rule in the family; nor their children had any Inheritance,
but Gifts and Portions, For that of Jacobs sons by Bilhah, and Zilpah, was a
case extraordinary. And thus we find with Abraham, Sarah of the first sort;
and Hagar, and Keturah of the second: with Jacob, Rachel, and Leah, of the
first; Bilhah, and Zilpah of the second. And those of the second sort, are
sometimes called wives, and sometimes Concubines; as we see in Keturah, Genesis
XXV. 1, 6. 1 Chronicles. I. 32. And in Bilhah, Genesis XXX. 4. and XXXV. 22. and Chapter
XXXVII. 2. And David's ten Concubines, 2 Samuel XV. 16. and Chapter XVI. 22. and Chapter
XX. 3. are called his wives, 2 Samuel XII. 11. And thus Concubines are of two
sorts, some are wives, or half-wives; others plain Whores and Harlots. But
this Concubine of the Levite was his wife, and he her Lord, as appears, ver. 3,
4, 5, 7, 9, 26, 27. and Chapter XX. 4.

Gibeah] Distinct from Gibeah in the tribe of Judah, Josh. XV. 57. And from
Gibeon in the Tribe of Benjamin, Josh. XVIII. 25. This was either that which
afterward was called Gibeah of Saul in the Tribe of Benjamin, 1 Samuel XI. 4. or
else very near it, in the same Tribe, and not far from Jerusalem, and Ramah,
ver. 13, 14, 16.

House of the Lord] In Shilo. Chapter XX. 18. This was near Mount Ephraim; where he
sojourned. And thither the whole Camp came, Chapter XXI. 12.

Know him] So Genesis

My brethren] Men in nature,

Behold my daughter] Sinful this; Romans III. 8.

Not hearken] Yet did in the next words. ver. 2. was plagued by lust.

Divided her] An act barbarous in it self and inhumane: Belial to deserved
punishment; that such pests might not be suffered to live, and poi^on the air
with their breath, and so pollute the Land, and go unpunished. The unbowelling,
and enbalming of dead bodies, and anatomizing of them by Physicians and
Surgeons, to good uses, is a case different in diverse points,

Mizpeh] See the Observations on Chapter

Footmen] Footmen four hundred thousand. Solomon's time, 1 King. IV. 26. and IX.
19. and Chapter X. 26. 2 Chronicles. I. 14. and Chapter VIII. 9. and Chapter IX. 25. where the
four thousand stalls of horses for his Chariots, 2 Chronicles. IX. 25. agree well
with the forty thousand in 1 King. IV. 26. counting ten single stalls or
divisions in every stable: yet we find no express mention of the use of any
horsemen in any battle afterward. And to this the command and care for the
houghing of the enemi es horses* and the burning of their Char^o^s, may have
relation, Josh, XI. 6, 9. 2 Samuel VIII. 4. 1 Chronicles. XVIII. 4. yet we read of
many horses and Chariots in war; with the Canaan^tes, Josh. XI. 4. Judge. IV.
3* 13. And many among the Israelites; Esaias II. 7. Trust in them is forbidden,
D^u^. XVII. 16, 17. Psalm. XX. 7. and XXXIII. 16, 17. Prove. XXI. 31.

Asked Counsel] The eleven Tribes presume here more upon their own strength*
second overthrow, they seek God in a right manner; they more seriously mourn,
and Fast, and repent of their sins; Offering Burnt-offerings for the expiation
of them; and Peace offerings, to make their peace with God, and testify their
Faith in him: And gaining a Promise of success, yet they carefully use the
means, and stratagems, which formerly they slighted, and presumptuously
neglected. And by this stratagem they seem to divide their army into three
parts; some to lie in wait; some to fight, and seemingly flee: And the body of
their Army, as a strong reserve to fall on and gain the victory, upon an
appointed sign, when the Benjamites were brought to an amazed stand, and come
within the reach of it.

Phineas] Phineas here living, Sampson was borne; which shows this History
preceded Sampson a long time. As the like might have been observed, to a like
end, of many other Passages in these five last Chapters, as has been formerly
said.

All which fell] The odd hundred men mentioned, ver. 35 are here omitted;
David's reign, 2 Samuel V. 5. and Chapter II. 11. And of the time of Solomon's
building the Temple, 1 King. VI. 1, 38. And the like is in Jephthahs account of
the 300. years, Judge. XI. 26. And likely here in the number of the remain of
the Benjamites that were slain after the three battles.

Turned again] This done in heat of war, Jehoshaphat's time, comparing the
number of Benjamin with Judah, 2 Chronicles. XVII. 14, -- 18.

Had sworne] This Oath, ver. 18. was made in rashness, and rage, out of a
blind zeal, and superstitious ignorance; And by Gods Law might and ought to
have been broken; And was unlawful to be kept; and much less to have fraud,
and violent rape, without consent, either of parties, or parents, used, for the
keeping of it. Which yet they did, thinking to silence thereby the cry of a
superstitious conscience in themselves; and to provide also for the like in
those parents of the 200 Virgins, ver. 22.

Women] The women, and children,

Ruth.
THE Book and History of Ruth falls in with the time of Deborah, or Gideou; as
may be gatherd by comparing Matthew. 1. 5. with the end of this History: and what
formerly has been said upon Rahabs marriage. And the History serves mainly to
continue and declare the Genealogy of our Savior Jesus Christ, Chap. IV. 18,
-- 22.

Famine] In the time of the Oppression of Jabin,

Ephrathites] Chapter IV. 11. Bethlehem was called Ephrath, Genesis XXXV. 19. Micah V.
2. Matthew. II. 6.

Of Bethlehem Judah] To distinguish it from Bethlehem in the Tribe of Zebulun,
Josh. XIX. 15. And these persons from those of the Tribe of Ephraim, who were
likewise called Ephrathites, 1 King. XI 26.

Ruth] The subject matter; not the Author of this Book.

Mothers house] I am but your Mother-in-Law.

More sons in my womb] See Deuteronomy. XXV.

And unto her gods] Orpha's idolatrous inclination.

Return thou] As, Josh. XXIV. 19.

Testified against me] As a witness of his just displeasure,

Barley-harvest] Part of our March and April, Lev. XXIII. 10,

Let me gleane] Her modesty; notwithstanding the Law, Lev. XIX. 9, 10. and
XXIII. 22.

An 20. Ephah] See the Observations on Exodus XVI. 36.

One of our next kinsmen] Who has right to redeem, Levit. XXV. 25, 26. Deuteronomy.
XXV. 5, 6, 7. Mar. XII. 19.

Uncover his feet] Naomi well knew the piety and chastity of Boaz, Ruth; and
confidently trusted therein.

Spread therefore thy skirt] Receive me into thy protection, by taking me to be
thy wife,

Lie down until the morning] Boaz not offended with this manner of her
approach,

Not be known] Boaz then did lie alone, in a room by himself; and is careful
to avoid scandal.

Six] See the Observations on Genesis XVIII. 6.

Gate] Gates of Cities were the ordinary places of audience, Deuteronomy. XVII. 2, 8.
2 Samuel XIX. 8. Prove. XXXI. 23. Jer. XXXVIII. 7. Lam. V. 13. And the usual manner
of Prophets was to publish their Prophecies in the Gates, either of the Temple,
or of the City of Jerusalem, Jer. VII. 2. and XIX. 2. and XXVI. 10. and
sometimes of the Kings house; as places of greatest concourse of people, Jer.
XVII. 19. and XXII. 1, 2.

Lest I mar mine own inheritance] Want an heir,

A man plucked off his shoe] These Ceremonies then used in buying, Deuteronomy. XXV.
8, 9. But with diverse differences. See, Psalm. LX. 8. The Ceremonies that
respected the person of Ruth, are here not mentioned, but may seem either
omitted, or else transacted with much alteration from the first institution* as
those times now were.

THe two Books of Samuel are thought to be written by Samuel, Nathan and Gad,
one after another, 1 Chronicles. XXIX. 29. Yet some passages in them may seem to
intimate the writing of them to have been of a later time. As, 1 Samuel V. 5. and
XXVII. 6. and XXX. 25. 2. Sam. VI. 8, and XVIII. 8.

They may better be called, The I. and II. Book of Kings: The I. containing all
the History of King Saul; Samuel dying, 1 Samuel XXV. And the II. the History of
King Ishbosheth shortly; and of King David at large. And so do the LXX. and
many other style them.

I. Samuel.
THis first Book contains an History of eighty years: viz: forty in the time
of Heli, Chapter IV, 18. in the four first Chapters. And forty in the times of
Samuel, and King Saul, in the rest. If Samuels time be reckoned in with that of
Saul. Or rather thus; forty to Eli, whereof the former half runs up in the
times of the Judges, in the twenty years of Sampson: And the later half, or
twenty begins with this Book; after the death of Sampson, and the end of the
Book of the Judges. And then follow twenty years of Samuels Government alone.
And after that, forty years of King Saul, Acts XIII. 21. In the former part
whereof Samuel also lived, and partly judged with him, as appears in the XIII.
XV. and XVI. and XIX. Chaters of this Book: though he withdrew from Saul in his
last days, 1 Samuel XV. 35. And died, chapter XXV. And in regard whereof they are
named as joint partners in the administration of the Government. 1 Samuel XI. 7.
Still in the whole eighty years.

An Ephrathite] As the Jews are called Cretes, Acts II. 9, 10, 11. For though
borne, or at least dwelling in Mount Ephraim in Ramah; yet was Elkanah, and so
Samuel his son, of the posterity of Izhar, the son of Kohath, the son of Levi,
1 Chronicles. VI. 33, -- 38.

Eli] Eli or Heli, Eleazer, the elder; but of Ithamar, the younger son of
Aaron, the son of Amram, the son of Kohath, the son of Levi. Eli was
extraordinarily both High Priest; and Judge; And a good and famous man; though
faulty, and infamous in his children. And therefore more grievously punished for
their flagitious wickedness, then Samuel for his sons lesser faults. See the
sins of the sons of the High Priest Joshua, Ezra X. 18. From Eli descended
Phinehas, his son; Ahitub, his son, 1 Samuel IV. 19, 21. compared with chap. XIV.
3. Ahimelech, his son, slain by Saul, [his brother was Ahijah] 1 Samuel XIV. 3.
and XXII. 9, 11. Abiathar, his son, in David's time, 1 Samuel XXII. 20. 1 King. I.
7. This Abiathar is named High Priest by our Savior, Mark II. 26. when David
did eat the Shewbread; because Abiathar then was with his Father Ahimelech
joined in that action of giving the bread to David instantly succeeded in his
Fathers room and Priesthood; was therein more eminent then his Father; and
continued therein, with David in his persecution by Saul, and in all the time
of his reign afterward. And thus have we no need in that whole History of
Ahimelech and Abiathar, Father, and son, to make them Binomii, to be both known
by both those names, and both indifferently called by either; yet see the great
Annotations on 1 Chronicles. XVIII. 16. This Abiather was thrust out of the High
Priesthood by Solomon, 1 King. II. 26, 27. And the sons of Abiathar were
Ahimelech, and Jonathan, 2 Samuel VIII. 17. and XV. 27. This Ahimelech, and not
his Grandfather, of the same name, is he that is usualy joined with Zadok in
David's reign. And both then are named Priests, 2 Samuel VIII. 17. 1. Chron.
XXIV. 31. i. e. Priests of the second rank, or next the High Priest, who then
was Abiathar. Such a second Priest we read of, 2 King. XXV. 18. Jer. LII. 24.
who upon any extraordinary occurrent, restraining or disabling the High Priest;
was to supply his place. This Jonathan the son of Abiathar was employed with
Ahimaaz the son of Zadok, as newes-bearer to David in his flight from Absalom,
2 Samuel XV. 27, 28. and XVII. 17.

Of Zadok, See 2 Samuel VIII. 17.

Temple] So is the Tabernacle here called. chap. III. 3. 2 Samuel XXII. 7. Psalm.
XXVII. 6. And so again, The Temple is called a Tabernacle, Lam. II. 6.

Samuel] We read not that he was High Priest, ver. 11. a Sacrificer; though a
Levite only, and most likely of the posterity of that Korah, Number. XVI. 32. and
of the race of Izhar the son of Kohath, the son of Levi, as was formerly said,
1 Chronicles. VI. A rare and worthy person.

The doors of the house of the Lord] The Hangings of the Gate of the Court,
Exodus XXVII. 16.

Ark] The Ark so precious in the eyes of God, Psalm LXXVIII. 61. and CXXXII. 8.
1. Sam. IV. 20. Was carried about the walls of Jericho, and then returned into
the Tabernacle, Being in the Tabernacle in Shiloh, it was taken thence (and
never came into the Tabernacle again), and was carried to Eben-Ezer (a place
ominous then, but a monument of Gods help soon after) into the Camp, 1 Samuel
IV. 1, 3, 4, 5. and V. 1. that it might save them out of the hand of their
enemies, the Philistines. (As we read, the Philistines themselves, in the days
of David, brought their Images into their Camp, 2 Samuel V. 21. 1 Chronicles. XIV. 12.)
The Ark being taken there by the Philistines, they carried it about to Ashdod,
into the house of Dagon: Thence to Gath: Thence to Ekron. And after they had
kept it seven months, they carried it to Beth-Shemesh, a City in the Tribe of
Judah, given to the Priests, 1 Chronicles. VI. 57, 59. Josh. XXI. 16. And it was
fetched thence to Kiriath-jearim, a City of Judah, likewise, 1 Chronicles. XIII. 6.
and Judge. XVIII. 12. So called, it may be, from Kiriath-jearim, the son of
Shebal, grandchilde of Caleb, the son of Hur, 1 Chronicles. II. 50, 52, 53. If
Kiriath-jearim be there to be understood of the name of a man, and not of the
City. Or thus called from its seat in a Wood, or woody Country, as the name
signifies; See ou Psalm. CXXXII. 6. It was called also Kiriath-Baal, Josh.
XVIII. 14, 15. And Baalah, Josh. XV. 9, 10. 1 Chronicles. XIII. 6. And Baale of
Judah, 2 Samuel VI. 2. It was brought thither into the house of Abinadab, a
Levite; builded in the hill, or Gibeah there, 1 Samuel VII. 1. 2 Samuel VI. 3, 4.
It abode there twenty years, till the time of the Repentance and Reformation
wrought by Samuel, 1 Samuel VII. 2, -- 6. And after in the times of Saul, it
seems to be fetched thence to Giglal, 1 Samuel X. 8. and Chapter XI. 15. and chapter XII.
3. and chap. XIII. 8, 9. And after to Gibeah of Benjamin; compare together 1 Samuel XIII. 6. and chap. XIV. 2, 18. It may seem to be thus fetched into
extraordinary Assemblies, upon extraordinary occasions both in War, and
Peace. But being returned to Kiriath-jearim, and the honse of Abinadab, it was
fetched thence by David, 1 Chronicles. XIII. 5. sixty seven years after it was first
brought thither; And was brought by him to the house of Obed-Edom, 2 Samuel VI.
10. a Levite, and Porter on the South Side of the Temple, 1 Chronicles. XV. 18, 24.
and chap. XVI. 38. and chap. XXVI. 4, -- 8, 15. if not a Singer also, 1 Chronicles.
XV. 21. and chap XVI. 5. And one of his race and name was treasurer in the
Temple, in the days of King Amatziah, 2 Chronicles. XXV. 24. He is called a
Gittite, likely because borne at Gath-Rimmon, a City of the Kohathites
Levites, Josh. XXI. 24, 25. situated near Gath of the Philistines. The Arc was
there three months, 2 Samuel VI. 11. 1 Chronicles. XIII. 13, 14. And then, and
thence, fetched by David, with great solemnity, into the Tent which he prepared
for it, in the City of David, in Jerusalem, 1 Chronicles. XV. 1, -- 29. and XVI. 1.
2 Chronicles. I. 4. And thence seems to be carried into Joabs Camp before Rabbah, 2 Samuel XI. 11. And begun to be carried with David in his flight from Absalom, 2 Samuel XV. 24, 25. And being returned to David's Tent for it in Jerusalem,
Solomon, as soon as he had builded the Temple, brings it thence with great
solemnity, and places it in the Holy Oracle, 2 Chronicles. V. 2, -- 14. and chap.
XXXV. 3. about one hundred and twelve years after it first left Shiloh. And
last of all was burned with the Temple by Nebuchadnezzar. And no more to be
minded, or remembered in the days of the Messiah, Jer. III. 16.

The hand of God] The hand of God in Punishments upon the Philistines, chap.
VI. 5. And in their bodies Emerods; and some other disease or plague, whereof
most died, chap. V. 12.

The house of Dagon] This Dagon was the Idol or God of the Philistines, Judge.
XVI. 22. They lived on the coast of the midland-Sea, on the East End of it from
us. This Dagon seems to be a kind of Sea-god, having his name from Dag, which
signifies a Fish; and is thought to be portraied like a Fish from the middle
downward; and his upper part like a man, if not a maid, 1 Samuel V. 4. Such Idols
other Heathens worshipped, as the gods of the Sea; as Neptune, Triton. This
House or Temple of Dagon was a mavelous House, Judge. XVI. 27. Hither the
Philistines brought Sampson to make them sport; and he brought down the House
upon them, Judge. XVI. 30. Hither they brought the Ark of God, as a captive in
triumph, to the honor of their Idol; And Dagon fell down before the Ark,
broken in pieces, 1 Samuel V. 3, 4. And here they fastened the head of Saul, whom
they slew in Gilboa, 1 Chronicles. X. 10.

Bethshemesh] Bethshemesh a City of the Priests, Judah, on the North-border of
it, Josh. II. 16. and XV. 10. 1. Chron. VI. 59. Here Amaziah of Judah fighting
against Iehoash of Israel was vanquished and taken, 2 King. XIV. 2 Chronicles. XXV.
There was another Bethshemesh a fenced City of Naphtali, Josh XIX. 38. Judge.
I. 33. Another Bethshemesh, a prime City in Egypt, Ier. XLIII. 13. called
anciently On, in later times Damieta. Bethshemesh signifies the house of the
Sun; and the Cities so called, from the Temples of the Sun built therein, and
the idol-worship of the Sun by the ancient inhabitants practiced there.

Fifty thousand and seventy men] These were not all of the City Bethshemesh,
Number. IV. 5, 20. If not prying presumptuously into it, out of an impious
curiosity, or a pretense to see whether the Philistines had taken ought out of
it, or put any thing into it.

Kiriath-jearim] A City, Judah, Josh. XV. 9, formerly called Kiriath-Baal,
ver. 60. and XVIII. 14. Of this City see more in the Observations on Chapter IV.
3. and on Psalm. CXXXII. 6. These Citizens fetched the Arc, but borne and
carried by the Priests of Bethshemesh.

Twenty yeeres] Till this time of lamentation and repentance, Observations on
Josh. VI. 6.

Thundered] By thunder here: by hailstones, Josh. X. 10, 11.

Now make us a King] The danger by Nahash, Samuels sons, made the Israelites
ask a King, 1 Samuel XII. 12. which they might have done warrantably, if they had
waited patiently and faithfully, as well for the time when, as the person whom
God should choose: But not tumultuously, and distrustfully, as they did now, 1 Samuel VIII. 5, etc. and Chapter XII. 19. Hos. VIII. 4.

This will be the maner] This manner of a King speaks in many things more then
what is the lawful power,

The fourth part of a Shekel] Samuel, Readiness Asses: As Ahijah did touching the
sickness of Jeroboams child, 1 King. XIV. And Elias did also, of Ahaziah, 2.
King. 1. And Samuel, in humility, seems to accept of a trifle, they having then
no better; not for a reward of Divining; but as a free testimony of their due
respect and thankfulness: As Ahijah did the like from Jeroboams wife, 1 King.
XIV. 3. And Elizeus also the like, 2 King. IV. 42. And as God accepts from the
poor widow two mites.

a Seer] And so ver. Sam. XXIV. 11. and Esaias XXX. 10. Prophets called Seers by
reason of the Visions and Prophecies which they saw from God; He, and they,
being seen of them in Visions and Dreams, Number. XII. 6. And that as clearly, and
as certainly as if they had seen them with their eyes, 1 Pet. I. 12. 1 Cor.
II. 10. 2. Cor. IV. 18. and V. 1. Heb. XI. 27.

to Gilgal] Not as soon as he parted from Samuel: Gilgal after his vanquishing
of the Ammonites before Jabesh Gilead, Chapter XI. 4, 5, 11, 14, 15. when, and
where, they made, or confirmed him King; though chosen before by Lot at Mizpeh,
Chapter X. 17, 24. But this seems to relate to a second time of being at Gilgal,
after that former, and above a year after this parting from Samuel, Chapter XIII.
1. when he was to be there upon that weighty preparation of the war against
the Philistines, Chapter XIII. 7, 8.

one year and he reigned tmo years] i. e. one year from his Election at Mizpah,
to his Coronation at Gilgal. And another year after that, which make two years,
Then he began to take upon him the Royal state of a King, and chose his Guard
and Army. Or thus, He reigned two years lawfully before he was rejected by God,
upon his sparing of Agag, King of the Amalakites, Chapter XV. Or rather, two years
quietly, before he was oppressed, and in a manner outed from his Kingdom by the
Philistines, 1 Samuel XIII. 6, 19, 22. Upon whose overthrow Saul is said to take
the Kingdom again, 1 Samuel XIV. 47.

If they say to us] The like is, Genesis XXIV. 14. and Judge. VI. 36, -- 40. These
done by some special divine instinct; and so not Patterns for our imitation
without like warrant.

a very great trembling] The Hebrew phrase is, God. And so, asleep of God, 1 Samuel XXVI. 12. Mountains of God, Psalm. XXXVI. 6. Cedars of God, Psalm. LXXX. 10.
and CIV. 16. an Host of God, 1 Chronicles. XII. 22. Garden of God, Ezekiel. XXVIII.
13. The wrastlings of God, Genesis XXX. 8. A City of God, Jon. III. 3. Visions of
God, Ezekiel. XL. 2. And so may we understand, Sinners of God, or unto God, Genesis
XIII. 13. that is, exceeding sinners against God, Jer. L. 29. And so fair to
God, Acts VII. 20. that is, exceeding fair. And so the flame of God, Cant.
VIII. 6. A most vehement flame. A Seed of God, Mal. II. 15. A most holy seed.
See my Observations on Jonah III. 3.

Utterly destroyed all the people] Not all the Amalekites slain
notwithstanding this, ver. 3. and Exodus XVII. 14, 16. For David fights them, 1 Samuel XXVII. 8. and they spoil Ziglag, 1 Samuel XXX.

The youngest] David young, Samuel, likely about two and twenty years old,
young when he killed the Lion and the Bear; when he slew Goliath; when, after
these, he slew his ten thousands (in Saul's sundry services); when afterward he
endured so long persecution by Sa^l; was with the King of Moab; and twice with
Achish King of Gath, abiding at one time an year there, and four months: And
yet was but thirty years old, when, after Saul's death, he was made King at
Hebron, 2 Samuel V. 4. neither seems he to have any child, till he was a King;
And then had six in Hebron of fix wives; four in Jerusalem of Bathshua or
Bathshebah, the daughter of Ammiel, or Eliam; and nine more; in all nineteen,
besides the sons of his Concubines 1 Chronicles. III. 1, -- 9.

Anointed] David thrice anointed.

Doubtful whether David slew Goliath before his first coming to Saul, Chapter XVI.
18, -- 23. Or after, that time: There are fair probabilities on either side; no
undoubted certainty.

And he prophesied] Besides the signification of the word for foretelling
things to come, Cor. XIV. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 22, 24, 29, 31, 32. And for singing
and praising God, 1 Samuel X. 5. 1. Chron. XXV. 1. 1 Cor. XI. 5. And more generaly
for declaring the will of God to any by Revelation, or Mission from him. And so
Christ is the great Prophet, Luke XXIV. 19. And so Enoch, Ahraham, Moses, are
called Prophets: and after Moses in this rank none was greater then he, Deuteronomy.
XXXIV. 10. And after his time Samuel, David, Gad, Nathan, Elias, Elizeus, the
four great Prophets, the twelve small Prophets inspired Penmen of Holy
Scripture, and others many, were such, and so called. And as these
Extraordinary Prophets; so there were multitudes of Ordinary Prophets among the
people: And Colleges of Prophets, and the sons of Prophets at Bethel, Jericho,
Gilgal, Ramah, Naioth, in the times of the Old Testament. And in the New
Testament, Zacharias the father, and John Baptist the son, Barnabas and Paul,
Judas and Silas, Agabus, and many others, are called Prophets; some
Extraordinary, others Ordinary Prophets, Matthew. XXIII. 34. Acts XI. 27. and
XIII. 1. and XV. 32. Romans XII. 6. 1. Cor. XII. 10. and chap. XIV. 6, 9, 22, 24,
29, 31. Ephesians. IV. 11. Apoc. XI. 10. And in both Testaments there were as
men-Prophets; so women-Prophetesses: And in both Sexes, both True ones, and
False. In the female sex we read of good and True, Miriam, Deborah, Huldah,
Anna, Philips four daughters virgins: of bad and False, Noadiah, Jezebel, and
others, Ezekiel. XIII. 17, -- 23. Yea, among the Heathen some Poets pretending to,
or reputed to be Declarers of Gods will, or Divine truths, are in a like sense
termed Prophets, Tit. I. 12. Prophets in their esteem. And the mode and manner
of the expressions of their minds, Oracles, and Prophecies among these Heathen
Enthusiasticks was most-what in a wild, raving and raging sort, with strange
motions and agitations of the body, thereby the more to pretend their divine
raptures; as in the Sybils, and others. And not unlike thereunto is this of
Saul's prophesying here; In this his rage he casting a jaylin at Davi^, ver. 11.
yet in what sense properly he is said here to Prophecy, is well guessed in the
great Annotations upon this text, though it be not altogether sure and
certain. As neither that of Eldad and Medad, and the rest of the LXX. Number.
XIII. 26, 27. Only this is unquestioned in the LXX. That it was some
extraordinary Act and Testimony, That the Spirit of God rested upon them in
some extraordinary manner, and as such was discernible to all, and so fit to
authorize them in the eyes of others, as by a miracle, and to declare to all
That they were gifted and assumed to that their present Office and employment.

Naked] i. e. Stripped of his upper garment or military habit. So Peter, John
XXI. 7. and Micah, chap. I. 8. Esaias, chap. XX. 2, 4. And those Acts XIX. 16.

Slew] Saul's most horrid and bloody Act.

Ephod] The Ephod here is that of the High Priests; Urim and Thummim, Exodus
XXVIII. 30. which Urim and Thummim were not the twelve precious stones of the
Breast Plate; mentioned, v. 17-21. Or the words of Vrim and Thummim, engraven
in the midst of those twelve precious stones on the Breast Plate; Or things
committed into the hands of the workmen to make them: But rather given by God
to Moses, to put them not on, but into the Breast Plate; which happily to this
end and purpose was doubled, ver. 16. so to have them hid there. And
accordingly, Levit. VIII. 8. Moses is said to put in the Breast Plate the Urim
and the Thummim. Yet what things, or what kind of things they were, appears
not. Only we know the names signify Lights, and Perfections; happily intimating
Knowledge of Doctrine, and Integrity of Life and Conversation: And that by
these the High Priests extraordinarily did ask Counsels of the Lord, and did
receive Answers, as Oracles from him. So we see the Precept for it, Number. XXVII.
21. Joshuah shall stand before Eleazar the Priest, who shall ask Counsel for
him, after the judgment of Urim before the Lord: at his word shall they go
out, and at his word they shall come in, both he ( i. e. Joshuah) and all the
children of Israel with him. And the Practice of it we find, expected
earnestly by Saul, 1 Samuel XXVIII. 6. though the same, it may seem, lighty
slighted by him, 1 Samuel XIV. 18, 19. And here acted by Abiathar the High
Priest, for David; David hereunto adjoining his Request unto the Lord, for the
Answer, ver. 10, 11, 12. And again, 1 Samuel XXX. 7. And not unlike but David's
enquiring of the Lord, 2 Samuel II. 1. and chap. V. 19, 23. and XXI. 1. And
possibly that, Judge. XX. 18, 23, 27, 28. was by the same means, upon the same
ground. And if it were burnt, or lost at the ruin of the Temple, and all, by
Nebuchadnezzar, yet the Tirshatha entertains an expectation of the restoring of
it, Ezra II. 63. Neh. VII. 65.

a Messinger] Gods providence for the preservation of his.

unto Achish] This second time,

in Shunem] In Shunem and Aphek, 1 Samuel XXIX. 1. the Philistines pitched: And
the Israelites in Gilboa, by a Fountain which is in Jezreel. All in the Tribe
of Issachar, Josh XIX. 18.

This is David's Spoile] i. e. all that the Amalakites had taken from others,
save from them of Ziglag. This, by his right, and free consent and gift of his
soldiers, he made use of to gratify his friends, and engage them to him, ver.
26, -- 31.

they shall part alike] They both alike shall have their shares, Number. XXXI. 27,
-- 30. Josh. XXII. 8. Though not both equal shares.

fell upon it] Saul his own bloody butcher and self-murderer. David, 2 Samuel I.
5, -- 10. in hope of grace and reward from David; but in issue, to the losing
of his life. God in his secret justice justly takes it upon himself, that he
slew him, 1 Chronicles. X. 14.

his head] This they fastened in the Temple of Dagon, Chron. X. 10. His body to
the wall of Bethshan, or Bethshean. And his Armor in the house of Ashteroth, a
name of their female goddesses.

II. Samuel.
THis Book contains an History of forty years; from the death of King Saul, to
the death of King David, or the time immediately preceding it, 2 Samuel V. 4, 5.
The time, and story of David's reign.

Crown that was upon his head] Likely not so worn by him in the day of battle,
King. XXII. 30. But carried with him, or before him, by his armor-bearer,

bowe] That they might be skilful in the right use of their arms and weapons
against their enemies in this time of need. Of the Bow in war, see ver. 22.
And the Annotations on Hos. I. 5. and on Zech. X. 4.

How are the mighty fallen?] Repeated, ver. 25. and 27. as the foot of this sad
song and Elegy.

Tell it not in Gath] This impossible not to be told there: But this shows
David's desire, ver. 21.

Unto Hebron] Of this place, Hebron was a City in the Tribe, and Mountain of
Judah, Josh. XV. 54. Called also Mamre, and Kiriath-arba, the City of Arba, the
father of Anak, where Anak lived, his sons, and the Anakims, a race of
Giants. Here formerly dwelt the children of Heth; and Hittites. And Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, sojourned here: And they; and Sarah, and Rebekah, and Leah
were buried here in the Cave of Machpelah, before Mamre, the same is Hebron,
Genesis XIII. 18. and XXIII. 19. and XLIX. 31. Hence Joseph was sent to see the
welfare of his brethren. Hither the Spies came that were sent from
Kadesh-barnea in the Wilderness of Paran to search the Land. Hoham the King of
Hebron, was one of the five Kings mured up by Joshuah in a Cave; and after
slain and hanged up. And soon after the City taken; and another King thereof
seems then to be slain by him. And he and Caleb slew the Anakims that dwelled
here. This City and Suburbs were given to the Priests, and to be a City of
Refuge: The Fields, and the Villages of it to Caleb the son of Jephunne the
Kenezite, that good Spy, Josh. XX. 7. and XXI. II. To the top of an hill
before Hebron Sampson carried the Gate of Gaza. To them in Hebron David sent a
Present of the Spoil taken from the Amalakite, 1 Samuel XXX. 31. Hither God
directed him to go, in this Text. And here he was anointed King; and reigned
seven years and six months: And here he had six sons born to him of six
several women, his wives Here Abner was slain by Joab; and mournfully buried by
David. Hither King Ishbosheths head was brought by his murderers; buried in
Abners Sepulcher; and they hanged up here. Hither came all the Tribes of Israel
to make David King over all Israel, and anointed him here. And Absalom being
borne here; pretended a vow to be performed here; and rebelling against his
father made himself King here. This City of Hebron was built seven years
before Zoan in Egypt, Number. XIII. 23. And in Rehoboams reign was fortified by
him, after the revolt of the ten Tribes, 2 Chronicles. XI. 10.

Reigned two years] That is, Abner and Joab, ver, 12, etc. As Saul reigned two
years, 1 Samuel XIII. 1. that is, Peaceably, as well as Lawfully, before his
Kingdom was in a manner taken from him by the Philistines, 1 Samuel XIII. 19.

Zerviah the sister of David had these three valiant sons, Joab. Abishai,
Asahel. And Abigael the other sister of David had Amasa, 2 Samuel XVII. 25. 1 Chronicles. II. 15, 16 17.

Michal] Michal loved by both her husbands, David and Phaltiel, see 1 Samuel XXV.
44.

Abner] He, Saul were brothers children, 1 Samuel XIV. 50, 51.

Millo] This in, Zion, the City of David, taken by him, and Joab, of the
Jebusites, notwithstanding their scornful brag and confidence; And David built
the City round about from Millo and inward. And Joab repaired the rest of the
City, 1 Chronicles. XI. 8. 2 Chronicles. XXXII. 5. This Millo Solomon built, 1 King. IX.
15, 24. and XI. 27. There was another Millo in or adjoining to the City
Shechem, where Abimelech was made King, Judge. IX. 6, 20.

unto the day of her death] i. e. Michal never had any child. Those five sons,
2 Samuel XXI. 8. were the sons of Merab, Michals sister, whom Michal brought up
for Adriel, Merabs husband, 1 Samuel XVIII. 19. 2 Samuel XXI. 8. And are called
Michals sons, because she did educate, if not adopt them. And in a sort not
much unlike, is Obed called Naomies son Ruth IV. 16, 17. see Matthew. I. 25. and
XXVIII. 20.

I will] The Promises are, some Peculiar to Solomon, some to Christ, some to
both as the Type and Antitype.

David's Conquests.

Hadadezer] or Hadarezer, 1 Chronicles. XVIII. 3. The like is in Diphath, and
Riphath; in Dodanim, Rodanim, 1 Chronicles. I. 6, 7. compared with Genesis Daleth and
Resh are like one another, and often put and used one for another; See Esaias
XLVI. 15. Jer. II. 20, and chapter XXXI. 40. which shows that the Hebrew letters
had the same form and figure in those days, which they have at this day. And
the same Observation may be made upon the like change of other letters,
wittingly made in Scripture, and much used in proper names; and much more used
in the many mistakes of Interpreters and Translators of Scriptures in many
other places; and all by reason of the similitude of their Hebrew Characters;
as namely of (...), and (...): of (...), and (...), and (...); of (...), and
(...); of (...), and (...); of (...), and (...) of (...) and (...); All which
argue still not the Samaritan Characters, which have none of these mutual
Similitudes amongst themselves; but the Hebrew Characters we have now to be the
same which were from the Beginning, or in Ezra his time. And farther, The
Hebrew Jod is the smallest letter, as it is intimated, Matthew. V. 18. whereas
the Samaritan Jod is one of the largest.

a thousand] These one thousand here are expressed to be Charets, Chron. XVIII.
4. And the seven hundred horsemen are expounded to be seven hundted rancks of
horsemen, or decurioues, ten in a rank; and so make seven thousand horsemen,
in the foresaid place.

Syrians] Hebrew, are Aram, and Aramites, for Syria, and Syrians: Aram the
son of Shem, Genesis X. 22. We read of Padan-Aram, wherein Haran was, the place
where Terah, Bethuel, and Laban dwelt, Genesis XI. 32. and XXVIII. and XXIX.
chapters. Of Aram Naharaim, Judge. III. 8. of Aram-Zobah, Ps. LX. title. Of Aram
of Damascus, in this Text. The word is of a great latitude, and comprehends
great Countries in it. As Mesopotamia, so called, because in the middle of two
arms of Euphrates; or of the two famous rivers of Euphrates and Tygris. And to
this Situation the names of Padan-Aram, and Aram-Naharaim do relate. But in
later ages Aram most relates to Aram of Damascus, that Syria whereof Damascus
was the chief City. And of this Syria see more in my Annotations on Amos I. 4,
5.

For the Catalogue of the Kings of Syria, see the great Annotations on Amos I.
4.

We read of four battles of David with the Syrians.

The first, here, when they came to succor Hadadezer against David. And in
this, two and twenty thousand of them slain, 1 Chronicles. XVIII. 5.

The second. ver. 13. in the Valley of Salt. And Edomites are named there, 1 Chronicles, XVIII. 11, 12. and Psalm. LX. in the Title of it; Because both Syrians,
and Edomites joined in the battle against David's Generals, Joab, and Abishai:
and therefore the victory is ascribed to each of the three: and the number
flaine is twelve thousand, Ps. LX. 1. and six thousand more, either by Joab
alone, before the main battle; or by both the brethren, after it in the pursuit
of the victory; in all eighteen thousand, 2 Samuel VIII. 13. 1 Chronicles. XVIII. 12.

The third battle, 2 Samuel X. 6, -- 14. when the Syrians joined to help the
Ammonites; and fled before Joab, 1 Chronicles. XIX. 6. 7, 10, 14.

The fourth battle with the Syrians, 2 Samuel X. 15, -- 19. wherein David slew
(the men) of seven hundred Chariots, i. e. of seven hundred rancks, or troops,
having ten in a rank or troop; not ten men in a Charet; in all seven thousand,
1 Chronicles. XIX. 18. And forty thousand horsemen, 2 Samuel X. 18. And forty
thousand footmen, 1 Chronicles. XIX. 18. And Shobach, the Captain of their Host.

Zadok] He was in David's, Solomon's times, 2 Samuel VIII. 17. and XX. 25. 1 King.
I. 8. He anointed Solomon King, and by him was put in the room of Abiathar, 1
King. I. 32, 34. and chap. II. 35. He was the son of another Ahitub then he
that was father of Ahimelech: And he came from Eleazar, the eldest son of
Aaron, and from Phineas, his son, after six descents, 1 Chronicles. VI. 4, 5, 6. And
the High Priests of his posterity in a continued series and succession, to the
Babylonish Captivity, are recorded in eleven generations, 1 Chronicles. VI. 9, --
15. And after the Captivity, in six generations to Jaddua, who lived in the
days of Alexander the Great: which is the last Historical Record of the Old
Testament, Neh. XII, 10, 11. This Zadoks son was that Ahimaaz, afterward High
Priest, mentioned by David, 2 Samuel XV. 27. This Zadok, of the line of Eleazar,
and Ahimelech of the line of Ithamar were the Priests, chief of those two
families, with command over the rest of the Priests of those two families
severally: But Abiathar the father of Abimelech was then the supreme and only
High Priest.

The Cherethites, and the Pelethites] Of these see the great Annotations on
this Text,

Mourning was past] David marries her when she was with child,

Solomon] The elder brother of Nathan, Bathsheba, or Bathshua, the daughter of
Eliam or Ammiel: though Nathan be rancked before ^olomon, 2 Samuel V. 14. 1 Chronicles. III. 5. and XIV. 4.

Crowne] The weight and worth of the King of Ammons Crown, Shobi the brother
of Hanun, and son of Nahash seems by David to be made King in Hanuns place,
which makes him to show such kindness to David in his flight from Absalom, chapter
XVII. 27. 28.

After forty years] Absalom, Sam. XIV. 25, 26. Begins his Rebellion against
David, after forty years, 2 Samuel XV. 7. not after forty since David was
anointed in Hebron; but since he was anointed by Samuel, 1 Samuel XVI. 13. And he
ends his Rebellion, with hanging by his hair, as his halter, or by his head
rather; where he is slain first by Joab; after by Joabs armour-bearers; 2 Samuel
XVIII. 14, 15 That the forty years aforesaid, did take their Beginning and
commencement as aforesaid; and so fell in with the twenty second, or twenty
third year of David's age; with the seventh or eighth year before he actualy
began his reign at Hebron; and ended at the thirty second, or thirty third
year of his real reign, and about seven years before his death; appears in
this. That at this time of Absaloms rebellion, David was a strong man, 2 Samuel
XV. 36. and ch XVII. 8, 10. and XVIII. 2. And afterward also, chapter XXI. 15.
whereas in the fourtieth and last year of his reign and life he was bedridden, 1
King. I. 1, 2. And after the business of this Rebellion was carried on, and
ended; we read of three years of famine, 2 Samuel chapter XXI. I. And of the hanging
up of ten of Saul's sons, and grand-sons, ver. 8, 9, 10. and of the gathering of
the bones of them that were hanged, and the burying of them afterward in
another place, ver. 13, 14. As also, of wars yet again raised by the
Philistines, and battles fought with them, at four several times; In the first
of which David himself was in person, and in present danger, ver. 15, -- 22.
And besides, near ten months were taken up in numbering the people, Chapter XXIV.
8. And upon the occasion of the Pestilence following thereupon, The
Threshing-Floore of Araunah being found to be the place where the Temple was to
be builded, 1 Chronicles. XXII. 1. with 2 Chronicles. III. 1. David does instruct Solomon
about his duty in the building of it; and does encourage him to do it; and
charge the Princes to assist him therein, 1 Chronicles. XXII. And causing him to
be suddenly anointed King, to suppress the seditious and ambitious attempt of
Adoniah; And having before ordered the Courses, and Offices of the Levites,
Priests, Singers, Porters, for the Service of the Temple, 1 Chronicles. XXIII. XXIV.
XXV. XXVI. Chapter He gives Solomon Patterns, and Materials for the Building; tells
him of the Courses of the Priests, and Levites which he had Ordered, Chapter
XXVIII. And himself offers of his own goods magnificently; and procures the
Princes, and People to Offer willingly toward the said Building; And concludes
with Thanksgiving and Prayer to God; And the People bless God, and offer
Sacrifices; and make Solomon King the second time, Chapter XXIX. And lastly, on his
deathbed David gives Solomon charge to serve God; as also concerning Joab, and
Barzillai; and Shimei; and dies, 1 King II. All which may well take up the
seven last years of David's reign and life.

In the wood of Ephraim] Not that Ephraim had any wood or land on the East Side
of Jordan: Ephraim by Jephthah, Judge. XII. 5, 6.

Amasa] David's gentleness and courtesy to spare and honor Amasa; Sam. XVII.
25.

slew Goliath] His brother Lahmi; Chron. XX. 5. And so Michal for Michals
sister, ver. 8. of this Chapter. The words brother and sister being left out by
an Eclipsis not unusual, specially in the short idiome of the Hebrews, and in
cases so well known.

This Psalm of Praise and Thanksgiving is the same with Psalm XVIII.

Here are David's Worthies toward the end of his reign. Sam. XXIII. 39.
whereof Joab one, the General and Captain of the host, 1 Chronicles. XI. 6. Six
chief Worthies or Colonels: And of them the first three above the other three.
And the first three, Adino, or Jacobeam, Eleazar, and Shammah; exceeding the
other three. Abishai the chief of the second three; and Benaiah, the son of
Jehoiadah; and Asahel, who was one not of the thirty, but above the thirty, for
there are thirty named after him. The three first, or three chief over the
thirty, ver. 13. are described, as otherwise, so by their valiant Acts, both
distinctly, and jointly, 2 Samuel XXIII. 8, -- 17. And so the two first of the
next three. And these six likely were each of them over five of the thirty
following, and their Regiments. The Catalogue of David's Worchies, 1 Chronicles. XI.
was taken when David began his reign at Jerusalem, or before; The number there
is forty seven, besides the first three, and the second three. And well might
the number be more at that beginning of his reign, then at the end of it; some
of them dying in the mean time. And of others some might have two different
names. The chief of all the Worthies slayes three hundred himself, and likely
in the pursuit, at the same time 500. more, by himself, or with his company; in
all eight hundred. Of him see more, 1 Chronicles. XXVII. 2, 3. The second defies the
Philistines, when the men of Israel were fled away, and in a parcel of ground
full of Barley, slew the Philistines till his hand clave unto the sword, and
wrought a great victory and deliverance. Of his father, see 1 Chronicles. XXVII. 4
The third did the like in a piece of ground full of Lentiles. Of the other
three, 1. Abishai, the brother of Joab. 2. Asahel, another brother, and Captain
for the fourth month, 1 Chronicles. XXVII. 7. slain by Abner, whiles David reigned
in Hebron. 3. Benaejah, the Captain of David's guard; the Cherethites and
Pelethites, 2 Samuel VIII. 18. And Captain for the third month, 1 Chronicles. XXVII.
5, 6. And afterward by Solomon made General of the Host in the room of Joab,
1 King. II. 34, 35. Of him see more, 2 Samuel XXIII. 20, 21, 22. This Benajah,
the son of Jehoiada of Kabzeel, is called also a chief Priest or Principal
Officer, 1 Chronicles. XXVII. 5. Another Benajah a Pirathonite, was one of David's
thirty Worthies, 2 Samuel XXIII. 30. And other Benajahs there were besides, that
were Priests and Levites. And diverse of the Captains for the twelve months
were of the number of David's Worthies. And among the thirty were a son of
Achitophel, Uriah the Hittite, and the armor-bearer of Joab likewise.

Although my house] Rather thus interrogatively;

Seven years] Seven years of famine here propounded to David. Chron. XXI. 12.
that is three more, to the three years of famine for the Gibeonites, 2 Samuel
XXI. 1. To which three so lately past; And David's sin of numbering the people
being in the fourth year, which was a Sabbatical year; A new addition of other
three makes up seven years of famine. Yet the LXX. read three in 2 Samuel XXIV.
13. Of Famine, see more on Lam. I. 11. and II. 11, 12, 19, 20. and IV. 4, 5, 8,
9, 10. and V. 10. Ezekiel. IV. 9, 16. and V. 16.

I. Kings.
THE Books of Kings do most pursue the History of the Kings of Israel, during
the continuance of that Kingdom.

They seem to be written after their days, 1 King. IX. 13, 21, and X. 12. and
XII. 19. 2 King. II. 22. and VIII. 22. and X. 27. and XIV. 7. and XVI. 6. and
XVII. 23, 34, 41. 1 Chronicles. IV. 41 and V. 26. 2 Chronicles. XXXVI. 22, 23.

The first Book of Kings [or III.] contains an History of one hundred and
eighteen years: viz. of Solomon: And after him, Of
Rehoboam, Abia, Asa, Jehoshaphat, Kings of Judah. Jeroboam, Nadab, Baasha,
Elah, Zimri, Tibni, Omri, and Ahab, Kings of Israel.


Acts of Solomon, Rehoboam and Abijah, are written in Books of Nathan the
Prophet, of Shemaiah the Prophet, of the Prophecy of Ahijah the Shilomite, of
the Visions and story of Iddo the Seer, and Prophet, 2 Chronicles. IX. 29. and XII.
15. and XIII. 22. which are lost, and never were Canonical Scripture. Yet those
of Solomon seem to some to be written by Nathan, Ahijah, and Iddo, in the
beginning of the first Book of Kings, 2 Chronicles. I. 29.

Adonijah] The eldest son then living, Sam. III. 3, 4 Chileab or Daniel, 1 Chronicles. III. 1. being dead (as Absolon was eldest when he formerly sought the
Crown) begins with a Courtly train and Lifeguard; as Absolon did. But gets
Joab, and Abiathar to join with him, in seeking to be King; And that by a
fairer way then Absolon did, 2 Samuel XV. 1 King. I.

En-Rogel] Or the Well of Rogel. Jerusalem, East and by South. See Josh. XV. 7.
2 Samuel XVII. 17.

Gihon] Gihon is a Mount, Jerusalem. See 2 Chronicles. XXXII. 30. and XXXIII. 14.

Horns of the Altar] And so, chap. II. 28. Adonijah, and Joab fled, seems to
be not any at Jerusalem, but that with the Tabernacle at Gibeon, 2 Chronicles. I. 3,
-- 6.

Forty years] And so the years of his life, Sam. V. 4. And yet Jesse was above
one hundred, when he begat him: See on Rahab, Josh. II. And we read not of any
King of Judah, or Israel after David that attained to his age: Only Vzziah,
and Manasseh came very near it.

I will not say thee nay] Many Promises of God and Man, Sam. II. 30. Ezekiel.
XXXIII. 13. 1 Chronicles. XVII. 9. and chap. XXVIII. 9. 2 Chronicles. VI. 16. Psalm.
CXXXII. 12. 2 Chronicles. VII. 17, -- 22. As Gods manifold promises of Long Life,
and Temporal Blessings, and Deliverances. And many the like. And so for
Threatenings, and Dooms, Judge. X. 13. Jonah III. 4. See my Observations on that
Text of Jonah.

Abiathar] Abiathar the fourth from Eli, Ithamar, the younger brother, was High
Priest, till Solomon put Zadok in his room, being indeed the right heir of the
right line, of Eleazar, and Phineas, 1 Chronicles. VI. 3, etc. Number. XXV. 13.

High places] High places called so, Esaias LVII. 7. whence named Bamah, Ezekiel.
XX. 28, 29. There they built houses of the High Places, Temples, Chapels,
Altars, etc. and put their Idols and Images there, and decked all with
Tapistry, and garments of diverse colors. They made Priests of the High places;
and there they sacrificed, yea, sometimes their children; and burnt Incense, 1
King. XII. 31, 32. 2 King. XVII. 29, 32. Ezekiel. XVI. 16, 17, 18, 24, 25, 31.
Ier. XIX. 5. The High places of Heathen Idolaters were always abominable.
These High places God commands the Israelites to destroy, and quite pluck down,
Number. XXXIII. 52. While the Ark, and Tabernacle were parted one from the other;
and both from Shiloh; and removed from place to place, till the building of the
Temple, and there fixed and settled; We read of High places lawfully resorted
to, and used, by Samuel, 1 Samuel IX. 12, 13, 14, 19, 25. and by others, chap. X.
5, 12, 13. And not much unlawfully by these here, 1 King. III. 2, 3. And Gibeon
it self, when the Tabernacle and Altar, were there, is called the Great High
place, 1 King III. 4. But when the Temple was since built, then all other High
places for Gods solemneworship, and Ceremonial Services were counted
abominable. And in this sin, the ten Tribes, after the division of the
Kingdoms by Jeroboam, continualy abounded. They made houses and Priests of
High places, in Mountains, and in all the Cities of Samaria, and their Altars
were as heaps in the furrows of the fields, 1 King. XIII. 32. Hos. XII. 11.
Yea, and Solomon himself, before that, in his later days, fearfully offended in
this kind, 1 King. XI. 7. 8. And Judah it self fell into this sin, even in
Rehoboams reign, 1 King. XIV. 23. And in aftertimes, They built High places
to Baal, and to the Idols of neighboring Nations, 2 Chr. XXV. 14. in Tophet,
in the Valley of the son of Hinnom, on Mount Olivet, in Jerusalem, in all
the Cities of Judah, and in every street of the Cities, Micah I. 5. 1 King.
XIV. 23. Ier. VII. 31. and XIX. 5. and XXXII. 35. Ezekiel. XVI. 16, 31. And this
specialy in the reigns of Ahaz, Ioram, and Manasseh. And in the reigns of
diverse good Kings of Judah, as Ioash, Amatziah, Vzziah, Iotham, it is recorded
as a blemish in them, That they did not take away the High places, but the
people sacrificed, and burnt Incense in them. Of good Asa it is said, that he
did, and he did not take them away, 1 King. XV. 14 2 Chronicles. XV. 17. And so of
Iehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles XVII. 6. and XX. 33 1 King. XXII. 43 The meaning is, They
took away those High places which were for Idols and strange gods, not those
which were for Gods worship: or they labored in the Reformation of these later
also; but through the peoples waywardness, could not therein fully prevail In
the Reformation of Manasseh upon his Repentance, it is said That nevertheless
the people did sacrifice still in the High places, yet unto the Lord their God
only, 2 Chronicles XXXIII. 17 But zealous Hezekiah and Josiah, went through-stitch
with all.

Gibeon] The Tabernacle was never at any one of the Cities of the Levites,
Gibeon only.

Aske^ Gods proffer to Solomon, Gibeon, 2 Chronicles. I. 7. And his large Petition
thereupon for Wisdom, 1 King. III. 6, 7, 8, 9. And Gods ample Grant thereunto;
and further Largess, partly added, partly upon Condition promised, ver. 11,
12, 13, 14. were transacted all whiles Solomon was asleep, as appears by ver.
5. and 15. Though in this same History, 2 Chronicles. I. 7, -- 12. of Sleep, or
Dream there is no mention made at all.

a little childe] In that sleep Solomon calls himself a little child; David
testifies the like of him, 1 Chronicles. XXII. 5. and chap. XXI. 1. with an eye had
to his grear charge at that age; not unlike to that, Jer. I. 6. Yet then David
calls him a Wiseman, 1 King. II. 9. even before that wonderful increase of
wisdom added to him after David's death; And then Solomon, being indeed about
seventeen years old, had Rehoboam, his son, as appears by the age of Rehoboam
at the beginning of his reign, 1 King. XIV. 21. 2 Chronicles. XII. 13.

Harlots] The King knew not likely,

son of Nathan] Nathans two sons highly honored and advanced by Solomon.

Spake] Solomon chosen by God to be King, Chron. XXVIII. 5. and XXIX. 1. and
chap. XXII. 9, 10, spoke three thousand Proverbs. And he spoke of all Trees, 1
King. IV. 32, 33. Not that the Text says, he writ them, or of them. And his
Songs were one thousand and five.

Hiram] Hiram, Huram King of Tire, and Sidon too, ver. 6. having Lebanon in his
possession. Both father and son of that name, 2 Chronicles II. 3, 13. And again,
Hiram the workman, father and son at the same time of the said Kings, both it
seems of the same name likewise, 1 King. VII. 13, 14. 2 Chronicles. II. 14. and IV.
11. and both wrought to Solomon, 2 Chronicles. IV. 16. The sons mother was of Dan,
2 Chronicles. II. 14. His father, of Naphtali, though inhabiting in Tire, 1 King.
VII. 14.

The House of the Lord] This House, ver. 3. the Throne of Gods glory, Jer. XIV.
21. a Glorious high throne, Jer. XVII. 12. our Holy and Beautiful House, where
our fathers praised thee, Esaias XLVI. 11. the Beauty of Holiness, 1 Chronicles XVI.
29. was built in Jerusalem, on Mount Moriah, or Sion, on the Threshing-floore
of Araunah or Ornan the Jebusite, 2 Chronicles. III. 1. 1 Chronicles. XXII. 1.

Very wonderful riches acquired, and laid up, and other preparations made by
David, and others, toward the building of the Temple, 2 Samuel VIII. 11, 12. 1 Chronicles. XXII. 14. and chapter XXIX.

And the Pattern or Platform of it given to David by the Spirit, 1 Chronicles.
XXVIII. 21. he set down in writing particularly, and gave it to his son, 1 Chronicles. XXVIII. 11, -- 18. This was such like an help as Moses had, Exodus XXV.
40. The Preparations for the second Temple were very small.

Huge stones, and costly, and precious stones used in Solomon's Buildings, 1
King. VII. 9, -- 12. and chap. X. 2, 10, 11. 1 Chronicles. XXIX. 2, 8. 2 Chronicles. III.
6.

The Brazen Altar for Sacrifice was in the Court next the Temple, in the open
air.

The Lavers likewise in that Court, between the Brazen Altar, and the Temple;
fixed and placed before the Temple, in the inmost Court; viz. five Bases, and
Lavers upon them, on the right hand; and five on the left, as one was to go
from the East into the Temple: To wash in them such things as they Offered for
the Burnt-offerings and Sacrifices.

The great molten Sea, standing on twelve Oxen, or Brazen Bulls, which were by,
and beside, not under the Bases and Lavers, as the word is rendered, Jer. LII
20. This Sea was placed on the right hand, or North-side, over against the
South, For the Priests to wash in, 2 Chronicles. IV. 6, 10. In most other places in
Scripture, the Right hand is taken for the South; and the Left hand for the
North; as supposing a man's posture with his face toward the East.

Going on from the East toward the West; and passing by the Altar, Lavers, and
Sea; Entrance was so made into the Porch of the Temple. This Porch being the
entrance, and East End of the Temple, was in length twenty Cubits; from North
to South; In breadth ten Cubits, from East to West; and in height as high as
the Temple, and thrice as high above it, one hundred and twenty Cubits in all,
1 King. VI. 3. 2 Chronicles. III 4. In the middle between the walls, not joining to
the walls, stood on each side of the entrance or Porch, the two Pillars, of
Jachin, on the right hand; and Boaz, on the left; eighteen sacred Cubits apiece
high, 1 King. VII. 15. or thirty five common Cubits besides the Basis or
Pedestal of one Cubit, 2 Chronicles. III. 15. Although some would have this thirty
five to be the number arising from the height of both Pillars or the shafts of
them. And a Chapter on the top of each, five sacred Cubits high, 1 King. VII.
16. 2 Chronicles. III. 15. to a part whereof are assigned three Cubits, 2 King. XXV.
17. And they being four fingers thick of brass, and hollow within, Jer. LII.
21. a line of twelve sacred Cubits did compass either of the Pillars about, 1
King. VII. 15. Some divide the Pillars into five parts; or rather into six
thus; a square Table on the bottom; a Rundle or round Basis upon that; the
shaft and maine body of the Pillars round; and above that a square Border upon
which the Pomegranates were; a Head, or Chapter, or Belly; and a Crown or
Powel, both round. All the three parts above the Shaft are called by the name
of Chapter, and are said to be five Cubits high, 1 King. VII. 16. Jer. LII.
22. And the four Cubits; 1 King. VII. 19. is to be understood of some parts of
them: And the th^ee Cubits, 2 King. XXV. 17. of the other: or the four Cubits
relate to the Lilie-work, and the three Cubits to the Network. The whole
Chapiters had Nets of Checker-work, and wreaths of Chain-work, seven on either
1 King. VII. 17. And Pomegranates upon the Net-works, in two rows, one above
another, that is, twenty four on a square or side, and so ninety six in all
upon the four sides of each row; which with the four corner ones make up one
hundred in each row, 2 Chronicles. III. 16. Jer. LII. 23. And so two hundred on
either Pillar, 1 King. VII. 20. and four hundred Pomegranates on both jointly.

Passing through the Porch, They entered into the Sanctuary or Body of the
Temple, conjoined to the Porch; which Sanctuary or Body was forty sacred
Cubits long, and twenty broad, and thirty high, 1 King. VI. 17. 2 Chronicles. III. 3
Overlaid within with gold, upon Palm trees, and Chains, and Cherubims; and
garnished with precious stones, 2 Chronicles. III. 5, 6, 7.

In this body of the Temple, were the things following; ten Candlesticks of
gold, with their Lamps [Besides other of silver mentioned, 1 Chronicles. XXVIII. 16.
for other uses, in other places, in the Courts and Chambers of the Priests and
Levites.] Of which ten, there were placed five on the right hand, and five on
the left 2 Chronicles. IV. 7. And each of them far greater then that one in the
Tabernacle. Oil was used to the Lamps.

Ten Tables for Shewbread, likely of gold; [besides other of silver in other
places, for other uses, in the Priests Courts, Chambers, and Treasuries,
mentioned, 1 Chronicles. XXVIII. 16.] Of which ten, there were five placed on the
right side, and five on the left, 2 Chronicles. IV. 8, 19. Though one Table and one
Candlestick, be named for the rest, 2 Chronicles. XIII. 11. 1 King. VII. 48.

Altar of Incense, of gold, placed by the Oracle, at the West End of the
Sanctuary, 1 King. VI. 20, 22. and VII. 48. On which was daily burnt the
Perfume, Exodus XXX. 34, -- 38. and ver. 1, -- 10. And that not by the High
Priest only; as it is in the Annotations on 2 Chronicles. XXVI. 16. But by other
Priests; as it is in the Annotations on Exodus XXX. 7.

Thence straight forward, Through the Veil, and Door the High Priest once in
the year entered into the Oracle or Most-Holy-Place; twenty sacred Cubits long;
twenty broad; and twenty high; a perfect square, 1 King. VI. 20. Being the
West End of the Temple. By the Height here it seems plainly to be ten Cubits
lower then the Body of the Temple; as our Chancels commonly are lower then the
Bodies of our Churches. Neither seems there to be any thing in the Text to
induce us to be otherwise minded: Though the Great Annotations on 1 King. VI.
20. seek out ways to heighten the upmost outmost top of it to be level and
even with the top of the Temple.

In the Oracle were, the Ark, called Gods strength, and glory, Psalm LXXVIII.
61, and CXXXII. 8. 1 Samuel IV. 20. And in it only two Tables of the Law and
Covenant, or Testimony: The Propitiatory or Cover upon it; which made up the
Mercy-seat: And the two Cherubims, not of massy gold, as those two lesser ones
in the Tabernacle, Exodus XXXVII. 7. But of Olive Tree, covered with plates of
Gold, and meeting with one of their wings upon the Mercy-seat; and the other
wings stretching to the walls of the Oracle; whereupon it is called the Chariot
of the Cherubims, 1 Chronicles. XXVIII. 19. See 1 Samuel IV. 4 Psalm. LXXX. 1. and
X^IX. 1. Esaias XXXVII. 16. And their faces were inward or toward the House, 2 Chronicles. III. 13. These Cherubims have one pair of wings apiece. In Ezekiels
Vision two pair apiece, Ezekiel. I. 6. and chap. X. 21. In Esayes Vision the
Seraphim have three pair a piece, Esaias VI. 2. As also those four living
wights, Apoc. IV. 8. Probably on their Shoulders, Breasts, and Hips. These
Cherubims were so made as the parts of them might be taken asunder, 2 Chronicles.
III. 10. And by the side of the Arc, or before the Testimony, are conceived to
be the Pot of Mannah; Aarons Rod; The Censer; and the Book of the Law, as they
had formerly been in the most Holy Place of the Sanctuary. And the smaller
Cherubims which Moses made out of the matter of the Mercy-seat, or
Propitiatory, or Cover, if inseparably fastened to the ends of it, then they
were also covered with the great Cherubims, Exodus XXV. 18, 19. and chapter XXXVII.
8. Of all which see what more has been said upon Exodus See also 1 King. VI.
and VIII. chapters. 2 Chronicles. III. and IV. chapters, where more is set down of
the gold, and precious ornaments of this place, and the things in it. [Our
Western Churches have the Chancels at the East End; and the steeples commouly
at the West End; (otherwise then it was in Solomon's Temple) in relation likely
to Judea, and Jerusalem, and that Temple, East from us. Of the second Temple in
Ezra; we have little for the things in it. Of Herod's Temple, little or nothing
in Scripture.

The windows narrow without, and broad within, were above the Chambers, round
about both the Temple, and Oracle.

Of the Walls, and Doors, see 2 Chronicles. III. 5, 6, 7. and chap. IV. 22. 1 King.
VI. 15, 16, 22, 29, 30, 31, -- 35. and VII. 50.

The Floor of the Temple, was of Firre-Plancks, 1 King. VI 15. Of the Oracle,
was of Cedar, ver. 16. Both overlaid with gold, i. e. plates of gold, ver. 30.

The covering of the House was with beams, and boards of Cedar, ver. 9. sieled
or covered within with gold, 2 Chronicles. III. 5, 8. And in likelihood Lead upon
the outside of them, to defend all against the injuries of the weather.

Gates of the Temple, and Courts of it, 2 Chronicles. VIII. 14. and XXIII. 4, 5, 19,
20. and XXIV. 8. and XXVII. 3. and XXXI. 14. and XXXV. 15. See the Annotations
on Ezekiel. VIII. 3, 5, 14. and on chap. IX. 2. and on chap. XL. 3.

The Courts; of the Tabernacle was one; of Solomon's Temple at least two, 2 Chronicles. IV. 9. Besides the Court of the Gentiles, or intermural; the Eastgate
whereof was called Solomon's Porch; of Ezekiels Visionarie Temple, at least
three; besides that for the Gentiles.

The Courts were comprised under the name of the Temple, Acts XXI. 28. Joh. II.
14, 16. In the Court of the People, or Greater Court Solomon erected his
Scaffold, 2 Chronicles. VI. 13. And Joash was anointed King, 2 Chronicles. XXIII. 13. And
here, and in the Porch of it, were the People taught, by the Priests, and
Levites; by the Prophets, and Apostles; by our Savior, who never entered
further then this Court into the Temple.

The time of Building, seven years. Though there were six months more by
comparing, 1 King. VI. 1, 38. 2 Chronicles. III. 2. Like to that of the time of
David's reign, 2 Samuel V. 4, 5.

The time of Dedication of the House and Altar in the seventh month, 1 King.
VIII. 2. 2 Chronicles. V. 3. and chap. VII. 9, 10. either the month before all the
appurtenances, and ordinances of the House were fully finished; or else in the
seventh month of the next year, when the Jubilee began; that so the celebrity
of Bringing in the Ark, and Dedication of the Temple, and Solomon's sacrifices,
and his solemn Prayer upon his brazen scaffold, might then and thereby, become
the greater and more illustrious, 1 King. VIII. 1, -- 66. 2 Chronicles. V. and VI.
and VII. chapters. It began the seventh or eighth day of that month: for on
the fifteenth day began the Feast of Tabernacles. And in relation to these two
Feasts, are those fourteen days mentioned, 1 King. VIII. 65. 2 Chronicles. VII.
ver. 8, 9. And on the twenty third day of that month the people were
dismissed, 2 Chronicles. VII. 10. the eighth day of the later Feast, 1 King. VIII.
66.

House of the Forest of Lebanon] This was built in Jerusalem. ver. 6, 7, 8.
His dwelling House and Throne not far from it; and golden shields in it, 1
King. X. 16, 17. And there seized on by the King of Egypt, 2 Chronicles. XII. 9, 10.
It seems so called, as being a kind of abridgement of that famous Forest,
afar off from Jerusalem, and containing in it, and in the Groves and Gardens
about it, all the delights and pleasures of that Forest, in solitary walks,
sweet smells, music of birds, and sight of wilde-beasts, etc. See my
Annotations on Zech. XI. 1. where conceiving this House to be built in that
Forest, not in Jerusalem, upon further consideration, I think good to retract
that opinion here.

Two thousand Baths] Bath the measure of Liquid things, Chron. IV. 5. or seven
hundred and fifty Barrels; with water drawn out of it by Cocks or otherwise,
the Priests washed, etc.

Ten Lavers] But one in the Tabernacle, Exodus XXX. 18. Here are ten Lavers,
besides the Sea. And so of the Candlesticks, and Tables, there were ten in the
Temple to one in the Tabernacle, 1 King. VII. 49. 2 Chronicles. IV. 8. Each Laver
contained forty Baths.

Bowls of pure Gold] Of Gold belonging to the Altar of Incense, Chron. XXVIII.
17. Some of Silver, 1 Chronicles. XXVIII. 16. And as those given by the twelve
Princes, Number. VII. 13, 85. Some of Brass, for the Brazen Altar, Exodus XXXVIII.
3 Number. IV. 14. 1 King. VII. 45. And for the Vessels of the Temple, See on Jer.
LII. 17, -- 23.

Pleased him not] King Hiram, Solomon, in the Land of Galilee, yet pleases to
restore them to him in love, 2 Chronicles. VIII. 2.

A tribute of bond-service] These here mentioned, Solomon's servants, Ezra II.
55, 58. Neh. VII. 57, 60. and XI. 3.

Gold from Ophir] So gold from Uphaz, Jer. X. 9. and Gold of Ophir, Psalm. XLV.
9. and Gold of Uphaz, Dan. X. 5. and Gold of Sheba, Ps. LXXII. 15. and Gold of
Parvaim, 2 Chronicles. III. 6. And these are taken for the finest Gold, 1 King. X.
18. compared with 2 Chronicles. IX. 17. Job XXII. 24. But whether these places be
Peru in America; or Fez in Africa; or Sumatra; or Taprobane; or in Arabia; or
elsewhere, according to our modern names, is in these days altogether
doubtful.

Tarshish] The name of one of the sons of Javan, Genesis X. 4. whose posterity,
as some imagine, planted in that part of Spain, where a City, and Region
adjacent, thence took the denomination of Tartesus, and Tartesia afterward: Or
rather, as others conceive, they seated themselves in Cilicia, and gave this
name of Tarshish, as to the whole Region, so specially to the chief City, and
Port-towne there, afterward called Tarsus, the place of Paul's birth, Acts XXI.
39. and XXII. 3. And that thence the Midland Sea which bordered upon that port
and territory, was called Tarshish; and the ships, either belonging to that
Port, or trading to and fro in that Sea, were thence called ships of Tarshish,
Esaias II. 16. yea, sometimes Tarshish seems to denote the Arabian, and Persian
Gulphs; the Ocean, either Western, or Eastern, Ezekiel. XXVII. 12. or any great
Sea; as likewise Pontus does in Latin: And ships of Tarshish, to be vessels of
great bulk and burden, fit to traverse and traffic in any such Sea, 1 King. X.
22.

Silver to be in Jerusalem as stones] The Israelites ripe for Rebellion,
Solomon's peaceable, rich, and glorious reign, 1 King. X. 27. and XII. 4. 2 Chronicles. I. 15. and VIII. 8, 9.

Loved many strange women] Wise Solomon's, Jedidiah's Fall is wonderful: yet his
Repentance not to be doubted of: as appears in the Book of Ecclesiastes, in 2 Samuel VII. 14, 15. 1 Chronicles. XXII. 10. and XXVIII 6. and XVII. 13 14. 2 Chronicles.
XI. 17. 2. Pet. I. 21.

One Tribe] Not one whole Tribe; Judah only, did stick to Rehoboam, and the
House of David after Solomon's reign, 1 King. XI. 32, 36. and XII. 20. 2. King
XVII. v. 18. Yet see 2 Chr. XI, 13, -- 17. And hence begin those three hundred
and ninty days in Ezekiel. IV. 5. See the Annotations there.

Rehoboam] Rehoboam is the only son we read of that Solomon had, King. IV.
11, 15. set down in that chapter by Anticipation. This Rehoboam is said to be
young, and tenderhearted, 2 Chronicles. XIII. 7. young in experienced wisdom, when
yet at that time he was forty one years of age, 2 Chronicles. XII. 13. being borne
in the first year of his young wise father Solomon's reign. He foolishly
forsook the counsel of the old men, 1 King. XII. 8, 13, 14. to the loss of the
ten parts of his Kingdom. Yet afterward he is said to deal wisely, 2 Chronicles.
XI. 23.

In Bethel, and the other put he in Dan] In the South and North borders of his
kingdom. And yet Bethel being in the Tribe of Benjamin] Bethel was taken from
him in his own days, by Abijah, 2 Chronicles. XIII. 19. And Dan was smitten by
Benhadad in the days of Asa, and Baasha, soon after, 1 King. XV. 20.

Bethel] Though Bethel be sometimes called Bethaven, in the Prophets, Hos. IV.
15. and V. 8. and X. 5, 15. and Aven, chap. X. 8. As Mount Olivet, of Mount
Mischa is called Mount Maschith, 2 King. XXIII. 13. Yet were there Bethel, and
Bethaven, two distinct neighboring towns or Cities, Josh. VII. 2. and XVIII.
12. 1 Samuel XIII. 5. and chap. XIV. 23.

a childe] Fulfilled, 2 King. XXIII. 15, 16, 17.

Samaria] Samaria so called by Anticipation; Bethel, Genesis XII. 8. And sundry
other places in Scripture. King. XVI. 24. It seems of old to be called and
belong to Shimron-Meron, Josh. XI. 1, 5. and XII. 20.

Book of the Chronicles] Books of the Kings do often cite the Books of the
Chron of Israel, and of Judah, as 1 King. XIV. 19, 20. XV. 7. 23, 31. 2 King.
I. 18. and VIII. 23. and X. 34. Not meaning thereby our Canonical Books of
Chron. for they were not then written before, but after the Books of Kings; and
therefore they could not be cited before they had a Being: But meaning thereby
Civil Chronicles or Rolls, now not extant; Like those Ezra VI. 1, 2. Esther VI.
1.

Maachah] Abijahs mother, King. XV. 2, 10. 2 Chronicles. XI. 20. and XIII. 2. His
marriages and children, 2 Chronicles. XIII. 21. were all, or almost all, in his
fathers reign.

Save only in the matter of Vriah] In this sin David did lie long without
repentance, Sam. XII. 14. And to cover this sin, he made Uriah drunck; and
after murdered him: yet afterward upon his repentance, he publishes it, and
his shame and sorrow for it, in the LI. Psalm, and commits it to the chief
Musician to be sung publicly in the Congregation. But besides this, there are
many other sins recorded of David: As his speech and lies to Jonathan, 1 Samuel
XX. 6. to Ahimelech, 1 Samuel XXI. 2. to Achish, 1 Samuel XXVII. 10. the slownesse
of his kindness to Mephibosheth; compare together, 2 Samuel IV. 4. and chap. IX.
11, 12. And after his ill-managing of it, 2 Samuel XVI. 4. and chap. IX. 29. his
many Wives and Concubines; the sparing of his sons, Ammon, and Absalom; his
numbering of the people. Yet by reason of the upright intention of his heart,
and his singular rare graces, gifts, and qualifications, are the rest not
reckoned, and this Praise here given him, by the indulgency of God.

Forty and one years] Asa reigned in Judah in the times of the reigns of
eight Kings in Israel; Jeroboham, Nadab, Baasha, Elah, Zimri, Tibni, Omri,
Ahab, 1 King. XV. 9 and XVI. 29. and XXII. 41. In which time the Kingdom of
Israel was changed into three several stocks and families.

Maachah] Maachah was wife to Rehoboam; Abijah; and grandmother to Asa, 1 King
XV. 2. yet called the mother of Asa, 1 King. XV. 13. 2 Chronicles. XV ver. 16. And
as mother used for grandmother; so daughter for grandchilde, 2 Kings VIII. 26.
Brethren for Kinsmen, 2 Kings X. 13. Matthew. XIII. 55, 56. And many like phrases
are frequent in Scripture. See Genesis XIII. 8. Exodus II. 18. 20, 21. Dan. V. 10,
11, 13, 22.

these years] Not this place, chap. XVIII. 1. nor any place in the Old
Testament, do show that the drought was brought at Elias his Prayer; or
continued three years and six months; But Saint James first records it, Jam.
I. 17.

Four Barrels with water] Elijah got this water in the time of that wonderful
drought for three years and a half, Carmel joining to the sea, Jer XLVI. 18.
The brook Kishon, at the foot of Carmel being dried up, as well as the brook
Cherith.

thine Altars] Formerly erected to him; ver. 14. thy Prophets] As chap. XVIII.
4, 13.

I only am left] In his own apprehension. Yet was there then a flowrishing
Church in Judah.

anoint] By another; viz. Elisha, 2 King. VIII. 7. And likewise Jehu was
anointed by a young Prophet at the command of Elisha, 2 King. IX. 1.

Thirty two Kings] Petty Kings; Genesis XIV. Josh. XII. Judge. I. 7.

Aphek] A City whose Kings was slain by Joshuah, Josh. XII. 18. Fell by lot
afterward to the Tribe of Asher, Josh. XIX. 30, 31. Where the Philistines
pitching in battle against Israel, got the victory, and took the Ark of God, 1 Samuel IV. 1. And again gathering their armies in Aphek, went up to Jezreel, near
the Mount of Gilboa, and overthrew Saul, and his host, 1 Samuel XXIX. 1, 11. and
chap. XXX. And here the Syrians under Benhadad fought against Ahab, and were
slain, even one hundred thousand footmen in one day: And the rest fled to
Aphek into the City; and there a wall fell upon twenty seven thousand of the
men that were left, 1 King. XX. 26, 29 30. And here again the Syrians were
smitten and consumed by Joash King of Israel, 2 King. XIII. 17.

Proclaim a Fast]

and stoned him] The blood of his sons is mentioned, Kings IX. 26.

Which is in Samaria, behold, he is in the Vineyard of Naboth] Or will be in
Jezreel in the Vineyard of Naboth. In Samaria when the message was given in
charge to Elias; in the Vineyard at Jezreel when Elias met him.

even thine] Verified for the substance in himself, Jezebel, and in his son
Jehoram, 2 Kings IX. 25, 26.

not bring the evil in his dayes] That evil, that totally.

in the Poole of Samaria] Which might extend, Jezreel; or another poole of that
name be there; or the armor washed there, where his chief armory was.

made peace] Made peace with Ahab, Ahaziah, and Jehoram, 2 Kings III. 6, 7. 2 Chronicles. XIX. 2. and chap. XX. 35, 36. and is reprehended justly therefore.

would not] Would not at first: Chron. XX. 35, 36, 37.

II. Kings.
THE second Book of Kings, [or fourth rather] contains the History of 321
years; to the lifting up of the head of Jehoiachim: In the reigns of 16 Kings
of Judah, counting in Athaliah. 12 King of Israel.
So that the number of Kings; from the first division of the Kingdoms, to the
extirpation of them both, were twenty in each: Though the Kingdom of Israel
did expire in Hoshea by Shalmanasar, before the Kingdom of Judah, did expire
in Zedekiah by Nebuchadnezzar, the space of one hundred thirty and three years;
not one hundred thirty and five

The twenty of Judah were all of David's line, excepting Athaliah the Queen. The
twenty of Israel were of ten several stocks.

Ahaziah, Joash, Amatziah, Kings of Judah, and Athaliah the Queen, all
succeeding one another, were all slain. Amon likewise, and his son Josiah both
slain.

And ten Kings of Israel, the half of all their number, were likewise slain.

For the times of the reigns of Ahab, Ahaziah, Jehoram, Kings of Israel; and
of Iehoshaphat, Iehoram, Ahaziah, Kings of Judah, take this as follows;

Ahab reigned twenty two, years, 1 King. XVI. 31.

Ahazia the son of Ahab began to reign in the seventeenth year of Jehoshaphat
King of Judah; and reigned two years.

Jehoram the other son of Ahab, begins to reign in the second year of Jehoram,
the son of Jehoshaphat, 2 Kings I. 17. and in the eighteenth year of
Jehoshaphat; and reigned twelve years, 2 Kings III. 1.

Jehoshaphat began to reign in the fourth year of Ahab, 1 Kings XXII. 41. and
reigned twenty five years, 2 Chronicles. XX. 31.

Jehoram the son of Jehoshaphat began to reign in his fathers lifetime; and in
the fifth year of Jehoram of Ahab; and reigned eight years, 2 Kings VIII. 16,
17.

Ahaziah Kings of Judah, and son of Jehoram King of Judah, began to reign in
the twelfth year of Jehoram of Ahab, 2 Kings VIII. 25. in his eleventh year,
chap. IX. 29. Ahaziah himself being then twenty two years old, 2 Kings VIII.
26. or forty two years old, 2 Chronicles. XXII. 2. And he reigned one year, 2 Kings
VIII. 26. 2 Chronicles. XXII. 2.

All the doubts arising from the Premises are fairly cleared, as follows:
viz. Jehoshaphat King of Judah, beginning to reign in the fourth year of Ahab
King of Israel; And Jehoram King of Israel, and Ahaziah King of Judah, being
both slain by Jehu, in one year; Therefore between their deaths, And the first
of Jehoshaphat, or fourth of Ahab, there must be one and the same distance and
period of time. Which agrees well thus; In the line of Israel, eighteen years
remaining of Ahabs twenty two 1 Kings XVI. 29. Two of Ahaziah, but one of them
in his fathers lifetime; and twelve of Jehoram: in all 31.

And so in the line of Judah; twenty five of Iehoshaphat; and eight of Iehoram,
whereof two at least in his fathers lifetime; and Ahaziah but a piece of a
year; in all thirty one.

Now Ahaziah of Israel beginning to reign in the seventeenth of Iehoshaphat,
shows that Ahab had made him Viceroy the year before his death; for Ahab died
in the eighteenth of Iehoshaphat: And so this Ahaziah reigned but one year
himself alone.

And Iehoram the other son of Ahab beginning to reign in the second year of
Iehoram the son of Iehoshaphat, shows, That Iehoshaphat had made his son
Iehoram his Viceroy, the same year that Ahab had done the like; viz. the year
before their going to battle to Ramoth-Gilead; which battle was in the last of
Ahab, and eighteenth of Iehoshaphat.

And Iehoram the son of Iehoshaphat beginning to reign in the fifth year of
Iehoram of Ahab; and that being in the time of Iehoshaphats own reigning, and
Iehoram reigning from that time eight years; shows that Iehoshaphat made his
son, of Voiceroy, King joint with himself, in the twenty third year of his
reign, two years before his death. And so this Iehoram reigned as King two
years in his father Iehoshaphats lifetime, and six years after his death: Not
four years in his lifetime, and four years after his death, as is usualy
averred.

And Ahaziah of Judah, upon the premises, begins to reign, upon the twelfth
year beginning, or eleventh year ending, of Iehoram of Israel.

And Iehoram the father of this Ahaziah beginning to reign in the thirty two
year of his age, and reigning eight years, and dying at forty, 2 Kings VIII.
17, 24; This Ahaziah cannot possibly be forty two, but twenty two, when he
began to reign; his father being married to Athaliah, his mother, in the
eighth year of, Iehoshaphats reign. And those forty two years must needs
relate to another time then Ahaziah's age; and do justly agree with the number
of years of the continuance of Omri his race in the royal Throne, from whom
this Ahaziah descended by his mother Athaliah and in whom, and Omries
grandchilde Jehoram it ended: Thus, Omri alone, after the death of Tibni, six
or seven years, 1 Kings XVI. 23, 29. Ahab, twenty two; Ahaziah alone; one,
Jehoram twelve: in all forty two. And the Hebrew expression in 2 Chronicles. XXII.
2. is this, A son of forty two years was Ahaziah inhis reigning; which may
have a relation to a continuance in a stock. And a passage and computation, not
unlike to this, is that, 2 Chronicles. XV. 19. and chap. XVI. 1. from the beginning
of the division of the two Kingdoms of Judah and Israel. This Ahaziah of Judah
is otherwise called Azariah, 2 Chronicles. XXII. 6. and Jehoahaz, chap. XXI. 17. and
Joahaz, 2 Chronicles. XXV. 23.

For the times of the reigns of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, Kings of
judah; And of Zuchariah, Shallum, Menachem, Pekiah, Pekah, Hosheah, Kings of
Israel, take this, as follows;

Vzziah being smitten with Leprosy, in his old age, for attempting to offer
Incense, on the Altar of Incense, his son Jotham was over the Kings house,
judging the people of the Land, 2 Chronicles. XXVI. 21. This seems to be four years
before his father Uzziah's death: And so may seem to extend, after a sort, the
number of the years of Jothams reign to twenty, 2 Kings XV. 30. whereas Jotham
reigned only sixteen years after the death of his father Uzziah, 2 Kings XV. 33.

Jotham begins his sixteen in the second of Pekah's twenty, 2 Kings XV. 32. In
Iothams days Pekah, and Rezin begin to trouble Judah, 2 Kings XV. 37.

Ahaz begins his six^een in the seventeenth of Pekah's twenty, 2 Kings XVI. 1.
Then does the danger by Pekah and Rezin increase. He is spoiled by them; and by
the Edomites; and the Philistines, 2 Chronicles. XXVIII. And by the Assyrian, partly
helped; and partly distressed.

Hezekiah begins his twenty nine in the third of Hoshea, 2 Kings XVIII. 1, 2.
that is, the third after his first nine, 2 Kings XVII. 1. which ninth falls in
with the ending of the twelftth of Ahaz; and that third after it, falls in with
the beginning of the sixteenth and last of Ahaz.

2 King. XV. 8, 13.
Zachariah begins in the thirty eight of Uzziah. Shallum begins in the thirty
nine of Uzziah
Menachem begins his ten in the thirty nine of Uzziah, 2 King. XV. 17. Then Pull
King of Assyria made an attempt upon Menachem, ver. 18, 19, 20.

Pekahiah begins his two in the fiftieth of Vzziah, 2 King. XV. 23.

Pekah begins his twenty in the fifty two of Vzziah, 2 King. XV. 27. And so
Pekah's first, and Uzziah's last, are in one year. In Pekah's days
Tiglath-Pelezer captived Galilee and Naphtali into Assyria, 2 King. XV. 29.

Hoshea rules and reigns eighteen years. For thirty eight years are from the
first of Jotham, to the sixth of Hezekiah: And so many must be from the first
of Pekah, to the end and last of Hoshea: And Pekah reigning twenty, the remain
for Hoshea must needs be eighteen.

Hoshea begins in the twentieth of Jotham 2 King. XV. 30. that is, from the
beginning of his reign, from the beginning of his sixteenth. For Jothams
fourth, in his father Uzziah's time, did precede his sixteen. And his sixteen
ended in the seventeenth of Pekah, when Jothams son Ahaz began to reign, 2
King. XVI. 1. So that Hoshea truly began in the fourth of Ahaz; which was the
twentieth from the time that Jotham began to reign; not that Jotham reigned
twenty years, till Hoshea began. And Hoshea had reigned nine years in the
twelfth of Ahaz. And these first nine years, the Sacred story passes over in
silence: He having done nothing remarkable or memorable in them. His later nine
years are storied ont thus; That the first of them begins in the twelfth of
Ahaz, 2 King. XVII. 1. That in the third of them, which was the last of Ahaz,
Hezekiah began to reign, 2 King. XVIII. 1. That in the seventh of them, and
fourth of Hezekiah, Shalmanezar came and besieged Samaria, 2 King. XVIII. 9.
That in the ninth and last of them, and sixth of Hezekiah, Shalmanesar took
Samaria, and carried all captives into Assyria, and finaly extinguished that
Kingdom of Israel, 2 King. XVIII. 10, 11.

The Names then, and the Numbers of the years of the Reigns of the Kings of
Judah, and of Israel, in this II. Book of Kings, are as follows, viz. of
Judah. years. Iehoram, as viceroy -- 4 In all -- 12. Imperfect. Joint King with
his father Iehoshaphat -- 2 Sole King after his fathers death, -- 6 Ahaziah 1
imperfect. Athaliah 6 Ioash 40 Amatziah 17 Vzziah 52 Iotham 15 Ahaz 14 Hezekiah
29 Manasseh 55 Amon 2 Josiah 31 Iehoachaz Iehojakim 11 Iehoachin Zedekiah 11
Thence to Iehoiachins advancement. 26 Kings of Israel. years. Ahaziah 1 Iehoram
11 Iehu 28 Iehoahaz 15 Ioash or Iehoash 16 Jeroboam 41 Zechariah Shallum
Menachem 10 Pekahiah 2 Pekah 20 Hoshea 18See my Annotations on Hos. I. 1.

If thou see me] Jordan.

a Minstrel] To quiet,

his eldest sonne] The King of Edoms eldest son, Moab in this eruption. See
Amos II. 1. and the Annotations there.

Shunem] A City in the Tribe of Issachar, Josh. XIX. 18. And has, in the same
Tribe standing from it, Iezreel toward the South; Mount Gilboa toward the
South-East; The river Kishon on the East; and Mount Tabor toward the
North-North-East, in the Confines of the Tribe of Zebulon. In Shunem the
Philistines pitched against Saul in Gilboa, 1 Samuel XXVIII 4. Here was borne
Abishag that fair Virgin, that lay in David's bosom to cherish him, as a
wife-nurse, in his decreped age: And was afterward sought for in marriage by
Adonijah; but to the loss of his life, in the State-wisdome of Solomon, 1
King. I. and II. chapters. And here dwelt this great and good woman that made
these accommodations for the Prophet Elishah: and upon his Prophetical promise
obtained a son: and had him miraculously raised from death of life again by
Elishah coming from Mount Carmel hither; as is in this IV. Chapter. And
further, upon this account, after her seven years absence, on the Prophets
direction, by reason of the Famine to ensue during that time, she returning out
of the Land of the Philistines, had her house, lands, and profits of her estate
restored to her, by Iehoram King of Israel, 2 King. VIII.

Gilgal] Of this see the Annotations on Hos. IV. 15.

twenty loaves of barley] This was more then the bread of his first fruits came
to.

King of Syria] This was Benhadad the son of Benhadad; Syria, 1 Kings XV. 18,
19, 20. and XX. 1. 34. 2 King. VI. 24. and VIII. 7. 2. Chron. XVI. 2. The
father was the son of Tabrimon, the son of Hezion King of Syria, 1 King.
XV. 18. This the son slew Ahab at Ramoth-Gilead, 1 King. XXII. 35, 37. Who
contrary to Gods command had saved him, 1 King. XX. 42. And besieging Samaria,
he brought it to that extreme famine, 2 King. VI. 24, 25. And after at
Ramoth-Gilead, he wounded Jehoram, the son of Ahab, 2 King. VIII. 28, 29.
Whence returning to Jezreel to be healed of his wounds, he was slain by Jehu,
2 King. IX. 24. And this son died, 2 King. VIII. 15.

A third Benhadad King of Syria was the son of Hazael, 2 King. XIII. 3, 24.

Benhadad signifies the son of Hadad. And Hadad was a name very common among
the Kings of Edom, or Idumea, Genesis XXXVI. 35. 1 Chronicles. I. 50. 1 King. XI. 14
but afterward grew more common with the Kings of Syria; insomuch as Benhadad
may seem a name common to the Kings of Syria. See Jer. XLIX. 27. Amos I. 4.

And take here a Catalogue of the Kings of Syria, as we find them in
Scripture; thus; Omitting Chushan-Rishathaim, who was King of Aram-Naharaim. or
Syria between the two rivers, that is Tigris, and Euphrates; or of Mesopotamia,
Judge. III. 10. We find these Kings of Syria, properly so called, whereof
Damascus was the chief City, viz.

Hadadezer, or Hadarezer, in David's time, 2 Samuel VIII. 5, 6, 13. and X. 6, 8,
16.

Rezon, in the days of Solomon, 1 King. XI. 23, 24, 25.

Benhadad, the son of Tabrimon, the son of Hezion, in the days of Asa, 1 King.
XV. 18, 19, 20.

Benhadad the son of Benhadad, in the days of Ahab, and of Elias, and Eliseus;
And Nahaman was the Captain of his host, 1 King. XX. 1, 20, 26, 32, 34. and
XXII. 3. and 2 King. V. 1, 2, 6, 7. and chap. VI. 8, 12, 23, 24. and chap VII.
4. 16.

Hazael, in the days of Joram, Jehu, Iehoahaz, 1 King. XIX. 15. 2 King. VIII.
7, 8, 13. and X. 32. and XII. 17. and XIII. 3, 22.

Benhadad, the son of Hazael, in the days of Iehoash, ^ King. XIII. 24, 25.

Rezin, in the days of Pekah, and of Ahaz, 2 King. XVI. 5. Esaias VII. 1. 16.
and VIII. 4.

Talents] See my Observations on Exodus XXXVIII. 24.

Go in peace] A farewell phrase, Nahaman had said; as little minding it, and
of small concernment to the greater engagements that then lay upon him: which
kind of Answers are not unusual.

The Leprosie] Yet King Jehoram holds conference with Gehazi afterward, King.
VIII. 4. as upon sundry grounds, and occasions incident, in a right manner well
he might.

are come down]

Dothan] In the Tribe of Ephraim: Samaria and Shechem. Here Joseph finds his
brethren feeding their flocks, Genesis XXXVII. 13, 17.

This is not the way] No,

came no more] Not these Bands; Benhadad came with all his host, ver. 24.

a Cab] Is a Hebrew measure. Observations on Genesis XVIII. 6.

of Doves dung] Or of the corn found in the crop, she flying into the City
out of the Country.

five pieces of silver] Or five silverings. See these Observations on Exodus
XXXVIII. 24.

said] Said to the Elders, Jehoram the son of Ahab, ver. 17. 18.

a measure] See my Observations on Gen XVIII 6.

twilight] In the evening, ver. 9, 12.

Edom] Edom revolts from Judah, King. XXII, 47. As Moab had done from Israel, 2
King. III. 5.

Libna] A City; Joshuah, Josh. X. 29. and XII. 15. After fell by lot to the
Tribe of Judah; And given to the Priests, Josh. XXI. 13. 1 Chronicles. VI. 57. It
rebelled [wonder it should] against Judah, in the days of wicked Iehoram, the
son of good Iehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. XXI. 10. Senacherib did war against it, in
the days of Hezekiah, 2 King. XIX. 8. Esaias XXXVII. 8. And there likely had his
army, or a great part of it slain by the Angel of the Lord. There was another
place called Libna, the seventeenth Station of the Israelites, mentioned Number.
XXXIII. 20, 21.

Sonne-in-law] His father was so. House.

Ramoth-Gilead] A City of Refuge; Gad; given to the Merarites; Deuteronomy. IV. 43.
Josh. XIII. 26. and chap. XXI. 38. This was taken by the King of Syria; And
Ahab, with the joint forces of Jehoshaphat, seeking to recover it, yet failed
of his purpose, and was there slain by Benhadad, whose life he had unjustly
spared; 1 King. XX. 30, 42. and XXII. 3, 35. And Jehoram the son of Ahab,
with the joint forces of Ahaziah King of Judah, actualy recovered it, from
Hazael King of Syria, But was wounded there. And Jehu being left there, as a
Captain under Jehoram, to keep it, was anointed there, by command and
direction of the Prophet Elisha, to be King of Israel; who thereupon soon slew
both Jehoram, and Ahaziah; 2 King. VIII. 28, 29. and chap. IX.

his sonnes] Naboths sons slain with him.

a draught-house] Here the Masorets put a more cleanly word, Keri, in the
margin, to be read, then is the Cetib, written in the Text; as if they would
prompt to the Holy Ghost a more manerly speech. And so Deuteronomy. XXVIII. 30. Jer.
III. 2. Less marvel then if they deal so with the words of Rabshakeh, Esaias
XXXVI. 12. And in Zechary speaking of Jerusalems destruction, and women's usage
by soldiers, gross to speak, the Text tells the term to be seen, the
margin what they would have read. And in Jer. XXXI. 38. they leave a blanck in
the Text with the vowel points underneath, and place the head letters in the
margin of a word which they suppose to be wanting. Some various Readings seem
to be in the Hebrew Text. See the learned Annotations on Jer. IX. 8. and on
chap. XVII. 13. And some learned seem to grant some superfluous insertions, as
Jer. LI. 3 in the word bending; and Jer. LII. 19. in the word Cauldrons. See
the Annotations on those places. Yet some other learned men assert the sacred
Text to be absolutely entire and perfect without the least default or defect;
without altering a syllable, letter, or situation of a letter; holding the
margin-reading to be given with equal authority, as the other which is in the
Text; and serving to expound it. And the vowels, and accents to have been ab
origin in the Text, and so of equal authority with it. Insisting upon the Jews
care for preservation of the Text, in numbering the letters in every Book, and
naming the middle letter in it, and the middle letter in the Law, or Books of
Moses. And this done not only by the Masorets that lived five hundred years or
more after Christ; but also by those ancient Masorets that are called the men
of the Great Synagogue, and succeeded next to the last Prophets of the Old
Testament, of whom the Jews make Ezra to be one. And that in his time the
whole number of the letters were reckoned, in all the Law to be 600045. in the
Prophets 815280. See more in my Observations on Eccles. IX. 4. and on Ier.
XXXII. 12.

Iehoiadah] This Iehoiadah was a Priest and prime man, Chron. XXIII. 1, 11, 16,
18, 19, 20. and chap. XXIV. 6. seems not to be the High Priest: for he is no
where so called in Scripture; except he be understood in that place, 2 Chronicles.
XXIV. 11. where yet he is not called (...) neither is there any of his name in
that Catalogue of the High Priests, 1 Chronicles. III. 6, -- 15. And yet this Priest
Iehoiada marries King Iehorams daughter, and King Ahaziah's sister, 2 Chronicles.
XXII. 11. And gives, wives to King Ioash, 2 Chronicles. XXIV. 3. And was buried
among the Kings, ver. 16.

Elisha] or Elizeus prophesied in the reigns of six Kings of Israel; viz.
Ahab, Ahaziah, Iehoram, Iehu, Iehoahaz, and Ioash, 1 King. XIX. 16, 19. 2 King.
XIII. ver. 14. with

Lachish] See the Annotations on Micah. I.

Azariah] Called also Uzziah, Ozias, Matthew. I, 8, 9. reigned in the times of
six Kings of Israel; viz. Jeroboam the second, Zachariah, Shallum, Menahem
Pekahiah, Pekah, 2 King. XV. 1. 27 In which time the Kingdom of Israel was
changed into four several stocks or families.

Pul] Pull or Phul, Chron. V. 26. This Catalogue of the Assyrian Monarchs we
find in Scripture; viz. Passing by Nimrod, and Ashur in the ancientest times,
Genesis X. We meet with this Pull in the days of Menahem King of Israel.

Tiglath-Peleser, or Tilgath-Pilneser, in the days of Pekah King of Israel,
and of Ahaz King of Judah: who carried away captives the Reubenites; and the
Gadites, and the half Tribe of Manasseh, into Assyria, 1 Chronicles. V. 26. And,
both helped, and afflicted Ahaz, 2 King. 16. with

Shalmanesar, or Shalman, Hos. X. 14. or Enemessar, Tobit I. 2. 15. in the
days of Hoshea King of Israel; who subdued Hoshea, beseiged and took Samaria;
carried Israel captive into Assyria; and extirpated that Kingdom of Israel, 2
King. XVII. 4, 5, 6. and XVIII. 9, 10. with

Sargon, mentioned, Esaias XX. 1. If he be not the same with Sennacherib. with

Sennacherib, in the days of Hezekiah, 2 King. XVIII. 13. whose host was
slain by the Angel of the Lord; and himself by his own sons, 2 King. 19. with

Esarhaddon, or Esar-Haddon, who seems to be called Asnapper, Ezra IV. 10. and
Sarchedonus, Tobit 1. 21. with

Another King of Assyria, not named, but living in the days of Josiah; in
whose behalf Josiah fighting against Pharaoh Necho King of Egypt, at Megiddo,
was slain there 2 King. XXIII. See this same, with some little variations, in
my Observations on 1 Chronicles. V. 26.

Kir] This is Cyrene, Acts II. 10. Of this see the Annotations on Amos I. 5.
and IX. 7. If rather be not meant hereby that part of Media: which from this
deportation seems to be called Syromedia, For Media belonged to the Kingdom
of Assyria, 2 King. XVII. 6. But Cyrene never, being very far distant from it.

Of the Altar] Of Urijahs new Altar made by the command of King Ahaz, Damascus.

Urijah the Priest] This might be that Uriah, Esaias VIII. 2 unfaithful to God, a
fawning parasite to the wicked King; but no ways appears to be the High Priest.

Covert for the Sabbath] A Covert for the Priests (and Porters likely) on the
Sabbath; Chron. XXVIII. 24.

in the City of David] But not in the Sepulchers of the Kings, Chron. XXVIII.
27.

but not as] Hosheah was the best of the Kings of Israel:

Carried Israel away into Assyria] See the Observations on chap. XV. 19.

They feared the Lord] The same Idolaters are said to Fear the Lord, King.
XVII. 32, 33, 34.

Their folly is derided, Ier. X. 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 14, 15.

Hezekiah] Godly Hezekiah the son of most wicked Ahaz, Chron. XXVIII. 22. And
father of a like wicked Manasseh, 2 King. XXIV. 3. 2 Chronicles. XXXIII. And godly
Josiah not much unlike.

He is a Type of Christ, Esaias XXXII. 1.

twenty five years old] And therefore was borne in the eleventh year of his
father Ahaz; Ahaz was twenty years old when he began to reign, and reigned
sixteen years, 2 King. XVI. 2. In all, thirty six when he died. Out of which
take the foresaid twenty five; and so Hezekiah must be borne in the eleventh
aforesaid. A thing not impossible. But to make Ahaz to be twenty, not when
himself, but his father Iotham began to reign, as it wresteth the Text, so it
implies an utter impossibility, because Iotham was but twenty five years old
when he himself began to reign, 2 King. XV. 33. which thing was not well
considered by the excellent Tremellius when he asserted that opinion; nor is it
much favored, though noted by our Annotators on 2 King. XVI. 2.

In the fourteenth year] Sennacherib comes up against Hezekiah; Annotations on
Esaias XXXVI. 1. And in the later end of that year Hezekiah fell sick: for he had
15. years added to his life, 2 King. XX. 6. which make up the twenty nine of
his reign. And in this time of his sickness, he had no some; because Manasseh
his eldest son was borne three years after this sickness, being but twelve
years old when his father Hezekiah died, 2 King. XXI. 1.

a Signe] The present plenty, Sennacherib, and their deliverance. Of Signs see
these Observations on Exodus III. 12. and on 2 King. XX. 9.

Camp of the Assyrians] Either before Libnah, Jerusalem, or both, 2 Chronicles.
XXXII. 9. See the Observations on Esaias XXXVII. 36.

his sonnes] These words have an empty place left for them in the Hebrew Tex;

ten degrees] This choice was given to Hezekiah about midday, Ahaz, a famous
Dial, happily mural, and happily visible to Hezekiah out of his bedchamber: and so
likewise in all other Dials, distinguished into half hours, as that of Ahaz
was. And so ten degrees make five hours. And the Miracle was not only in the
Shadow going backward, but in the Sun also going backward ten degrees: though
whether in an instant, or in the set course of time, or its ordinary continual
motion, is not certain, Esaias XXXVIII. 8. Which made the Ambassadors of the
Princes of Babylon to be sent unto him, to enquire of the wonder that was done
in the Land, 2 Chronicles. XXXII. 31. See on Esaias. XXXVIII. 8.

Altars] Idolatrous Altars, ver. 4, 5, 7.

eighteenth year] From this famous year, Ezekiel. I. 1. And those forty days or
years of the sin of Judah, chap. IV. 6. seem to take their rise and
reckoning.

the Book of the Law] The knowledge of it; Josiah, 2 King, XXII. 10, 11. 2 Chronicles. XXXIV. 19, 21. notwithstanding that Law Deuteronomy. XXXI. 10, 11.

in peace] Josiah died in peace, King. XXII. 20. and XXIII. 29. 2 Chronicles. XXXIV.
28.

Topheth] Called Tophte, Esaias XXX. 33. The name is from Toph, signifying a
Drum, Tabret, or Timbrel; such as idolatrous Priests used to beat upon in the
time of their detestable sacrificing of children to Moloch, to drown their
skrikes and cries, Levit. XX. 2. 2 Chronicles. XXVIII. 3. and XXXIII. 6. 2 King.
XVI. 3. and XXI. 6. Psalm. CVI. 38. This the Jews learned from the Heathen,
Deuteronomy. XII. 31. This Tophet stood in a pleasant valley on the South Side of
Jerusalem, Josh. XV. 8. and chap. XVIII. 16. Belonging to one Hinnom and his
sons, and called therefore the valley of Hinnom, Gehinnom, or Ge-bene-Hinnom,
the valley of the sons of Hinnom. Whence the Greek and Latin take the word
Gehenna, and use it for Hell, fitly resembled by such a Type, for the horrid
acts and sufferings used therein, Matthew. XVIII. 8, 9. Mar. IX. 43, -- 48. James
III. 6. And allusion is made hereunto, Matthew. V. 22. This place was defiled and
destroyed by Josiah, in this Text. See the Annotations on Esaias XXX. 33. and on
Jer. VII. 31.

Jehoahaz] Called also Joachaz, Johanan, and in the opinion of the most and
best, Shallum likewise; The Prophecy concerning Shallum, Jer. XXII. 10, 11,
12. best agreeing to him; And supposing that Shallum the fourth son of Josiah
mentioned, 1 Chronicles. III. 15. to be dead before his father; yet under the name
of Johanan he is called the firstborn of Jo^^h, 1 Chronicles. III. 15. in respect
likely that he first succeeded him in his throne, 2 Chronicles. XXXVI. 1. Of him see
Ezekiel. XIX. 3, 4.

Jehojakim] Jehojakim called also Joachim, Eliakim (as Solomon was also called
Iedidiah and Lemuel) was the eldest son of Josiah. Of him, and his Burial, we
read Ier. XXII. 19. and XXXVI. 30. 2 Chronicles. XXXVI. 5, 6. Ezekiel. XIX. 5, -- 9.

Iehojakim] In his fourth, Nebuchadnezzar, Daniel was carried captive, Dan. I.
1, 6. Ezekiel, and Mordecai, with Iehojachin, Ezekiel. XL. 1. Esther II. 5, 6. Of
Ezechiel, see the Argument of his Book.

Iehojacin] Called likewise Coniah, Iechoniah, 1 Chronicles. III. 16. Ier. XXII. 28
Of his age at the beginning of his reign, See the Observations on 2 Chronicles.
XXXVI. 9. He was carried captive into Babylon in the seventh ending, and eighth
year beginning of Nebuchadnezzars reign, ver. 12. Ier. LII. 28. And his head
lifted up again in the thirty seventh year of his captivity, twelfth month,
on the twenty fifth, and twenty seventh day; and first year of Evilmerodach, 2
King. XXV. 27. Ier. LII. 31.

Zedekiah rebelled] Zedekiah rebelled in his sixth year, Ezekiel. XVII. 15, 17.
compared with Ezekiel. VIII. 1. and XX. 1.

the second Priest] Grounded on Number. Ier. LII. 24. See 2 King. XXIII. 4. and
the like, 1 Chronicles. V. 12. This second Priest, upon any extraordinary occasion
and occurrent restraining or disabling the High Priest, seems set to supply
his place.

to Riblah] See the Observations on Number. XXXIV. 11.

THE Books of Chronicles do chiefly pursue the Histories of the Kings of Judah.
And yet are more sparing in relating the sins of David, and Solomon.

These are not those Chronicles often cited in the Books of Kings; as has been
showed heretofore. But these are thought to be written by Ezra, 2 Chronicles. XXXVI.
22, 23. Ezra I. 1, 2, 3 And that after the return from the Babylonish
captivity. Yet some things are inserted which extend beyond Ezra's time; as
that 1 Chronicles. III. 21, -- 24. In these Books, as in an Abridgement, the holy
Penman is sometimes short, and obscure. But in the Histories of the Kings of
Judah, full and exact.

Take the periods of times from the Creation, to the year of Return from the
Babylonish Captivity, And so these Books contain an History of 3458. years.
The first Book, 2986. to the death of David; Thus; Genesis, 2369; Exodus, 142;
Levit, Number. Deuteronomy. 39. Joshuah 17. Judges, 299. 1 Samuel 80. 2 Samuel 40. In all,
2986.

The second Book 472. from the beginning of Solomon's reign, to the said year
of Return; Others reckon thus; 3467. in the whole: 2990. in the first Book:
477. in the second Book. Others, and that most likely, 2986. in the first Book;
And 466. in the second Book: viz. from the first of Solomon, to the seventeenth
of Jehoshaphat, 118. Thance to the Captivity in the first of Nebuchadnezzar,
and fourth of Iehojakim, 278. Thence to the Return, 70. In all, 466. And so
the whole in both Books will amount to 3452.

The first Book mentions occasionally some things long after David's death; as
the Inhabitants of Jerusalem after the Return from Babylon, chap. IX. And
Zerubbabels posterity long after that, chap. III.

I. Chronicles.
IN the Genealogies of the first eight Chapters, the Tribes of Dan, and
Zebulon, are left out.

Edom] Edom before any in Israel.

Sisters] of David Zerviah bare Abishai. Ioab. Asahel. Abigail bare Amasa. 2 Samuel XVII. 25


Caleb] Three Calebs famous in Israel; first, the son of Hezron, in this Text
called also Carmi, and Chelubai, chap. II. 9. and IV. 1. who had a son called
Hur; And this Hur a son called also Caleb; chap. II. 9, 19, 50. who is the
second Caleb. And the third is that famous Caleb the son of Iephunne, Number.
XIII. 6. 1 Chronicles. IV. 15.

The sons of David] See the Observations on 1 Samuel

Salatheil] Hebrew, Shealtiel, said to be the son of Iechoniah. Matthew. I. 12.
And so here, son of Iechoniah Assir, that is, strictly bound, prisoner in
Babylon. For we read not of any son called Assir that Iechoniah had: yet this
Salathiel is named the son of Neri, Luke III. 27. who came by many descents,
of another line, that is, of Nathan the younger brother of Solomon; from which
line came our Savior; and not of Solomon's line: And though Iechoniah may seem
to have seed and sons more, out of Ier. XXII. 28, 30. and 1 Chronicles. III. 17
18. Yet he is doomed childlesse, Ier. XXII. 29, 30. because neither Salathiel,
if he were his son, nor any of Iechoniah's race, ( Zedekiah the last King
being Uncle to Iechoniah) did succeed him in the Regality, to sit on the throne
of David, though in a kind of sovereignty; as Zerubbabel the son, or
grandchilde rather of Salathiel by Pedaiah, did succeed: in regard of which
successions, both Salathiel, and after also Zerubbabel, may be called sons.
See Ezra III. 2, 8. and V. 2. Neh. XII. 1 Hag. I. 1, 12, 14. and II. 3. 24. Of
Iehojakim the father of Iechoniah, it is likewise said, He shall have none to
sit upon the throne of David that is, for any time worth speaking of; for his
son Iechoniah reigned but three months and ten days; Ier. XXXVI. 30. 2 Chronicles. XXXVI. 9.

Sons of Zerubbabel] Among his sons, Abihud, and Rhesa are not mentioned
(unless under other names) nor else where found in the Old Testament: And yet
from them two, the Genealogies, Matthew. I. 13. and Luke III. 27. are drawn and
derived; which makes some suppose, that Zerubbabel, and this here, to be
different persons.

Ezra] Ezra not that learned Scribe, Ezra VII. 1. And in the last letter of
this Hebrew name there is a difference from the name of the other.

in the days of Hezekiah] The Simeonites lying within the inheritance and lot
of the Tribe of Judah, Josh. XIX. 9. were not carried away Captive by the
Assyrians; but continuing in their estate, sought to enlarge their territories,
as is here mentioned.

Amalekites] They bordered on mount Seir. Israel, Number. XXIV. 20. And after
joined often with other enemies against Gods people. They were overthrown by
Ioshuah, Exodus XVII. 13. Saul in his time was sent against them; destroyed
many; but spared Agag their King; and for so doing lost his own Kingdom, 1 Samuel XV. and chap. XXVIII. 18. David afterward destroyed more of them, 2 Samuel,
VIII. 12. And here the Simeonites in the days of Hezekiah, smote the rest of
the Amalekites that were escaped. Thus the judgment denounced against them,
Exodus XVII. 14, 16. Deuteronomy, XXV. 17, 18, 19. was accomplished. See the
Observations on Esth. III. 1.

King of Assyria] This Catalogue we find in Scripture of the Kings of Assyria;
Pull or Phul, in the days of Menachem: so here, and 2 King. XV 19.
Tiglath-Pileser, in the days of Pekah, and Achaz; so here, and 2 King. XV. 29.
and XVI. 7, 10. Jareb, Hos. V. 13. and X. 16. Sargon, Esaias XX. 1. Shalmanesar,
called Shalman, Hos. X. 14. Who took Hoshea, and Samaria, 2 King. XVII. 3, 4.
and XVIII. 9, 10. or Enemessar, Tobit. l. 2, 15. Sennacharib, who came against
Hezekiah, 2 King. XVIII. 13. Esarhaddon, or Asnapper, Esaias XXXVII. 38. 2 King.
XIX. 37. Ezra IV. 2, 10. called also Sarchedonus, Tobit I. 22. And another King
of Assyria, against whom Pharaoh-Necho King of Egypt, fights at Carchemish by
Euphrates, in the last year of King Josiah, 2 King. XXIII. 29. 2 Chronicles. XXXV.
But many leave out Iareb, as no proper name of a King; and make Sargon to be
the same with Senna harib. And some place Iareb before Pull; and Sargon after
Shalmanesar. And no doubt there were many Kings of Assyria, it being the first
Monarchy, before Pull; though their names be not in Scripture. Though the
Assyrians take the name from Ashur the son of Shem, Genesis X. 22. 1 Chronicles. I.
17. yet the Kingdom seems to be raised among them by the posterity of Cush,
the son of Cham, Genesis X. 6, -- 11.

a Singer] Heman, Kohath, stood in the midst; Asaph, of Gershom, on the right
hand; Ethan, of Merari, on the left, ver. 38, 39, 44, 47. See more of the
Singers, 1 Chronicles. XV. ver. 16, -- 22.

All their Cities] The Kohathites had twenty three Cities:

reckoned] Issachar a numerous Tribe.

Ephraim] The line from Ephraim to Ioshuah, Number. chap. XXVI. 35 1 Chronicles. VII.
20, 26, 27.

Shephuphan, Huram]

Ner] Ner had Kish the father of Saul; and another son Ner the father of
Abner, 1 Samuel XIV. 50, 51.

genealogies] This Chapter, chap. III. 19, -- 24. are some parcels of the last
passages for History, of the Old Testament. See more on Neh. XII. 10, 11.

David and Samuel] David and Samuel the Seer (though he died in the time of
Saul's reign) ordained, and ordered the Priests, ver. 10, 14, 22 and Chapters
XXIII. XXIV. XXV. XXVI. as the Lord God of Israel had commanded him, 1 Chronicles.
XXIV. 19. by the Spirit, and by God and Nathan; 1 Chronicles. XXVIII. 12, 19. 2 Chronicles. XXIX. 25. and VIII. 14. and XXXV. 4, 15. And Solomon did according to
him, 2 Chronicles. XXXV. 4. Neh. XII. 45.

day and night]

tidings unto their Idols] Idolaters ascribe their Victories, Judge. XVI. 23,
24. 1 King. XX. 23. 2 Chronicles. XXVIII. 23. Hab. I. 11. They bring their Idols to
their Camps, 1 Chronicles. XIV. 12. As the Israelits the Ark, 1 Samuel IV. 3.

castle of Zion] David took the Castle, Zion; dwelt in it; built round about
it; called it the City of David. And Ioab repaired the rest of the City, 2 Samuel V. 9.

came to David] There came to David to Ziklag a great host, Hebron to make him
King over all Israel, 340822. And among them very many Priests and Levites,
ver. 26, 27, 28. besides others intimated ver. 32.

Jehoiada, David to Hebron, to make him King over all Israel, 1 Chronicles. XII. 27.

Jehoiada, a chief Priest, 2 Chronicles. XXIV. 6. married Iehoshabeath or Iehosheba;
the daughter of King Iehoram, and sister of King Ahaziah, 2 King. XI. 2, 3. 2 Chronicles. XXII. 11. He caused usurping, and murdering Athaliah, the daughter of
Ahab and Iezebel, and wife of King Iehoram, and mother of King Ahaziah, 2 Chronicles. XXI. 6. and XXII. 1, 2. to be murtheredher self, 2 King. XI. 16. And
caused Ioash, grandchilde of Athaliah, and his wives nephew, and son and heir
of Ahaziah, to be crowned King when he was seven years old, 2 King. XI. 11, 12,
21. 2 Chronicles, XXIII. 11. Of whom see more on 2 King. XI. 4.

Iehoiada, the son of Benaiah, David's Counselor, next to Ahitophel, 1 Chronicles.
XXVII. 34.

bring again the Ark] David so soon as ever he was settled upon his throne over
all Israel, Zion, from the Jebusites: brings the Ark of God with all solemnity,
yet not after the due manner, from Kiriath-jearim, and the house of Abinadab;
And upon the death of Uzza, by the way, at the threshing floor of Nachon or
Chidon, he carries it aside into the house of Obed-Edom, where it remained
three months, 1 Chronicles. XIII. Hiram sends to David messingers, workmen, and
materials to build him an house in Zion: And David takes more wives at
Jerusalem; and obtaines two victories against the Philistines, chap. XIV. And
with great solemnity, in the due manner, he brings the Ark from Obed-Edoms
house, and sets it in the midst of the Tabernacle or Tent which he had
prepared for it, in the City of David, in Zion, chap. XV. where he offers
Sacrifices; Orders a Quire, gives them a Psalm of Thanksgiving, and appoints
Ministers, Porters, Priests, and Musicians to attend on the Ark continualy, chapter
XVI. In 2 Samuel V. David takes the strong Fort of Zion; builds, dwells in it,
has messingers sent to him from Hiram King of Tire, with materials, workmen
for his building; grows great; takes more wives and concubines at Jerusalem;
gets two victories over the Philistines in two set battles chap. V. And he
brings up the Ark from Kiriath-Jearim, and carries it aside into the house of
Obed-Edom; and after three months, he brings it thence, into the City of
David, with great solemnity, and joy; 2 Samuel VI Now whether the things
contained in 1 Chr. XIV. and 2 Samuel V. after the taking of Zion, did intervene
in that three months space, while the Ark was in the house of Obed-Edom; or
were acted before the Ark was removed from Kiriath-Jearim, is a matter of
conjectural probabilities on either side: yet I rather incline to the later
opinion.

from Shihor of Egypt] This Shihor, Shichor, or Sihor, has a notion of
blackness in it; And is not that rill or drill of water called by foreign
writers Rhinocolura; but is much rather the same with Nilus, otherwise not once
named in Scripture, anciently by the Ethiopians called Siris, by the Greeks
Melas, by the Latins Melo, from the blackness of the water, or rather of the
mud and slime that it brings down with it, or the black color of the grounds
and soils it passes through. It is called by way of excellency the River,
Esaias XXIII. 3. Ezekiel. XXIX. 3, 9. and the river or flood of Egypt, Amos VIII. 8.
and chap. IX. 5. This River rising in the South from unknown heads, runs in one
entire stream Northward to the Head Delta in Egypt, where it divides it self
into two maine Channels; and afterward brancheth into seven several streams,
Esaias XI. 15. Emptying themselves into the midland Sea: And so making that lower
part of Egypt to be of a triangular form with the point upward, and the basis
beneath toward the Sea [v]. One of the seven streams named Pelusian has a
stream issuing from it; which first makes the Sea or Lake of Sirbonis, of a
great length, and vast depth, dividing Egypt from the Edomites, and
Philistines, and so justly is named one of the Limits of the Land of Promise,
Number. XXXIV. 5. Josh. XIII. 3. 1 Chronicles. XIII. 5. as the River Euphrates is named
the other, Genesis XV 18. Deuteronomy. I. 7. and chap. XI. 24. Josh. I. 4. This River
Nilus supplieth the place of Rain in Egypt, Zech. XIV. 18. by the overflowing
of it; as is famous in Histories. The seven streams of old, are now become
four.

Baal-Perazim] By anticipation. Observations on 1 King. XIII. 32.

not after the due maner] The manner of doing makes or marres in matters of Gods
worship, Esaias I. 11, -- 15. God ownes not, but loathes, his own services, of his
own ordaining and commanding, when by evil men, and in an evil manner performed,
Jer. VI. 20. and VII. 21, 22. Psalm. L. 13, 16. Prove. XV. 8. and XXI. 27. Esaias
LXI. 8. and LXVI. 3. Amos V. 21, 22. Micah VI. 7. Mal. I. 10.

seven] Of the number of seven, Annotations on this Text.

dancing] See 2 Samuel VI. 14. Psalm. CXLIX. 3. and CL. 4. and XXX. 11. See Exodus
XV. 20. Judge. XI. 34. and XXI. 21.

he appointed] High and Solemn Service, David, 1 Chronicles. XVI. See that
Particular, 2 Chronicles. V. 12, 13.

trumpets] See the Observations on Number.

delivered first] See the Observations on Psalm. CXV. 1. and on Psalm. XCVI.

at Gibeon] Hither was the Tabernacle brought after that beastly and brutish
slaughter of the Priests made by bloody Saul at Nob, Sam. XXII. Of Gibeon, see
the Annotations on Hos. IX. 9.

his throne for ever] Some things here, Sololomon as the Type; but more in
Christ the Antitype: some things proper to the Type only; others to the
Antitype only: as was said on 2 Samuel VII. 12.

Sat before the Lord] Of this gesture in Prayer, Annotations on this Text, and
Exodus XVII. 12.

Abimelech the son of Abiathar] See the Observations on 2 Samuel Abimelech and
Abiathar. See the Observations on 1 Samuel I. 3.

Satan stood up] In 2 Samuel David against Israel. See the Observations on Esaias
VI. 9, 10.

to number Israel] Out of pride only and curiosity, and carnal confidence:
Otherwise the thing in it self not simply unlawful, when done upon good grounds
and to good ends: As we see it done at other times in Scripture. God commands
it, Number. I. 3. and XXVI. 1, 2. And Solomon and Amaziah did it, 2 Chronicles. II. 17.
and XXV. 5.

the sum of the number] 1100000. Israel, able men; from twenty years old, and
upwards. To the 800000. in 2 Samuel XXIV. 9. seem to be added here those 288000.
of David's Trained Bands, 1 Chronicles. XXVII. 1, -- 15. already enrolled, in public
records. And their Colonels, Captains, Commanders, and Officers, to the number
likely of 12000. which make up the said 1100000. To the 470000 of Judah are
30000. added more, in 2 Samuel XXIV. 9. which addition either might be the number
of the Regiments under those thirty Worthies of David, having one thousand in
each: Or rather an Addition of so many out of Jerusalem only, or out of Levi,
and Benjamin also (which still joined themselves to Judah) after Joabs first
return to Jerusalem, and giving up his number to the King. For he was weary of
the service, it being abominable to him; and therefore he is said, not to count
Levi and Benjamin; and to begin to number, but not to finish it, because there
fell wrath for it against Israel; neither was the number put in the account of
the Chronicles of King David, 1 Chronicles. XXI. 6. and XXVII. 24. In all, 1600000.
neither yet took he the number from twenty years old and under, 1 Chronicles. XXVII.
23.

It is enough] God in mercy shortens the three days of Pestilence,

Ornan] Or Araunah was the more free,

for the Place] For the whole place and plot of ground, David gives here a
great sum. Whereas he gives far less for the bare threshingfloore, Oxen,
and Instruments, 2 Samuel XXIV. 24. And David might give more then the worth, out
of his royal bounty; as 1 King. X. 13.

I have prepared] ver. 16. David's wonderful Preparation of gold and silver,
Exodus XXXVIII. 24, 25, 26. Whereof Dovid gave out of his own proper goods,
eleven millions and 250000 pounds Serling in Gold; and two millions, and
625000. pounds in silver; In all thirteen millions and 875000. pounds Serling.
And the Heads, Princes, and Rulers, gave eighteen millions, and 750000. pounds,
and 3125. pounds; In all, 18. millions, and 753125. pounds in Gold; And three
millions, and 750000. in Silver. The whole amounts to twenty two millions, and
503125. pounds Sterling. Adding to this David's proper Offering aforesaid, the
whole amounts to thirty six millions, and 378125 pounds. See further 1 Chronicles.
XXIX. 4, 7. and Chap. XXVI. ver. 26, 27, 28. All which yet is but a small part
of that sum prepared by David, Chap. XXII. 14. See the notes on Exodus
XXXVIII. 24, 25, 26. See the Offerings given in Zerubbabels time toward the
second Temple Ezra II 69; 70. And those in Nehemiahs time, Neh. VII. 70, 71, 72.

made Solomon his son King] This verse better concludes the former Chapter.
chap. XXIII. and Priests, chap. XXIV. and Singers, chap. XXV. and Porters, and
other Officers, chap. XXVI. And also Political or Civil, in the 12. Captains
for each several month; in the Princes of the twelve Tribes; and other several
Officers, chap. XXVII. were acted long before David's death, and his instructing
and encouraging of Solomon to the building of the Temple, and the making of him
King.

and upward] To fifty years, Number. IV. 3. After fifty they were freed from the
service in the Temple; and kept in their several Cities, in their several
Tribes; to teach the people, and to instruct and judge in matters brought
before them, as having best insight in the Judicial Laws, and the whole word
of God.

David divided] Chap. Gad the Kings Seer, and Nathan the Prophet, 2 Chronicles.
XXIX. 25. And these Divisions and Courses his son Solomon punctually retains,
2 Chronicles. VIII. 14. And Jehoiada, 2 Chr. XXIII. 18. and Josiah, 2 Chronicles. XXXV.
4. And so after the Return from the Babylonish Captivity, Ezra III. 10. And so
by Gods Spirit David had all the Patterns of the Temple, which in writings he
delivered to his son Solomon, 1 Chronicles. XXVIII. 12, 19. 2 Chronicles. III. 3.

of twenty years] Number. David, by new warrant, enters them into the work for the
Service of the Temple, at twenty years of age: likely more now being needful
for this Service, ver. 27. 2 Chronicles. XXXI. 17. yet they come not to the full
possession and fruition of their Place and Office, till thirty years of age, 1 Chronicles. XXIII. 3. Number. IV, 3, 4, 7.

And to offer] At all offerings to fit and prepare the Sacrifices to the hands
of the Priests,

The eighth to Abijah] Zacharias the father of John Baptist was of this Course,
Luke I. 5.

according to their maner] To come on a Sabbath day, Chapter IX. 25. 2 King. XI. 5,
6.

over against their brethren] That the first Course of Levites might attend on
the first Course of the Priests;

with Harps] Much Music used in Gods Service. Chron. IX. 33. and XVI. 4, 5, 6,
41, 42. 2 Chronicles. V. 12, 13. and VII 6. and chapter XXIX. 30. Psalm. LXVIII. 24, 25.
and LXXXI. 1, 2, 3. And so in the Tabernacle, Number. X. 10. and XXIX. 1. In
bringing up the Arc, 1 Chronicles. XIII. 8. and chap. XV. 16, -- 24. In going up to
Gods House, and coming from it, 1 Samuel X. 3, 5. Esaias XXX. 29. This music was
by skilful voice; and by various Instruments, both wind-instruments, and
hand-instruments; And these, both stringed, and touched with fingers, or struck
over with quill, or bow; or else shaken, or beaten with hand, or stick.

Prophesie] See the Observations on 1 Samuel Zeph. III. 4.

Of Asaph] See 1 Chronicles. chap. XV. 17, 19. and XVI. 5, 7. And see the
Annotations on 1 Chronicles. XXV. 1, 2, 6, 9. And see the Titles of sundry Psalms.

Of Heman] See the Annotations on 1 Chronicles VI. Chron. XV. 17. and chap. XVI. 41.
2 Chronicles. V. 12. and XXIX. 14. and Chap. XXXV. 15.

Jeduthun] See 1 Chronicles. Chron. VI. 12. and chap. XXIX. 14. and XXXV. 15. And
the Titles of Psalm. XXXIX. 62, 77.

The four and twentieth] As many Courses and Companies of Musicians or Singers,
chap. XXIV. 18. and of Levites attending on the Priests, chap. XXIV. 31. These,
as the others, in their Weeks and courses attended.

Porters] Of their Office, Chron. XXIII. 19. and the Annotations on this text.
Their number, 1 Chronicles. XXIII. 5.

Korhites] Descended from that Korah, Number. XVI. 1. great grandchilde of Levi;
From which Korah descended likewise Elkanah, and Samuel the Prophet, and Heman
the singer, 1 Chronicles. VI. 27. 33, 37, 38. 1 Samuel I. 1.

treasures] Many sorts of Treasures, ver. 20, -- 26. See the Annotations on
this text.

All that Samuel] Samuel, Saul, and Abner, and Joab, did dedicate part of the
spoils won in battles, to maintain the House of the Lord.

Izbarites] And Hebronites, ver. 30, 31, 32. being Levites, 1 Chr. XXIII. 12.
Number. III. 27. 1 Chronicles. XXIV. 20, -- 24. were employed also for the outward
business over Israel, for Officers and Judges: on this side Jordan Westward,
in all business of the Lord, and in the service of the King. And some of them
made Rulers over the Reubenites, and the Gadites; and the half tribe of
Manasseh, for every matter pertaining to God, and affairs of the King.

month by moneth] David had twelve Captains for the twelve months, Solomon
had the like, after him, 1 King. IV. Each Captain in David's time had twenty
four thousand under him; which in all arise to 288000. David's (...) and
Husbandry.

a chief Priest] The word so most usually signifies* (...) times it signifies
also a Prince, King. IV. 5. and 2 King. X* 11. And (...) And the
fathers-in-Law, of Joseph, Genesis XLI. 45 and of Moses, Exodus III. 1. were
Princes; for they would not marry the daughters of idolatrous Priests. The word
came thus to be used in both sense, because the same persons at first were both
Priests and Rulers; as the firtst-borne; before the Law; Moses, Psalm. XCIX 6.
and Eli. and Samuel, under the Law: And among the Heathen, famous is that of
Anius, Rex idem Hominum, Phoebique Sacerdos.

over the Tribes] These are Commanders in Peace; Manasseh, And another of the
other half. And Gad, and Asher, are left out.

stood up] Being now well-nigh bedrid, Adonijah his conspiracy.

Candlesticks of silver] For the use of the Courts,

yet young and tender] Of Solomon's age, Observation on 1 King. III. 7.

three thousand] See the observations on chap.

Thine] Like the doxology of the Lords Prayer.

Keep this] David's remarkable Prayer.

the second time, and anointed him] The rather because the first anointing was
in a time of tumult, Adonia, the next brother to Absalom sought to reign, 1
King. I. 39. But whether the later Anointing was before or after David's death.
It is not clear. But sure it is that David himself was thrice anointed, once at
Bethlehem by Samuel, and twice at Hebron, 1 Samuel XVI. 13. 2. Sam. II. 4. 1 Chronicles. XI. 3.

II. Chronicles.
THE II. Book of Chronicles contains the History of the Kings of Judah, (not of
Israel, but a little occasionally when the two Kingdoms had to do one with
another) unto the last end of that Kingdom, viz. from the first of Solomon, to
the Babylonish captivity. Mentioning also the Proclamation of Cyrus for the
Return out of the Captivity: Containing in all till that Return, four hundred
sixty six years, or upwards: some say four hundred and eighty, which number of
four hundred and eighty, was exactly complete, from the coming of the children
of Israel out of Egypt, till the building of Solomon's Temple, 1 King. VI. 1.

horsemen] Ver. Horsemen, and Solomon's horses, see the Observations on Judge.
XX. 2. How far his multiplying of Horses, 1 King. IV. 26. and X. 36. And his
multiplying of wives, 1 King. XI. 3. And his multiplying of gold and silver, 1
King. X. 21, 27. 2 Chronicles. I. 15. and chap. IX. 27. may square with, or swarve
from, may stand, or fall, by that Law for Kings, Deuteronomy. XVII. 16, 17. is a thing
to be considered, and not very hard to be determined.

threescore and ten thousand] And ver. Solomon's workmen in Lebanon were 150000.
viz. 70000. Bearers, and 80000. Hewers; All of strangers dwelling in the Land
of Israel. And his Overseers of them were 3600. Such strangers likewise And so
each of them were over forty two workmen or thereabout. And three hundred of
these Overseers, which are more then those set down, 1 King. V. 16. might be
extraordinary, in case any of the Ordinary should fail, by sickness, death,
or any other way. And thus, the Ordinary Overseers would be one over forty
five workmen or thereabout. Or rather, those three thousand three hundred, 1
King. V. 16. were Israelites and the chief of Solomon's Officers, added to the
other three thousand six hundred Overseers, and set partly as with them, so
over them, and partly over the whole work. And so each Overseer would be over
twenty one workmen at least. Those sixteen thousand a month by course, 1 King.
V. 13, 14. are by some added to the Overseers: And so there would be one
Overseer to eight workmen. But they may seem rather to be the better sort of
workmen of the Israelites, joined to King Hirams workmen, 1 King. V. 6. Those
Officers, viz. five hundred and fifty, 1 King. 9. 23. seem to be the chief of
the Officers that were over Solomon's other words, when he builded his own
house, and that for Pharaohs daughter, and all his other Buildings (besides the
Temple) ver. 15, -- 19. 2 Chronicles. VIII. 1, -- 6. These bare rule over the people
that wrought in those works. And the two hundred and fifty, 2 Chronicles. VIII. 10.
seem to be chief of his Officers that bare rule over the people, i. e. over
those Canaanites that Solomon had made Tributaries, ver. 7, 8. to rule them.
And so iffering from the former five hundred and fifty.

of beaten wheat] The difference of the Food and Measures of them, Solomon
here, over and above that in 1 King. V. 11. may stand in this, That the former
was for King Hirams Court and household; And this here for his workmen in
Lebanon.

Bathes] See the Observations on Genesis

of Huram my father] See the observations on 1 King.

to Joppa] See the Observations on Jonah, I. 3.

Solomon.] Solomon had diverse elder brethren living, Adoniah, when he was made
King; and he was the eldest son of the four, by Bathshuah or Bathshebah,
though he be recorded last, 2 Samuel XII. 24. 1 Chronicles. III. 5. and XIV. 4 2 Samuel
V. 14. And Nathan was the second, from whom Christ came, Luke III. 31.

After the first measure] See the Annotations on Ezekiel.

Greater house] This was twice as big as the Oracle; King. VI. 3.

he seiled] Or covered. This, and the next verse seems to relate to the Floor
of the Temple, 1 King. VI. 15. The walls are mentioned in the seventh verse
following.

Chambers] Of these see 1 King. VI. 5. 1 Chronicles. XXVIII. 11; 12. Ezekiel. XL. 44,
45, 46. and chap. XLI. 5, -- 11. and chap. XLII. 1, -- 13.

an Altar of brasse] That Altar in the Tabernacle was made of Shittim wood,
Exodus XXVII. 1, 2, 8. And the staves of it likewise, ver. 6. And so Exodus
XXXVIII. 1, 6, 7. And again it was covered with broad Plates made of the
Censers of those Sinners, Number. XVI. 38. This Altar of burnt-Offerings in the
Temple, though far greater then the other, seems to be made of the same
materials, Shittim wood, and brass.

Of the Altar in Ezekiels Visionary Temple, see Ezekiel. XLIII. 13. -- 17.

Court] Of the Courts see the Annotations on 1 King.

right side] See the Observations on 1 King.

Seventh moneth] See chap.

Levites] Priests of the tribe of Levi, King. VIII. 3. Number. IV. 15.

unto this day] See 1 King. Chron. IV. 41. till Nebuchadnezzar, or Nebuzaradan
burnt all, 2 King. XXV. 9. If Ezra writ these Books of the Chronicles after the
return from the Babylonish Captivity, then this phrase must be understood as a
Proverbial speech, to signify a long time. See the Observations on Deuteronomy. XV.
17.

Neither chose I any man] As I chose David,

thou did well] The purpose approved,

the fire] Of this see Levit.

sacrifice of 22000.] Ver. 7. The greatest Offering that we do read of. Those 1 Chronicles. XXIX. 21. 2 Chronicles. XV. 11. and chap. XXIX. 32. and XXX. 24. and XXXV. 7,
8, 9. come short of this.

appeared] Formerly, chap. I. 7. This is the second time, 1 Kings IX. 2.

my wife shall not dwell] Solomon's reverend and religious respect to the Place
where the Ark of God had been.

four hundred and fifty Talents] The thirty Talents reckoned here, King. IX.
28. seem to go for all manner of charges of the Navy and Voyage.

Four thousand stals] See the Observations on Judge.

forty years] Being born after David war with the Ammonites at Rabbah, Sam.
XI. and XII. chapters. A little before the time that Ammon deflowred Tamar: And
so aged about eighteen years when he began to reign.

Shechem] See the Observations on Josh.

Levites left] Cast out by Jeroboam, King. XII. 27. And to gain their
possessions: making Priests of the lowest of the people, which were not of the
sons of Levi, 2 Chronicles. XIII. 9. A practice well beseeming Rebels.

Devils] Idols here so called.

in the way of David, and Solomon] This charitably implies the Repentance of
Solomon; as well as his Ecclesiastes does; in his last days: though happily he
could not reform all Idolatry; as neither Manasseh could after his repentance,
2 Chronicles. XXXIII. 7.

and dispersed] As Genesis

Israel] Put and meant for Judah, See the Observations on 2 Chronicles. XXI. 2.

against Jerusalem] After this Jerusalem was taken about ten times.

one and fourty] Therefore borne in the first year of the reign of his father
King Solomon.

four hundred thousand] Huge are the armies of the Jews. Abijah and Jerrboam
Wherein slain on Jeroboams side five hundred thousand; v. 17. In the reign of
Asa, he had out of Judah, and Benjamin, an army of 500080. And he fought
against an army of Zerah the Ethiopian of a thousand thousand, and three
hundred Charets (likely meaning three hundred [thousand] Charets, 2 Chronicles. XIV.
8, 9. the greatest army that we read of. And in Jehoshapha's time, he had men
of war waiting on him, 1160000. besides those whom he put in the fenced
Cities, throughout all Judah, 2 Chronicles. XVII. 14, -- 19.

children of Belial] i. e. without yoke, Deuteronomy. XIII. 13. Such as Judge. XIX.
22. 1 Samuel II. 12. and X. 27. and XXV. 17. 1 King. XXI. 13. This title does
Shimei give falsely to David, 2 Samuel XVI. 7. But is truly given to the Devil, 2
Cor. VI. 15.

was young] Not in age; but in experience, and policy; being then, as was said,
forty one years old.

fourteen wives] Fourteen wives in his lifetime; ver. 2.

ten years] Yet likely some small skirmishes there were, King. XV. 16, 32.

Mareshah] A City in the North-West part of the tribe of Judah, Josh. Michah
the Prophet was borne, Michah I. 1. And here as we see, in the Valley of
Zephathah at Mareshah, Asa overthrew the hugest host that ever we read of, (
Xerxes army not excepted) of Zerah the Ethiopian.

Gerar] Gerar anciently a City and Kingdom of the Philistines; Abimelechs;
where Abraham, and Isaac, a while lived; both offending in denying their wives,
Genesis XX. and XXVI. Isaac leaving the City, dwelt in the valley of Gerar. Genesis
XXVI. 17. a most fruitful valley, ver. 12. as it were the Granarie of Canaan,
when famine was elsewhere in the Land, ver. 1. Here Isaac dug again the
Wells of water, dug by Abraham, and stopped by the Philistines: And he
dug others new. After Gerar fell to the tribe of Simeon. And hither, as we
see, Asa pursued the Ethiopians: and smote all the Cities round about Gerar.

long season] Thirty or thirty one years, Asa at the end of those ten years,
chap. XIV. 1.

Israel] The ten tribes, under Jeroboam, Nadab, and Baasha.

did turne] We read not of their turning in those thirty years. Israel in the
former verse may relate to all Gods people; and comprehend in it also former
times, even the times of the Judges themselves.

Be ye strong] Ye of Judah and Benjamin,

Oded] See the Annotations on this verse. ver. 1. and father here, might
prophecy.

renewed the Altar] And likely that whole Court, whereunto that chap. XX. 5
seems to have reference.

strangers] Those Israelites out of the ten tribes, Judah, are here called
strangers.

third moneth] Likely at the Feast of Weeks or Pentecost.

fifteenth year] This may seem a second and more through Reformation, four or
five years after his victory against Zerah. Or else that victory must be
reduced to this fifteenth year of Asa. And till that time they had had rest,
and no war; which fifteenth of Asa was the thirty five in his reign, i. e.
since the Kingdom of Judah was divided from the Kingdom of Israel, ver. 19.
viz. 17. of Rehoboam; three of Abijah, and these fifteen of Asa.

six and thirty] It is clear that this well may, Kingdom wherein Asa was now
King. For Baasha began to reign in the third year of Asa, 1 King. XV. 28. And
reigning twenty four years, ver. 33. he must needs die in the twenty seventh of
Asa, or twenty six complete: And so we find it, 1 King. XVI. 8 And therefore
this thirty sixth wherein Baasha waged war with Asa, must needs be meant of
the Kingdom of Judah, that is, since the first division of the two Kingdoms.
And so reckoning the seventeen years of Rehoboams reign, and three of Abijah,
we find this thirty sixth to be the sixteenth of Asa, the next year after that
full Reformation mentioned, 2 Chronicles. XV. 10. And to be the thirteenth year of
the reign of Baasha. See a like passage, 2 Chronicles. XXII. 2.

Ramah] Ramah of Benjamin, bordering upon Judah, Josh. XVIII. 25. See the
Annotations on Hos. V. 8.

Hanani] The father of the Prophet Jehu, chap. XIX. 2. 1 King. XVI. 1.

of Syria escaped] Which God might, and would, otherwise have delivered into
his hand; as he did the Ethiopians, if Asa had not prevented the occasion and
opportunity thereof by his foolish sending to and for Benhadad to aid him, and
break his League with Baasha; and so showing thereby that he relied not upon
the Lord, but upon Benhadad; for which he is justly reproved, and punished.

a very great burning] Greeks and Romans of old used to burn their dead
bodies; viz. of Burning at the Exequies of their Kings; so here, and Jer.
XXXIV. 5. of such of them at least, as lived beloved, and died desired: which
was to others denied, 2 Chronicles. XXI. 19. Jer. XXII. 19. and XXXVI. 30. But we
read not That this Burning was of their Bodies, but of sweet Odours only at and
in their Sepulchers.

taught in Judah] The Priests and Levites did so.

Philistines] These, Asa chap. XIV. 14, 15.

Numbers] See the Observations on chap.

Waited] Waited in their Courses,

Jehoshaphat] Jehoshaphat marries his son Jehoram to Athaliah, Ahabs
daughter. And this in the eighth year of Jehoshaphats reign; as appears by the
age of Ahaziah, succeeding his father Jehoram in the Kingdom, when he was two
and twenty years old, 2 Kings VIII. 18, 26, 27. 2 Chronicles. XXII. 2. with chap.
XXI. 5.

went down to Ahab] In the twenty two and last year of Ahabs reign, Jehoshaphat.

Ramoth Gilead] See the Observations on 2 Kings VIII. 28.

at a venture] Gods Providence. Observations on Ester V. 8. and on Ezekiel. I. 18.

Wrath] Wrath deserved by him; chapter XVIII. 31 and XX. 1.

from Beershebah to Mount Ephraim] The South and North borders of the Kingdom
of Judah.

set] As Jehoshaphats Commission for teaching throughout the Kingdom, was
chap. Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. XIX 8, -- 11. following therein the Ordinance of
Moses, Deuteronomy. XVII. and XIX. See the Observations on Deuteronomy. XVII. 8, -- 13.

Hazazon-Tamar] Genesis Engedi, a City of the tribe of Judah, Josh. XV. 62.

thy friend] So Esaias XLI.

cliffe of Ziz] And so the Wilderness of Jervel; Judah; near Tekoah, and
Berakah. ver. XX. 26.

Korhites] Korhites that descended of that Korah, the son of Izhar, the son
of Kohath, swallowed up of the earth, Number. XVI. 1. 32. These were singers in
the Temple, and some of them Porters.

Praise the Lord] Psalm. So chap. XXIX. 27.

began to sing] In assurance of victory.

three dayes] A rich spoil.

of Jehu] See the Annotations on chap.

in the book] 1 King. XVI. 1.

joined himself] Jehoshaphat first, Ahaziah to join with him to make ships to
go to Tarshish, 1 Kings XXII. 49. does at last yield, and is reproved by
Eliezer, and the ships are broken. Not that he joined first; and refused after,
upon the Prophets reproof; for then the ships might well have been unbroken.
But however; Here the good King falls once and again into the same fault of
joining himself with wicked Ahaziah; as formerly he had done with wicked Ahab;
chap. XVIII. 1, 2, 3. and chap. XIX. 2. As we see the like in Abraham, Genesis
XII. 13. with chap. XX. 2.

Jehoshaphat King of Israel] Jehoshaphat here is called King of Israel; ver. 4.
And Ahaz likewise, 2 Chronicles. XXVIII. 19, 27. And Darius is called King of
Assyria, Ezra VI. 22. And Artaxerxes King of Babylon, Neh. XIII. 6. As indeed
the Persian Monarchs were the rightful Kings of Persia, Assyria, and Babylon,
or Chaldea. Of names, see more in the Annotations on 2 Chronicles. XXIV. 20.

of his father] After his father Jehoshaphats death; Jehoram carried himself
better, both as, Viceroy, and King.

slew all his brethren] And see Gods judgments upon his sons, ver. 17. and
his grandchildren chap. XXII. 10, 11. only Jehoahaz or Ahaziah, or Azariah,
left of the one; and Joash of the other.

compelled] By force and persecutions.

A writing to him from Elijah] Written in the lifetime of Elijah, Jehoshaphat,
2 Kings III. 11. Left, and directed to Jehoram or for him; who would not endure
the Reproof of a living Prophet. Therein prophesying and foretelling Jehorams
Sins, and Punishments, Amongst other his wickednesses He show all his
brethren, the sons of Jehoshaphat, 2. Chron. XXI. 4. And his sons were all
slain by the Philistines, and Arabians, but Ahaziah the youngest (called also
Jehoachaz, 2 Chronicles. XXI. 17. and Azariah, chap. XXII. 6, 7.) 2 Chronicles. XXI. 17.
and XXII. 1. And Ahaziah was slain by Jehu, 2 Chronicles. XXII. 9. when he was
twenty three years old, 2 Kings VIII. 26. And the sons of Ahaziah were slain
by their grandmother Athaliah, save Joash, that was hid from her, and after
crowned King; and at last slain by his own servants, 2 Chronicles. XXIV. 24, 25. We
read that Josiah, and Cyrus, by their names, were prophesied of many ages
before they were borne. But their good deeds were foretold not any evil of
them; as of idolatrous bloody Jehoram here. Elisha foretells Hazael, face to
face, of his bloodinesse, and evil that he would do to the children of Israel,
2 King VIII. 12.

Arabians near the Ethiopians] See the Observations on Genesis he reigned] Iehoram
of Judah his Life,

Forty and two] Clear it is, Iehoram the father of Ahaziah was but forty
years old when he died, chap. XXI. 5. And that Ahaziah himself was but twenty
two years old when he began to reign, 2 Kings VIII. 26. But it was in the two
and fourtieth year of the continuance of the Crown in Omri and his race, from
whom Ahaziah descended, by his mother Athaliah, 2 Kings VIII. 18, 26. And the
Hebrew expression by the word (...) a son; together with a trajection of some
clauses in this verse, do render this interpretation the more passable. And a
like passage we find, as has been showed, in chap. XVI. 1. And such
trajections are used, 1 Samuel XX. 16. Ezra X. 17. Neh. XII. 22.

Athaliah] Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah, and wife of Jehoram the son of
Jehoshaphat, and daughter of Ahab and Jezebel, and grandchilde of Omri.

in Samaria] Not in the City, Samaria, 2 Kings IX 27.

Son of Jehoshaphat] Grandchilde. So daughter for grandchilde, verse 2. A
phrase usual in Scripture.

seed royal] Sons of Ahaziah, ver. 11. likely by other women.

of the King] Jehoram, Ahaziah; as is expressed in this verse.

Of the Priests, and of the Levites] They the Prime men in the deposing of
Athaliah, and crowning of Joash; guarding the gates, and compassing the King
round about with weapons in hand, their courses being not dismissed; and others
of them gathered out of all the Cities of Judah.

gate of the foundation] Called Shur, Kings XI. 6. the high or higher gate, 2
Kings XV. 35. 2 Chronicles. XXVII. 3. Of the Gates of the Temple, and Courts, See
the Annotations on Ezekiel. VIII. 3. See also Ezekiel. VIII. 5. 14. and chap. IX. 2.
and chap. XL. 3. and 2 Chr. VIII. 14. and chap. XXIII, 4, 5, 19, 20. and chap.
XXIV. 8. and XXVII. 3. and XXXI. 14. and XXXV. 5.

the Horse-gate] Of the gates of Jerusalem, Observations on Nehemy III. 1.

gather of all Israel] Israel as Ioash had.

from year to year] One year would not suffice to make up this Reparation.

hastened not] For in the twenty third year of Ioash it was not done, 2 Kings
XII. 6.

the Collection of Moses] So ver. Moses used, Exodus XXX. 12, 16. or Exodus XXV.
But this, differing from them both: agreeing only in this; As Moses then
provided for the Tabernacle, and the service of it by those Collections
extraordinarily, as need then required; so were they now, by somewhat a like
Collection, to provide for the repairing of the breaches of the Temple. Yet is
this, because somewhat like, called the Collection of Moses; as like sins,
are called by the names of the sins of Manasseh, 2 Kings XXIV. 3. of the
iniquity of the fathers, Exodus XXXIV. 7. of the error of Balaam, and
gainsaying of Core, Judge 11. and the sign of Jonas, Matthew. XII. 39. is used
in a like sense.

Sons of Athaliah] In their father Iehorams lifetime,

Highpriests Officer] 2 Kings XII. Iehoiada was this High Priest, is not
expressed.

day by day] i. e. time after time, so often as the chest was full.

in Israel] the Kingdom of Judah, Chr. XXIX. 24.

Princes] Hypocritical flattering Princes. See ver.

Zechariah] Zechariah slain, and mentioned Matthew. XXIII. Zechariah, But rather
the Prophet Zechariah, the son of Barachiah. Zech. I. 1.

slew his sonne] Cruel ingratitude.

host of Syria] This might be a seconding of that invasion, King. XII. 17, 18.

a small company] Gods visible hand in it; Joash, ver. 25.

sonnes] Likely more slain then Zechariah, Genesis XLVI. 7.

Book of the Kings] Most likely some civil Records.

Amaziah] Of the times of the reigns of Amaziah, Uzziah; as also of Iotham,
and of Ahaz, 2 Kings XV. 32. and XVI. 1. And of their Concordance with the time
of the reigns of the Kings of Isreel, See my Annotations on Hosea I. 1.

But he slew not their children] See the Annotations on this text.

do it] An Ironical concession. Observations on Amos IV. 4, 5.

top of the rock] Selah, Petra signifying a rock; whence the chief City in
Arabia Petraea is called Petra, 2 Kings XIV. 7.

gods of the children of Seir] Worse then that of Ahaz* chap. XXVIII. 23.
Punished, chap. XXV. 20, 27.

Altar of Incense] This the High Priest might do, Exodus XXX. 7. and other
Priests also, Luke I. 9 But not the King, or any else, but Priests.

the chief Priest] Not styled the High Priest

was a Leper] Yet bare the title of King to the day of his death.

Ophel] Ophel in Jerusalem, Chron. XXXIII. 14. Neh. III. 26. and XI. 21.

his wars] 2 Kings XV.

his God] Though himself such an idolater, ver. 22. So chapter XXXVI. 5.

King of Syria] Rezin, 2 Kings XVI. 5.

slew] Slew a great number.

Captive] A greater number.

feirce wrath] Pekah soon slain: Hosheah's time all captivated; and the
Kingdom extinguished; Esaias VII. 16.

the first day] ver. Hezekiah begins Reformation on the very first day of his
reign. Or rather on the first day of the year which fell out toward the later
end of the first year of Ezekiah's reign.

sixteenth day] So that Passover was past, and not kept.

seven Bullocks] Here are seven,

the Priests killed them] And so Levit. IV. 4. and chap. IX. 8, Chron. XXIX.
24, 34. The Levites did flea them, 2 Chronicles. XXXV. 11. And in some extraordinary
cases sley them also, 2 Chronicles. XXIX. 34. and receive the blood, 2 Chronicles. XXX.
16, 17. The Priests only, not the Levites, came to the Altar, to lay the wood,
sprinkle the blood, and burn them, Levit. l. 7. etc. and chap. III. 2, 5. 2 Chronicles. XXXV. 14.

the Song] Psalm CXXXVI. See the Annotations on Ezra III. 11.

to Ephraim, and Manasseh] See ver. 5, -- 11, 18. Yet this was before their
final captivity by Shalmaneser, 2 Kings XVII.

in the second moneth] ver. Number. IX. 11.

Kings of Assyria, Pull, Tiglath Pilneaser, 2 Kings XV. 19, 29. 1 Chronicles. V. 26.
2 Chronicles. XXVIII. 20.

mocked them] But a final judgment son followed.

had not cleansed themselves, yet] And, Josiah's time, all did not eat at the
very hour appointed, at Even, 2 Chronicles. XXXV. 14. yet where the heart is
upright, God mercifully heals such offenders.

to keep other seven dayes] The power of the Church seen herein;

Since the time of Solomon] And the division of the two Kingdoms, Jerusalem to
eat and celebrate the Passover. Yet see a larger commendation of Josiah's
Passover, which followed after this, chap. XXXV. 18. 2 Kings XXIII. 22, 23.

finished] Presently after the foresaid Passover, Ephraim also, and Manasseh;
which belonged to Hoshea King of Israel.

third moneth] Or Feast of weeks, Exodus XXIII. 16.

host of the King of Assyria] Though that King Sennacherib; Hezekiah. chap.
XXXII. 21.

a wall] Begun by his father, chap. XXXII. 5.

yet unto the Lord] Not to false gods;

Amon] Amon worse then his father Manasseh.

eighth year] Being then sixteen years old; Eliakim or Iehojakim, 2 Kings
XXIII. 36. and chap. XXII. 1. compared together.

twelfth year] Himself being then twenty.

cities of Manasseh] Remanants then of the Israelites;

eighteenth year] This Reformation and Covenant made, chap. XXXV. 19. And yet
from this, or rather from the twelfth year above mentioned begins that
reckoning of the sin of Judah, Ezekiel. IV. 6. For under so good a King yet the
people continued obstinately wicked; as appears in Jeremy, who began to
prophecy in the thirteenth year of Iosiah's reign, Ier. I. 2. and XXV. 3. and
chapter III. 6. And Josiah only caused, and made them outwardly to obey, 2 Chronicles.
XXXIV. 32, 33.

the Houses] The Houses of the Priests, which adjoined to the Temple; and of
the Levites, which adjoined to the Courts.

Levites Scribes] 1 Chronicles. Ezra VII. 6. 21. Neh. VIII. 9. and chap. XII. 26.
and XIII. 13. See the Annotation on 1 Kings IV. 3. More fully, thus; we read in
the Old Testament of several persons that were Scribes; some, Scribes of
Kings, or their Secretaries; So David had one; And Solomon two, Ioash one, 2
Kings XII. 10. Josiah one, 2 Kings XXII. 3. Of Jonathan David's Uncle, that he
was a Counselor, a wise man, and a Scribe, 1 Chronicles. XXVII. 32. And of Baruch,
that he was Ieremies Scribe. And of families of Scribes, that dwelt at Jabez in
the tribe of Judah, and were of the posterity of Iethro, 1 Chronicles. II. 55. But
why so called, or what their Office was, whether as Public Notaries,
Scriveners, or Transcribers of the Law, or what else, it appears not. Here in
Iosiah's time we find that in his business of repairing the house of the
Lord, there were appointed of the Levites Scribes. And in Nehemiah's time he
made Treasurers over the Treasuries [in the Lords House] Shelemiah the Priest,
and Zadok the Scribe. And in his time also was that famous Ezra, a Priest,
son of the High Priest Serajah slain by Nebuchadnezzar, and the same a ready
Scribe in the Law of Moses, a Scribe of the Law of the God of Heaven, of the
words of the Commandments of the Lord, and of his Statutes to Israel; and the
same a public Reader, and Teacher of the Law. In the New Testament we find
them much more mentioned; and to be of more esteem; and themselves affected
Pre-eminence and precedencies, Mark. XII. 38, 39. Here they are often joined
with the Chief Priests, and Elders, and often with the Pharisees. They
pretended to extraordinary holiness, as the Pharisees did; whence is that,
Matthew. V. 20. and Acts XXIII. 9. They were of the Pharisees part against the
Sadduces. Yea he that is called a Scribe, Mark XII. 28. the same is called a
Pharisee, and a Lawyer, Matthew. XXII. 34, 35. We read not that they were of the
Sect of the Sadduces, or Essenes. But we find them to join with all the rest,
to question, to pose, and oppose our Savior, to entangle and ensnare him by
Questions, to charge his miracles to be done by Beelzebub; Himself, with
Blasphemy; to apprehend and bind him; to condemn him in the Council; to
deliver him to Pilate; to accuse him before Herod; to prosecute him to death;
to mock him upon the Cross. And we find that these Scribes sat in
Moses-chair, Matthew. XXIII. 2. and were Preachers and Teachers of the people,
Mat. VII. 29. and XIII. 52. And likely were all of the tribe of Levi.

rent his clothes] See the Annotations on 2 Kings XXII. 8.

Huldah the Prophetesse] See the Observations on Zeph. III. 4. The High Priest
Hilkiah is here sent to her; she being an extraordinary Prophetess, so near at
hand.

Put the holy Ark] It might be put out of his place,

Passeover-Offerings] So ver.

After all this] Thirteen years after the foresaid Passover;

by Euphrates] Heb. Phrat, or Prat, or Perath, the fourth river in Eden, Genesis
II. 14. usually called the River, and the great River: made one of the
Boundaries of the Promised Land, Gen XV. 18. Deuteronomy. 1. 7, and chap. XI. 24.
Josh. I. 4. 2. Chron. IX. 26. Cut by Cyrus into several Channels when he lay
in siege before Babylon which stood upon it; and so by him much dreyned and
dried, Ier. L. 38. See 1 Chronicles. XVIII. 3. Ier. XIII. 4. and chap. LI. 63. Apoc.
IX. 14. and Chap. XVI. 12. See on Dan. IV. 30.

Megiddo] See the Annotations on Zech.

to carry him] But he died by the way, Jer. XXII. 18, 19.

Eight years old when he] He was eighteen when himself began to reign, Kings
XXIV. 8. And but eight then when his father began to reign. The like relative
sense may that speech admit, 2 Kings XVI. 2.

no remedy] Desperate sinners procure implacable wrath,

Kingdom of Persia] See the Observations on the beginning of the Book of Ezra,

threescore and ten years] For the beginning of these, Annotations on Dan. IX.
2. rather then those on Zech. VII. 3. yet many learned are of the later opinion.

Ezra.
THE Book of Ezra contains an History of seventy years; viz. from the first of
Cyrus, or his Proclamation, chap. I. 1. to the seventh year of Artaxerxes
Longimanus; upon this Account; viz. Cyrus, seven; Cambyses, seven; Smerdis,
one; Darius Hystaspis, thirty six; Xerxes, twelve; of Artaxerxes Longimanus,
seven, where Ezra end. Or, premising two of Darius Medus before Cyrus, it comes
to seventy two. The four last Chapters contain the History but of that one
year concerning Ezra, which was in that seventh year of Artaxerxes. See chap.
VII. 7, 9. and chap. VIII. 15, 21, 31, 32, 33. and chap. X. 8, 9, 16, 17. But
the six first Chapters are extended by some, otherwise learned men, yet upon
less probable grounds, to a far larger scope of time; even to one hundred
thirty eight, or one hundred forty five years: And they end the Book with the
nineteenth year of Artaxerxes Mnemon; which seems clean contrary to the Text,
chap. VII. 7, 8.

For the clearer knowledge of diverse things in this Book; as likewise in
Nehemy, and Esther; A Catalogue of the Persian Monarchs, and of the years of
their Reigns is very useful: which out of the best Authors, with very little
variation, may be as follows; years. Darius Medus 2 Cyrus 7 Cambyses 7
Smerdis 1 Darius Hystaspis 36 Xerxes 12 Artaxerxes Longimanus 48 Xerxes 1
Sogdianus 1 Darius Ochus seu Nothus 19 Artazerxes Mnemon 43 Darius Ochus 23
Arsen 3 Darius Codomannus 5

And so the Persian Monarchy continued two hundred and eight years; or there
about.

In this Book of Ezra there is mention made of six Persian Monarchs; first, of
Cyrus, chap. I. 1. secondly, of Darius chapter IV. 5. thirdly, of Ahasuerus, chap.
IV. 6. fourthly of Artaxerxes, chap. IV. 7. fifthly, of another Darius, chap.
IV. 24. and chap. V. 5, 6. sixthly, of another Axtaxerxes, chap. VII. 1. Or
rather thus; Of five Persian Monarchs, viz: 1 of Cyrus; 2 of Ahasuerus; 3 of
Artaxerces; 4 of Darius, taking him mentioned, chap. IV. ver. 5. 24. and Chap.
V. 5, 6. and chap. VI. 15. to be the same man. And 5 of another Artaxerxes. And
the Persons of these by sundry learned men are sundry ways understood. Some
take the first Darius to be Darius Hystaspis; Ahasuerus, to be Xerxes; the
first Artaxerxes to be Artaxerxes Longimanus; the second Darius, to be Darius
Ochus and Nothus; the second Artaxerxes, to be Artaxerxes Mnemon or Memor.
Others take Ahasuerus to be Cambyses; Artaxerxes to be Artashasta or Smyrdis
Magnus; Darius not two, but one, to be Darius Hystaspis; and the second
Artaxerxes, to be Artaxerxes Longimanus. This diversity is occasioned by the
silence of Scripture, and uncertainties of Heathen Greek Histories: yet this
later opinion I the rather embrace, for that it stands best with the ages of
Ze^ubbabel, Ezra, Nehemiah, and Mordecai.

Ezra a child, when his father Serajah, the High Priest, chap. VII. 1. was
slain at Riblah by Nebuchadnezar, 2 Kings XXV. 18, 21. And his brother
Jehozadak, the succeeding High Priest, was carried into Captivity, 1 Chronicles. VI.
14, 15. And his son Jeshua, or Joshua, or Jehoshua, the High Priest, the
son of Jehozadak, or Josedech; Neh. XII. 1. Ezra III. 2, 8. and V. 2. Zech.
VI. 11. came up with Zerubbabel. And this Ezra came up from Babylon, in the
seventh of Artaxerxes, with a gracious Commission, Ezra VII. VIII. IX. X.
chapters. And he was with Nehemiah, after the building of the Walls of
Jerusalem; at that solemn Reading of the Law, and Preaching: and at that
singular keeping of the Feast of Tabernacles, Neh. VIII. 1, -- 6, 9, 13. etc
And after the Feast, chap. IX. and X. at the Dedication of the Walls, chap.
XII. 26, 36. So that upon the least account, He must live upon one hundred and
fifty years, that is fifty three or sixty before the Return from Babylon;
twenty three to the Building of the Temple; sixty seven to the Dedication of
the Walls of the City. But upon the larger, and more improbable account, he
must live at least two hundred and twenty years. He was a ready Scribe in the
Law of God, chap. VII. 6, 11. And is generaly reputed the holy Penman likewise
of the Books of Chronicles; And, as some would, of the Books of Nehemiah, and
Malachi also. And is taken by many to be the restorer and orderer, after the
return from the Babylonish Captivity of all the Books of the Old Testament, in
that sort, and posture, and character also, wherein now we have them.

Now in the first year] Hebr. Chronicles. As the like is in the beginning of
Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Joshua, Judges, and many other Books. See moreover
the Annotations on Ezekiel. I. 1.

One for First is an usual Scripture phrase.

And First here, is of his Conquest of Babylon, and of his reign there: For he
was King of Persia, not Monarch, many years before, chap. V. 13.

Charged me] Esaias XLIV. Cyrus, by Daniel or some other.

vessels] Such as were not cut in pieces, Kings XXIV. 13.

Sheshbazzar] The Chaldee or Court-name of Zerubbabel, Ezra I. Belteshazzar was
of Daniel. The same work that is ascribed to Sheshbazzar, chap. V. 16. is
ascribed to Zerubbabel, Zech. IV. 9.

were five thousand four hundred] This number arises out of the particular
numbers formerly mentioned, chap. VII. 19. and chap. VIII. 25, 27, See the
carrying of them away by Nebuchadnezzar, at four several times, Dan. I. 2. 2 Chronicles. XXXVI. 7, 10, 18.

Province] Judah no Kingdom now; chap. V. 8. Neh. I. 3. and chap. VII. 6. and
XI. 3.

which came] The manifold variations for Names, Nehemie VII. may arise from the
diversity of names given to one man. And from this, That the one was taken at
their setting out from Babylon, viz. this Ezra II. The other upon their coming
to Judea and Jerusalem, Neh. VII. And so some might come to Jerusalem which had
not registered their names in Babylon: and some might register their names in
Babylon which yet came not up to Jerusalem, either changing their minds to
stay in Babylon, or dying by the way. Or else that in Nehemie might be applied
to the persons that were living and remaining in the Land of Judah in his time,
or else it might be taken out of some other Register besides this in Ezra. The
numbers of them that returned with Zerubbabel in this Catalogue, Ezra II. and
in that Catalogue, Neh. VII. 6 -- 62. fall far short of that total sum,
both in Ezra and Nehemy, which is said to be forty two thousand three hundred
and sixty, besides seven thousand three hundred thirty seven more of servants
and Proselites, Ezra II. 64, 65. Neh. VII. 66, 67. The number wanting seems to
be supplied out of those Ezra II. 62. and out of the Relicts of the ten Tribes,
that were both captivated, and returned with them of Judah, and are not
numericaly set down, yet after the Return, continued among them, and professed
their Religion, even till the coming of our Savior, and the final destruction
of Jerusalem. See 2 Chronicles. XI. 3, 16. and XXXI. 6. Ezra II. 70. and VI 16, 17.
Matt. IV. 14. Luke II. 36. Acts II. 5. and XXVI. 7. Of those which came up with
Ezra, see chap. VIII. 1, -- 14.

Tirshatha] Tirshatha signifying Governor in their tongue seems attributed
here to Zerubbabel: Nehemiah expressly, Neh. VIII. ver. 9. and chap. X. 1.

Urim] See the Observations on 1 Samuel XXIII. 9.

the whole] Many more returned,

Singing men, and singing women] Most likely such as were used, not in the
Temple, but elsewhere, for mirth, as 2 Samuel XIX. 35. Eccles. II. 8. Esaias XXIII.
16. Amos VI. 5. and for mourning, as 2 Chronicles. XXXV. 25. Jer. IX. 17, 18.
Eccles. XII. 5. Amos V. 16.

seventh moneth] Ver. Solomon's Temple, 1 Kings VIII. 2.

In the second year of their coming] They prepare for the building of the
Temple;

wept with a loud voice] Many ancient men that had seen the former Temple,
Ezra I. 4, 6, 68, 69. and chap. VI. 8, 9. and chap. VII. 15, -- 22. and chap.
VIII. 25, 26, 27. 33, 34. Neh. VII. 70, 71, 72. in comparison of those for the
former Temple; Hag. II. 3. In which case God comforts them, Hag. II. 7, 9.
Zech. IV. 6, -- 10. and VIII. 6, 9. Mal. III. 1. Or else, seeing these
foundation-stones not so goodly and precious, as those were known to be that
were in Solomon's Temple, 1 Kings VII. 9, 10. For as for the largeness and
compass of the foundation, it was not inferior to that of Solomon's, 1 Kings
VI. 2. Yea far superior, if that Decree of Cyrus, and the record of it found
by Darius, Ezra VI. 1, 2, 3. mistake not; and the Cubits be the same.

Esar-haddon] The son of Sennacherib, Kings XIX. 37. and grandchild of
Salmaneser: And this seems to be the last of the Assyrian Kings; And the same
with Asnapper; and to be him that carried Manasseh prisoner to Babylon, then
under the Assyrian Empire, 2 Chronicles. XXXIII. 11. And is likely the man whom
Ptolomie calls Assaradinus, and the Greeks Sardanapalus, of Sar for Esar,
haddon, and Pull; Pull being much used in the names of the Assyrian, and Chaldean
Kings.

Brought us up hither So that those adversaries, ver. 1. seem to be the race
of those Samaritanes brought in by Salmanesar, 2 Kings XVII. 6, 24. Or a second
kind of plantation by his grandchilde, ver. 9. which ever continued fierce
enemies to the Jews, whatever they mischeivously pretend here, John IV. 9.
Luke IX. 52, 53. And this makes that Answer returned to them here, ver. 3.

Darius] Hystaspis

Ahasuerus] Ahasuerus seems most probably to be the man whom Heathen Authors
call Smerdis Magus, Cyrus, and younger brother of Cambyses,

Artaxerxes] As they had formerly done in the days of this Artaxerxes;
Cambyses. For to understand this of Artaxerxes Longimanus, and much more of
Artaxerxes Mnemon; And the Temple to be builded in the days of Darius Nothus,
and much more of Darius Ochus, will no ways stand with these Scriptures, and
the notation of times contained in them, Zech. III. 9. and Hag. II. 3.

Syrian tongue] Hebr. Aramite. This was in ordinary use under the Assvrian,
Chaldean, and Persian Monarchy, Esaias XXXVI. 11. Dan. II. 4. This we commonly
call the Chaldee tongue. It differs from the Hebrew Dialect, Esaias XXVIII. 11.
and chap. XXXIII. 13. and XXXVI. 11. Yet in the days of our Savior it grew
common among the Jews also; and is in that regard called the Hebrew tongue in
the New Testament, John XIX. 13, 17. Acts XXI 40. and XXII. 2.

Rehum] This, chap. VI. 19. is penned in the Chaldee Dialect. And so chap. VII.
11, -27.

building the rebellious and the bad Citie] So ver. Temple.

the river] So chap. V. 6. Jordan, Euphrates, ver. 17. and 20. From Persia, it
is beyond the river.

work of the House of God] Though their Letter,

Zechariah] He is called the son. Iddo; And Zerubbabel the son of
Shealtiel, ver. 2. And they were indeed their grandchildren, Zech. I. 1. 1 Chronicles. III. 17, 18, 19.

Tatnai] He, Shethar-boznai deal more fairly and truly with the Jews in their
letter to Darius, then Rehum, and Shimsai did in theirs to Artaxerxes, chap.
IV. 12, -- 16. And they make mention only of the House of God, and not of the
City.

until now] But hindered and inhibited in the mean time, chap. IV. 21, 22.

in Babylon] Or concerning Babylon.

Achmetha] Called by Heathen Authors Ecbatana: signifying a Summer seat for
cool refreshing; Media kept their Court in the Summer season.

threescore Cubits] Cubits likely are taken here for common Cubits half the
length of sacred Cubits; Solomon's, 1 Kings VI. 2. 2 Chronicles. III. 3. according to
that Hag. II. 3. See the Annotations on this text: and the Observations on Chapter
III. 12.

three rowes] This relates to the Courts of the Temple.

Let timber] The great zeal of this King for the Temple,

Artaxerxes] Likely one of the seven that put down Smerdis Magus, and in a
sort, Darius Hystaspides.

finished] About twenty two years after their Return:

Offered] not comparable to that, Kings VIII. 5, 63. 2 Chronicles. VII. 5. 7.

And the children] From this verse to Chap. VII. ver. 11. the Text again is
Hebrew.

Killed] Each family, Egypt; But Gods Ministers, Priests and Levites, must do
it, 2. Chron. XXX. 15, 16, 17.

separated themselves unto them] Heathen Proselytes.

King of Assyria] See the Observations on 2 Chronicles. XXI. 2.

Artaxerxes]

Ezra] See the Observations touching him in the beginning of this his Book.

Azariah] Six generations here omitted; Chron. VI. ver. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. And
three generations omitted between Jeroam and Pashur, 1 Chronicles. IX. 12. compared
with Neh. XI. 12. And so three generations are omitted between Joram and Ozias,
Matthew. I. 8 And all done for brevity sake; conceiving those Omissions to be
things evidently known, or not so material to be there inserted.

King granted] Ezra's extraordinary power and authority was from the Kings
grant,

went up] So backward were the Jews in returning back to Judea after the
Proclamation of Cyrus: yea, Esther VIII. 8, 9.

first] Four months in going.

King of Kings] Ezekiel. XXVI. 7. Dan. II. 37.

seven Counsellors] So Esther I. 14.

freely offered] great zeal, ver. 20 -- 26. and 28. and chap. 8. 25, 26, 27.
as was formerly in Darius, chap. VI. 11.

can finde] Grants him a free Collection,

not lawful to impose] Artaxerxes gives Ezra the Priest a grant and power for
an immunity of the Clergy; Observations on 1 Chronicles. XXVI. 29.

Males] In all,

Ahava] A river, ver. 21, 31. a few days journey distant from Babylon, in the
way to Jerusalem, ver. 15, 17 21. 31.

Levi] Levites here distinguished from the Priests, chap. VII. 7.

Casiphia] Not very far from Ahava: Caspian Sea.

Nethinims] See the Observations on Josh.

a Fast] A good pattern here. Annotations on Joel I. 14. and on Jonah III. 5.

Talents] See the Observations on Exodus XXXVIII. 24.

fine Copper precious as Gold] Rare this;

in the chambers] Diverse of the Chambers on the sides or walls of the Temple,

their daughters] Of marriages with Heathens, Observations on Number. XXXVI. 6.
yea more, it may seem they put away their own wives to take these, Mal. II.
11. 13.

weeping] Weeping in Prayer, Kings XX. 3. and XXII. 19. Number. XXV. 6. Judge. XX.
23, 26. and XXI. 2. 1 Samuel I. 10. and VII. 6. 2 Kings XX. 3. Heb. V. 7. Psalm.
VI. 8. and XXXIX. 12.

a Covenant] Covenants much used between God and his People, Genesis VI. 18. and
XV. 18. and XVII. 2. Deuteronomy. V. 2. Josh. XXIV. 24. 2 Kings XI. 17. and XXIII. 3.
2 Chronicles. XV. 12. and XXIX. 10. Neh. IX. 38. Esaias LIX. 21.

and such as were borne of them] If the mothers continued Heathens, and did not
turn Proselytes; their children were not to be reputed as freeborn sons, in
the number of Gods people; yet the fathers were to have a fatherly care of
them, for maintenance and education.

forfeited] According to that power given to Ezra, chap. VII. 26.

separated] By excommunication; as John IX. 22, 34. or by banishment, chap.
VII. 26.

ninth month, twentieth day] Therefore the Proclamation, ver. 7, 8, was on the
ninth month, seventeenth day, about the beginning of our December.

of one day or two] But of three months, ver. 16, 17.

Our Rulers of all the Congregation] Such as Deuteronomy. XVII. 9. Sanedrin, and great
Council.

examine] (...) a word beside all ordinary form of Grammar. Psalm. X. 15.

sons of Jeshua] of the High Priests race; which happily made the High Priest
absent himself in this action, ver. 15.

All these] Seventeen Priests; Annotations count them.

Nehemiah.
THE Book of Nehemiah is the last Book and History of the Old Testament,
mentioning matters after Malachi. It contains an History of one hundred and
twenty years, or thereabout; reckoning from the twentieth of Artaxerxes
Longimanus when Nehemiah began, chap. II. 1. to the days of Jaddua, two years
before the period of the Persian Empire, chap. XII. 11, 22. Some make it about
fifty five; reckoning so from the twentieth of Artaxerxes Mnemon, to the period
of the Persian Empire.

The two maine and differing reckonings then of the years of the two Books of
Ezra, and Nehemie jointly considered, stand thus; Reckoning as some do, to Ezra
one hundred forty six, and to Nehemie fifty five, the sum of both comes to
two hundred and one. But rather reckoning to Ezra seventy two, and to Nehemie
one hundred and twenty, the sum of both does arise to one hundred ninety two.
Thus the difference between these two reckonings of both Books jointly,
amounts to nine years.

If this Nehemiah be the same that came up with Zerubbabel and Jeshua,
mentioned Ezra II. 2. Neh. VII. 7. and writ this Book; then Nehemiah must needs
be a very old man; And that passage, chapter XII. 10, 11. mentioning Jaddua the
High Priest, must needs be inserted by some other Prophet since his days; And
much more since the days of Ezra: For Jaddua lived till the days of Alexander
the Great, and met him coming into Jerusalem: which is the very last Historical
Passage and Record of the Old Testament: For Psalm XLIV. And LXXIV. conceived
by some to be penned in the days of Antiochus Epiphanes, carry no sure ground
for such an after-date. And surely so many years as include the whole
continuance of the Persian Empire and more, do far pass the date of one man's
life in that age of the world. Yet that Nehemiah might well reach to the 32.
year of Artaxerxes Longimanus; which is the last passage of this Book, setting
that of Jaddua aside. However, many make this Nehemiah this famous Governor,
to be another Nehemiah, of younger and later years, then he, Ezra II. 2. This
Nehemiah came to his Government, when Eliashib, the Grandchilde of Jeshua, or
Joshua, or Jehoshua was High Priest, chap. III. 1. and XII. 10. The whole time
of his Government is set down, chap. II. 1. and chap. V. 14. and chap. XIII. 6.
The first time was twelve years. And the twelve first Chapters of his Book
mention the things that were done by him in the first year only of those
twelve. The second time of his Government is contained in the last chapter: And
the beginning and durance of it is uncertain: yet long it was, as may be
gathered out of chap. XIII. 28. See the Observations on that Text.

And it was] The first particle may seem to join this Book to that of Ezra.
Esdras; as supposing Ezra to be the sacred Penman of both; though Nehemiah be
brought in usualy speaking in his own person.

Chisleu] About our November.

Shushan] Shushan signifying a Lilly in the Greek; a Fountain or Well in that
Country language. The chief City in Persia; the winter Mansion of the Persian
Monarchs. See Ezra VI. 2. Esther I. 2. Dan. VIII. 2.

the wall] Ever since the ruin made by Nebuchadnezzar.

Nisan] which is the Hebrew Abib; March. the vernal equinoctial.

Artaxerxes] Longimanus, thirteen years after Ezra, chap. VII. 7.

I took up] His waiting-course being then come: four months after Hanani his
coming, chap. I. 1, 2.

prayed] Nehemiah his Prayer, Moses, Exodus XIV. 15. And specialy his zeal in
the building, chap. IV. 16, 17, 23. and V. 11. And his speed, chap. VI. 15. And
his courage against all oppositions, chap. IV. and chap. VI. And his care for
the needy and oppressed, chap. V. 11, 12, 13. And his heat and wrath against
sin, chap. XIII. 25. And his wonderful bounty, chap. V. 14, 15, 17, 18. are
all very remarkable.

a time] Twelve years, chap. V. 14. and XIII. 6.

Sanballat] As the Samaritanes opposed and hindered Zerubbab^l in the Building
of the Temple, Ezra IV. So the Moabite, Ammonite, and Arabian disturbed
Nehemiah in the building of the walls of the City, Neh. II, 10, 19. and IV. 1,
etc. and VI. 1, etc.

Which were] (...); Here (...) ( m) is used in the end of a word; which never
uses so to be. And again (...) ( m) proper to the end of a word, is found in
the middle, in the beginning of Esaias IX. 7.

Eliashib] Eliashib the son of Jojakim, Jeshua, (which Jeshua came up with
Zerubbabel, Neh XII. 10. Ezra II. 2. and lived to finish the Building of the
Temple, Hag. I. 14.) was High Priest in the Beginning of Nehemiah's twelve
years Government, in the twentieth year of Artaxerxes Longimanus, Neh. III. 1.
20. as was said before; about sixty years after the Temple was finished.

gate] For the Gates of the City of Jerusalem we read of the Citiegate, 2 Chronicles. XXXII. 6. the first Gate, Zech. XIV. 10. the Gate of Benjamin, Jer.
XXXVII. 12, 13. and XXXVIII. 7. Zech. XIV. 10. situate in the wall of the
City, in the Tribe of Benjamin, Northward. Yet said to be in the House of the
Lord, Jer. XX. 2. that is, by it; as the particle Beth is used, Number. XXXIII.
37. Josh. V. 13. and chap. XXIV. ver. 25, 26, 32. Jer. XIII. 5. and XXXII. 7.
the Gate of Ephraim, 2 Kings XIV. 13. Neh. XII. 39. the Corner Gate, 2 Chronicles.
XXV. 23. and the Valley Gate, 2 Chronicles. XXVI. 9. the Fish Gate, 2 Chronicles. XXXIII.
14. The New Gate, Jer. XXVI. 10. because repaired new by Jotham, 2 Kings XV.
35. 2 Chronicles. XXVII. 3. Yet some make it the East Gate, some the West Gate of
the outer Court of the Temple; wherein they will have the Sanhedrin to sit. The
Gate between two walls, by the Kings Garden, if this be a Gate of the City, 2
Kings XXV. 4. In Nehemiah's time, at his new building of the Walls of the
City, we read of the Sheep Gate; of the Fish Gate; the Old Gate; the East
Gate, Jer. XIX. 2. the Valley Gate; the Dung-Gate; the Gate of the Fountain;
the Water Gate; the Horse Gate; the Gate Miphkad or Judicatory; the Gate of
Ephraim; the Prison Gate, Neh. II. 13, 14. and chap. III. 1; 3, 6, 13, 14, 15,
26, 28, 31. and chap. XII. 39. Zech. XIV. 10.

Besides Towers upon the Walls of both Cities; the Tower of Meah; the Tower of
Hananeel; Neh. XII. 39. Zech. XIV. 10. on the East side of the City, between
the Tower of Meah, and the corner gate, Neh. III. 1. the Tower of the Furnaces,
Neh. III. 1, 11. and Chapter XII. 38, 39. and others.

And Valleys about it; as Jer. XXXI. 40. the Valley of the dead bodies, under
Mount Golgotha, West-North-West of the City: and the Valley of Ashes; likely
that came from the Altar of Burnt-Offerings: the Valley of Jehoshaphat on the
East, and the Valley of the sons of Hinnom also; the Valley of Savey, or the
Kings Vale or Dale on the South; and the Valley of Rephaim or Giants, on the
South-West.

And Fields mentioned about it, the Fullers field on the South, Esaias VII. 1.
and the Porters field, or Acheldama, on the South-East, Jer. XVIII. 2. and XIX.
2. and XXXI. 40. Matthew. XXVII. 7. And Hills about Jerusalem were, Mount Olivet
on the East; Mount Calverie or Golgotha on the West-North-west, Mount Gihon
West, Mount Gareb North, Ier. XXXI. 39.

The Brook Kidron did run on the East Side of Jerusalem; And the Fountain of
Siloam, or waters of Gihon, on the West.

Pooles, two of note were near Jerusalem, Neh. III. 15, 16. The upper Poole of
Siloah, called also the old Poole, and Kings Poole; on the South, 2 Kings
XVIII. 17. Esaias VII. 2. and XXXVI. 2. or South-West corner: receiving its water
from the river Gihon. And the Lower, of which Esaias XXII. 9. 2 Chronicles. XXXII. 30.
which was made long after, Neh. III. 16. on the West: and drew water from the
upper.

sanctified it] This sanctification of this Sheep-gate, built by the High
Priest, and his brethren, is deemed by some to be extraordinarily ratified and
graced with that miraculous gift of healing from this time vouchsafed to the
Poole of Bethesda close by this Gate: of which mention is made, John V. 2.

cover not their iniquity] See the Observations on Psalm. Annotations on this
text of Nehemie.

unto the half] Of the height of the Wall.

a great cry] Of Oppressions in three sorts; verse. following: Their needs and
wants, which made them liable to these oppressions, being the more occasioned
by their labors so much employed in the public work of the Walls.

usury] Ver. 10. Of this see the inhibitions, Exodus XXII. 25. Lev. XXV. 36, 37.
Deuteronomy 23. 19, 20. Ezekiel. XVIII. 8. 13, 17. And Gods judgments against it, Prove.
XXVIII. 8. Ezekiel. XXII. 12, 13. Psalm. XV. V. Yet the word is used sometimes in a
larger sense, and lawful way; as Matthew. XXV. 27. Luke XIX. 23. And so Esaias
XXIV. 2. Jer. XV. 10. And to a stranger the Jews might lend upon usury, Deuteronomy.
XXIII. 20.

even this day] Without delay: Genesis XVII. 23.

hundredth part] Which seems to be that which they received for use and
interest; likely the hundredth part by the month of what they lent.

require nothing] Here is more then was asked;

an oath] See the Observations on Hos. IV. 15.

Shook my lap] See such like Rites used Luke IX. 5. Acts XIII. 51. and XVIII.
6. 1 Kings IV. 29, 30.

forty Shekels] Five pounds happily each day,

daily] Yet Solomon's exceeded far, Kings IV. 22, 23.

Ono] A Valley, Benjamin, chap. XI. 35. 1 Chronicles. VIII. 12. not far from
Jerusalem.

the fifth time] Thinking to prevail by impudent importunity.

their King] A charge of high treason. Ezra. IV. 12, 13. John XIX. 12.

Shemajah] His vile hypocrisy, Nehemiah, and his godly proceedings.

Elul] About our August.

in fifty and two dayes] Wondrous speed. See the Annotations. This was in the
twentieth or one and twentieth year of Artaxerxes, and first year of Nehemiah's
Government.

Nobles of Judah] Guilty likely some way in the matter of marrying strange
wives, ver. 18.

These are the children] See the Observations on Ezra*

And some] These Contributions differ from those Ezra II. 68, 69. And were made
at another time, Nehemie gathered the Nobles and Rulers together, ver. 5.

seventh moneth] Beginning with the Autumnal Equinoctial, and was at first the
first month, but changed, Exodus XII. 1, 2. The Jews being then in their
Cities; gathered themselves to Jerusalem, ver. 5. and chap. VIII. 1, 2.

seventh moneth] See more of this in the Annotations on 1 Kings VIII.
Observations on Lev. XXIII. ver. 24. This was in the first year of Nehemiah's
Government.

Also Ieshuah] Here are thirteen in several places, at the same time with Ezra,
ver. 12.

Wept] As weeping at Prayer, Ezra X. 1. So here weeping at Preaching, ver. 11.

Second day] Of this seventh month.

feast] On the fifteenth day, Levit. XXIII. 34. Deuteronomy. XVI. 13.

roof of his house That were flat, and most likely leaded. Deuteronomy. XXII. 8. 2 Samuel XI. 2. Ier. XIX. 13. and XXXII. 29. Matthew. X. 27. 2 Kings XXIII. 12. Zeph.
I. 5.

Done so] Making such Booths; ver. 18.

Eighth day] Which likewise was enjoined by the Law, Levit. XXIII. 36.

twenty and fourth day] The second day after the Feast of Tabernacles was
ended.

separated themselves] They had not yet fully performed what they had solemnly
covenanted, Ezra X. 3. or soon fell into that sin again, chap. XIII. 23, 24.
And were also under the guilt of the breach of that Commandment, Deuteronomy. XXIII.
3. Hereupon they make an ample Confession of sin of their fathers, and their
own, in this Chapter; and solemnly renew their Covenant with God for amendment,
in the next Chapter.

One fourth part] Which is three hours; viz. those from our nine to twelve, in
reading and expounding.

another fourth part] From twelve to three; in prayer, confessing, and
worshipping: all the time between the morning and evening sacrifice spent in
those two.

Ieshua] Here are eight,

bread water] 1 Cor.

Appointed a Captaine] This explaines that, Number. XIV. 4.

Seraiah] Chap.

entered into a curse] As by Covenant, Judge. XXI. 18.

to observe] The matter of the Covenant: set forth afterward in seven main
branches.

third part of a Shekel] A new Ordinance for this time, and present necessity.

year by year] As so bound by the Law.

Shall be with the Levites] See Number.

take Tythes] Or rather give Tithes.

lots] See the Annotations on Jonah I. Nehemiah's Government.

to dwell] Chap. VII. 4 the inhabitants few: therefore here is care taken to
increase the number: and by lot to take one out of ten; beside Volunteers.

Solomon's servants] See the Observations on 1 Kings IX. 21.

at Jerusalem dwelt] The inhabitants of Jerusalem after the Return are
recroded here; Chron. IX. But with much variation. And many more are recorded
in that of 1 Chr. IX. as intending there al promiscuously, both such as were
chosen by Lot, and also Volunteers. And moreover there is mention made of
Ephraimites, Menaschites, Zerachites, and others which are not once named here.
And also the account was taken likely at another time after the first Record in
Nehemie. chap. VII. 5, etc.

Ophel] See the Observations on 2 Chronicles. XXVII. 3.

over the businesse] These for the inward business of the house of God, ver.
16. had the oversight of the outward business of the house of God, 1 Chronicles.
IX. 15, 16. and chap. XXVI. 29.

the Kings commandment] As formerly, Ezra VI. 8, 9. and Ezra VII. 2, 24. So
here by the Kings grant to Nehemiah.

Villages] From the inhabitants of Jerusalem, Judah, ver. 25, -- 30. Then in
Benjamin, ver. 31, -- 36.

And of the Levites] Cities, Judah, and Benjamin, for the necessary use of
instructing and teaching the people.

Priests] The chief of them, ver. 7. that came up with Zerubbabel, and were in
the days of Ieshua; Ezra II. 36, -- 39. and might well be there left out,
without blame.

The Levites] The chief of them, in the foresaid time; ver. 8, 9.

Ieshua Catalogue or Series of the High Priests from Ieshua or Joshua, to the
end of the Persian Empire, Cyrus to Alexander the Great; in six generations,
ver. 10, 11. Of these, Eliashib was allied to Tobia; and Ioiada to Sanballet;
both alients, and enemies to the Jews, chap. XIII. 4, 5, 28, 29. And Iaddua
the last of them has his name inserted here by some Prophet, after the days
of Ezra, and Nehemiah too, specialy if Nehemiah be the man that came up with
Zerubbabel; as has been said in the Observations upon the beginning of this
Book. See them.

days of Iojakim] The son of Ieshua. (those in his fathers time being
supposed to be now dead) are set down; in number twenty, from ver. 12. to 21.
These relate to those ver. 1, -- 7. Yet the number of the Courses of the
Priests appointed by David was twenty four, 1 Chronicles. XXIV. 7, 18. That the
number of the Priests were now but few, that place Ezra VIII. 15. does import.

The Levites] The chief Fathers of them;

recorded] And so to be found registered by name in the public records; so as
they need not here to be set down again.

also the Priests] They likewise so recorded; and so not needful to be here
recited.

Darius] Darius Codomannus; the last Persian Emperor, conquered by Alexander
the Great.

in the Book of the Chronicles] 1 Chronicles. IX. 14, 15, 16. seem to be related to
in these words,

Porters] See 1 Chronicles. XXVI. and chap. IX.

Nehemiah] It seems hereby that Joshuah the High Priest was dead before
Nehemiah came as Governor into Judea; Ezra with his Commission.

Dedication of the wall] The former Genealogies and Records of the Priests and
Levites seem to be insisted upon, Nehemiah's Government.

purified] See the Annotations.

I brought up] The manner of the Dedication of the wall was thus; The wall was
thick and broad; Nehemiah appointed two great companies, consisting of Priests,
Levites, Princes, and People. They entered upon the wall about the middle of the
West wall, near the Dung-gate. And there the two companies parted. And each
went as in Procession in this Order; The one company had Ezra the Priest and
Scribe before them. And other Priests after him, founding their Trumpets. After
them the Levites, playing on sacred musical instruments; and singers of them,
that sang with a loud voice; All sounding forth Gods praise, and their own
thankfulness and joy, ver. 31, -- 42. After them the Princes and Rulers. After
them the People. And last of all, some great Prince, likely next in degree to
Nehemiah. And this company thus went on the right hand Southward by the
Fountain Gate; and about the City of David, and all along the South-wall, even
unto the Watergate on the East. The other company went in like equipage; and
Nehemiah himself the last of them. And they made their Procession on the left
hand North-wards, from beyond the Tower of the Furnaces, even unto the Broad
wall. And all along the North-side, from above the Gate of Ephraim, and above
the Old-gate; and above the Fish-gate, and the Tower of Hananeel, and the Tower
of Meah, even unto the Sheep-gate, on the East; And they stood still in the
Prison-gate. The two companies somewhat beyond this Gate met together, that
they might in order descend from this East-wall, to go into the House of God.
And likely it was from the Watergate on the East-wall; For the street it
opened upon, was one of the eminentest, and of greatest receipt in the City,
deemed to be that of Millo, which lay between the Temple on Mount Morea, and
the Palace on Mount Zion, by which the King and Courtiers did usualy pass to
and fro, Neh. III. 26. and VIII. 3, 16. 2 Chronicles. XXIX. 3, 4. and XXXII. 6.

Ezra] Some other Ezra.

Ezra the Scribe] That famous Ezra.

Gate] Of the Gates, and Towers in this Procession mentioned, Observations on
chap. III. 1.

great sacrifices] As in like cases of joy and thankfulness: Chr. XXIX. 21. 1
Kings VIII. 62, 63.

for the treasures] 1 Chronicles. Hezekiah's time, 2 Chr. XXXI. 4, 5, 11. See again,
Neh. XIII. 12, 13.

And the Levites sanctified them unto] The Levites paid to the Priests the
tithes of all their tithes, Number. XVIII. 26, -- 30.

On that day] Nehemiah, between the end of the first, and beginning of his
second Government.

written] Deuteronomy. XXIII. 3. See the Observations on that text.

they met not] As Melchizedek did, Genesis XIV. 17.

separated] See that Ezra chap. Neh. IX. 2. and chapter X. 30. and chap. XIII. 23,
-- 30. So difficult was this point of the Reformation; and so ready they to
relapse into this sin.

a great chamber] Pulling down the Partitions,

I cast forth] And so ver. 9.

had not been given] This, Nehemiah's absence to have been more then a year.

Sabbath] See the Annotations on Jer.

dark] The sooner, because of the hills about Jerusalem:

some of my servants] That the Merchants might not thrust in amongst those that
came to the Service in the Temple.

the Gates] The Gates of the Temple;

swear] And so they had sworn before, chap. X. 29, 30.

sons of Jojada] His grandchilde, Menasche, and brother of Jaddua the High
Priest, as Josephus writes, Antiq. lib. 11. c. 7.

I chased him from me] This argues this Nehemiah not to be that man mentioned,
Ezra II. 2. that came up with Zerubbabel: and yet to live to a very great age,
whether he were the Penman of this Book; or else this clause inserted by some
other Prophet. See the Observations on the beginning of this Book.

Remember me] So likewise, ver. 14. and 22. and chap. V. 19. He pleads not here
any merit of his own, but all he pleads is for Gods mercy sake; all goodness
in him still proceeding from Gods mere grace. He does cheer up himself in
this, in the sincerity and integrity of his heart, and the effects thereof, as
fruits and sound proofs of the truth of Gods graces in him, whereupon he
further with comfort expects more mere mercy to come from the Lord.

Esther.
THE Book of Esther contains an History of nine years, expressed in the reign
of Ahasuerus; viz. the third of Ahasuerus, chap. I. 3. the seventh, chap. II.
16. and the twelfth, chap. III. 7. In which twelfth year are mentioned the
first month, chap. III. 7, 12. the third month, chap. VIII. ver. 9. and the
twelfth month, chap. III. 7. 13. and chap. VIII. 12. and chap. IX. 1, 13, 14,
15, 17, 21. And some more years in his reign afterward are noted
indefinitely, chap. X.

In this Book only of all the Scripture, there is no mention made of God, nor
his Name once used. The Book of Canticles speaking much of Christ the
Bridegroom.

Ahasuerus] Heb. Ahasuerosh. It is doubted which of the Persian Monarchs this
was. The LXX. still name him in their Translation Artaxerxes. Others take him
to be Xerxes. Others fix their several fancies upon sundry others of the
Persian Monarchs. But the greatest probability is for Darius Hystaspis; who
first extended the bounds of that Empire so far and wide, and over so many
Provinces; and married Atossa the daughter of Cyrus, called Vasthi, ver. 9, who
was the third King of Persia; omitting Darius the Mede, before Cyrus; and the
Magus Smerdis, not worthy the reckoning; and was next before Xerxes, that
fourth and rich King, Dan. XI. 2. See the Observations on Esther II. 5. This
Ahasuerus in his third year makes that Imperial Feast of one hundred eighty
seven days; And therein that good Law for drinking, as most take it; And at
the end of it, he deposes Vashti, by the learned thought to be the daughter of
Cyrus, chap. 1. In his fourth year Haggai, and Zechariah do prophecy: In his
sixth year the Temple is built: In his seventh year, chap. II. 16, 17. he
marries Esther. After promotes Haman; And in his twelfth year hangs him, chap.
III. 7. and VII. 10. And about his twenty sixth year he imposes that tribute,
chap. X. as Historians do account.

Shushan] The chief City of the Assyrian Empire was Nineve: Babylon: of the
Persian, Shushan, and Ecbatana: of the Grecian, diverse; as the divisions of it
were: of the Roman, Rome. Of Shushan, see more on Neh. I. 1.

according to the Law, none did compel] Compel; or restrain rather. For so a
learned Divine renders the word, and sense of the place; That the drinking was
according to the Kings Law, not of the Kingdom, but of all the Officers of his
house; or that the Officers should give them royal wine, such as the King
himself used, and that in abundance, according to the state of the King when
now in this Feast the Kings purpose was to show the riches of his glorious
Kingdom, and the honor of his excellent Majesty; that none therefore of his
officers should restrain, inhibit, or hinder it, but give to every one of the
guests freely and bountifully what wine, and as much, and as often as he
desired; that as no restraint, so no complaint should be to the contrary.

a feast] The greatness of his Empire was, ver. 1. and is also Chapter VIII. 9.
See that, Dan. VI. 1. Here is the greatness of his Feast; and chap. II. 18.
And great was his riotous luxury in the Purification of the Virgins, chap. II.
12.

beds] Beds whereon they feasted; chap. VII. 8. Beds, i. e. bedsteads of gold
and silver. And Amos VI. 4. Beds of Ivory. Those for cost and beauty. That of
Ogs, Deuteronomy. III. 1^. for largeness.

On the seventh day] On the seventh day of that Feast, ver. 5.

refused] She might have made some fair excuse: ver. 17.

his anger burn] See the Annotations on Dan. III. 19.

wise men] Wise men in State affairs, ver. 14. Such are Kings Counselors. Such
as those, Ezra VII. 14. and 1 Chronicles. XII. 32. men gathering wisdom by
observation of times and seasons, for passages of State, in ages past and
present: and so the ablest to give counsel and judgment, the fittest for wise
plots and projects. Such were still of great use in all Nations. We find
mention of wise men, chap. VI. 13. Esaias XIX. 11, 12. and XXIX. 14. Jer. X. 7.
and chap. L. 35. Matthew. II. 1. And such a great Politician, a man expert in
State-skill; was Achitophel in his time, 2 Samuel XVI. 23. and Jonathan, 1 Chr.
XXVII. 32. and others, ver. 34. Of such we read, Prove. XV. 22. Esaias I. 26. and
chap. III. 3. Micah IV. 9.

according to Law] Thus he keeps close to the Law, ver. 13. notwithstanding his
burning anger.

deed of the Queen] Examples have in them a kind of (...); magnates, men, or
women, are in a sort magnetes, loadstones, by their example to dray on others.

among the Lawes] Irrevocable, chap. VIII. Dan. VI. 8, 12, 15.

Let there be] To divert his mind from Vasthi; and to prevent displeasure from
him, and her, against those who any wise did counsel and animate him against
her, if he should repent, and she be restored to favor. See Dan. VI. 24.

to the house of the women] Ver. 14. Concubines: Hege, or Hegai, ver. 8. the
Keeper of the first: Shaahgaz, the Keeper of the second, ver. 14.

purification] ver. 12.

Mordecai] This might well be that Mordecai, Zerubbabel, Ezra II. 2. And
evinceth this Ahasuerus to be Darius Hystaspides; and not Xerxes, or
Artaxerxes; because he and not Kish, was the man that was carried captive with
Jechoniah, ver. 6. And so he lived above sixty years in the Captivity; two
years under Darius Medus; seven under Cyrus; seven under Cambyses; one under
Smerdis; twelve under Darius Hystaspis, when Haman conspired against the Jews,
chap. III. 7. And so he was eighty nine years old at that time; besides the age
that he was of, when he was carried away captive; and the time that he lived
after that conspiracy. All which may well stand together. But if by Ahasuerus
be meant Xerxes, then instead of those eighty nine, we must reckon one hundred
thirty five, that is, adding to them twenty four more of Darius Hystaspis, and
twelve of Xerxes: which, together with his age before his captivity; and after
the said conspiracy, intimated chap. X. would make him outlive the age of men
in that age of the world.

Hadassah] Not the same with Atossa or Vashti who was the daughter of Cyrus;
Atossa for Esther: But this Hadassa is Esther: called so, as may seem from the
Myrtle-tree, dedicated by the Paynims to Venus; or from (...), the Star of
Venus.

his Uncles daughter] So Mordecai and Esther were cosen-germans,
brothers-children.

best of the house] Best places and rooms in that house.

twelve moneths] Many were purifying together.

the turne] Which was in the fourth year since Vasthi was put away;

Tebeth] The Jews after their return from the Babylonish captivity used the
Chaldee and Persian names of months. Tebeth our December, our tenth month,
most what answers; they beginning the year at the vernal equinoctial.

Queene] The year after the Temple was finished, Ezra VI. 15.

the second time] To what ends then gathered,

the Agagite] Ver. 10. Likely of the royal stock of Agag: but sure an
Amalakite. Of whom see Exodus XVII. 14, 16. Number. XXIV. 7, 20. Deuteronomy. XXV. 17, 19.
1 Samuel XV. 2, 3, 8. Ever bitter enemies to the Jews, ver. 10. See the
Annotations on this text.

King had so commanded] Commanded more then ordinary bowing and reverence;
Persia themselves, more then was fit for any mortal man to have, a kind of
Divine reverence and worship, which made some Heathen men themselves, as Conon
the Athenian, not to yield unto it.

bowed not] In that sort. His pious spirit would not stoop to it, could not
brook it: And the rather because Haman was of that cursed stock, which God
would have rooted out for their bitter emnity against the Jews. Yet Mordecai's
humility appears in returning to the Kings gate, his ordinary standing and
calling, presently after his so high advancement in chap. VI. 6, -- 12.

had told them that he was a Jew] This he did to satisfy them, Haman to such
wrath.

all the Jewes] Wrath raging,

Nisan] Nisan is the Chaldee name, And Abib the Hebrew name, March does
mostwhat answer. In which month the Lots were cast that showed Adar the
twelfth month, to be the luckie month for executing that bloody Decree. The
Commandment for which bloody butchery, was issued forth on the thirteenth day
of the foresaid Nisan, chap. III. 12.

from month to moneth] All this was or might be done in one day.

Adar] Whereunto our February mostwhat answers; as beginning on the eleventh
day of our month.

scattered abroad] Not into Babylon only, Persia, and all the many Provinces of
it: And there remained behind after the Proclamation of Cyrus, and the Return
made with Zerubbabel, Ezra II. Amighty scattering, though this comprehend the
ten Tribes also; And a shameful neglect of the Jews, in not Returning.

to suffer them] Lest they infect and infest the Kings good subjects.

I will pay] The Jews paid great tributes to the King. Haman would pay this
great sum

Ten thousand Talents] The ten thousand Talents, at three hundred seventy five
pound the Talent, comes to 3750000. See Observations on Eoxd XXXVIII. 24.

to the hands] Of the Kings treasurers.

his Ring] See chap. Genesis XLI. 42. Luke XV. 22. 1 King. XXI. 8. Dan. VI. 17.

given unto thee] The grace of Favorites.

first moneth] All haste used.

young and old] Monstrous cruelty.

twelfth moneth] Delayed so long, because of the lot, ver. 7. else folly in
Haman to have made so long a delay. Gods Providence seen in ordering the lot
so as there might be so long a time between the decree and the execution, for
the using of means to prevent it.

for a prey] To encourage the enemies and murderers. Which prey the Jews, in
their case, punctualy abstained from, chap. 8. 11. and chapter IX. 10, 15, 16.

sent raiment] That he might be fit to come into the Court, ver. 2. and unto
her.

who is not called] This custom and law was partly for state and honor,

deliverance arise] Mordecai's faith and confidence.

but thou] Mordecai's peremptorinesse with Esther in such a case of extremity,
ver. 13. And assuring her of certain danger and destruction from God, if she
insisted on pretended danger from the King.

three days, night or day] Of Fasting, see the Annotations on Joel I. 14. This
length of time might be endured in that hot Country; and in a case of such
extremity: yet see chap. V. 1. Haman might well know of the Jews fasting and
mourning in Shushan: But not of this of Esthers and her maids.

likewise] But not three whole days, chap. V. 1.

and if I perish] She might suspect her countenance less beautiful upon her
Fasting; and remember the Kings rigor against Vasthi: yet this is her pious
resolution. See Genesis XLIII. 14.

on the third day] Shushan continued the Fast.

his royal throne] She takes the time, when most likely she might find the
King, and have access.

half of the Kingdome] Again, ver. 6. and chap. VII. 2. So Herod, Mark VI. 23.
a kind of Proverbial speech; not literaly to be taken.

the King and Haman] Both together,

to morrow] Gods secret and overruling hand of Providence herein.

nor moved for him] It seems less respect used now then before; Haman belies
him. And hither Mordecai comes, now without sackcloth, on the third day of the
Feast; upon just causes no doubt.

of fifty Cubits high] Monstrous high;

on that night] Gods wondrous Providence. Sam. XXIII. 27. 1 Kings XXII. 34.
Seen, as in Esthers putting off her Petition to the next day; so here; in his
ordering the Kings waking; and hearing the Chronicles read, That so the
advancement of Mordecai might intervene. Of Gods Providence, see in the four
living Wights, and in the Wheels, Ezekiel. I. 5, -- 25. and X. 12.

read] Likely reading to one in bed makes him sleep the sooner.

to Mordecai the Jew] So that the King knew Mordecai to be a Jew; Haman against
them; and yet thus honors him.

nothing fail] Yet the Crown is not mentioned, ver. 11.

Then took Haman] Without any replies, excuses, or objections made.

begun to fall] One Favorite falls at the rising of another.

yet talking] High time it was considering the business already past on that
day.

could not countervaile the Kings damage] ways very advantageous to the
Persian Monarchs; as the Israelites were to Pharaoh in Egypt.

upon the bed] For the banquet, chap. I. 6.

will he force] Likely Haman might clasp her feet in his hands, to show the
earnestness of his Petition for his life, that he would not let her go without
granting him some favor. See 2 Kings IV. 27. Matthew. XXVIII. 9.

covered Hamans face] See Job IX. 24. 2 Samuel XV. 30. Ezekiel. XII. 6, 12. as
unworthy to see the Kings face,

hang] The Kings word in those days was warrant enough.

pacified] He was not sorry for it afterward.

On that day] Chapter were done.

the house] And his estate, as escheated to the King.

came before the King] As one of those, chap. I. 14.

had told] And so the Kings kinsmanby marriage.

Esther spoke yet again] Esthers zealous care for the safety of Gods people the
Jews still appears, Hamans hanging, and Mordecai's advancement, in the
seconding of her Petition on their behalf, with kneeling, and tears, formerly
not mentioned to be used by her to the King.

golden Scepter] She ventures again to go in uncalled, chap. IV. 11. and chap.
V. 2.

write ye] This is another way. Chapter I. 19.

third moneth] Two months, and ten days after Hamans Decree; chap. III. 12.
The Lots were cast in the first month, and twelfth year of Ahasuerus, chap.
III. 7. And the Decree issued out the thirteenth day of that month, ver. 12.
And did stretch even to the Jews in Jury, ver. 6, 8, 13. And the execution of
it was to be on the thirteenth day of Adar, the twelfth month following. But
the Edict on their behalf issued forth on the twenty third day of the third
month Sivan, i. e. two months and ten days, after Hamans bloody Edict.

Sivan] Whereunto our May most answers.

and unto the Jewes] Whom it so much concerned.

crown of gold] See chap.

became Jewes] Proselytes,

as sought their hurt] As assaulted them; chap. VIII. 11. and chap. IX. 16.

smote all their enemies] Wonder that they durst rise against the Jews,
Mordecai for them; see ver. 3.

in Shushan] These likely of Hamans faction;

to do tomorrow] It may be necessity to preserve the lives of the Jews in
Shushan, Haman, his sons, and others that were slain, might move her to this
Petition; so to rid their hands of all their enemies.

75000] It argues a great height of malice against the Jews, Hamans ten
sons, and others in Shushan, even on a second day; and so many in all the
Kings Provinces, durst so assault the Jews, that in their own defense they
killed in all seventy five thousand eight hundred, likely most Amalekites;
considering the Kings Edict for the Jews, and the power of the Queen, and
Mordecai, with the King, as has been said: yet the Jews laid not their hands
on the prey and spoil, though granted to them by the King chap. VIII. 11.
chap. IX. 10, 15, 16. to show they did it not for covetousness; but to
preserve their own lives.

Mordecai wrote] Some extend this to the whole Book: ver. XXIII. 29. And herein
the power of the Church is seen in Ordaining set annual Feasts, ver. 27. 29,
31. And so for Fasts, Zech. VII.

Purim] i. e. Lots. Annotations on Jonah I. 7.

the matters of the fastings, and their cry] The occasions that were given of
their fastings, and cries, by which they obtained such a blessing. Some take
this as a part of the Ordinance and Decree, to fast on the thirteenth day: And
allege for it the practice of the Jews to this day.

in the Book] Some public record.

a tribute] We read of a release, chap. II. 18. whether the Jews, by
Mordecai's means were released of this Tribute, the Scripture expresses not.

Job.
THE Book of Job is a true History, accompanied fully with all the
circumstances of a true History, from first to last: and attested, Ezekiel. XIV.
14. and Jam. V. 11.

This Book is written, in the judgment of some, in Prose, to chap. III. v. 3.
In Verse; thence, to chap. XLII. ver. 6. And then again concludes in Prose,
thence to the end.

Job lived most likely when the Israelites were in Egypt; His age being one
hundred and forty years after his Affliction was ended: and he having seven
sons, and three daughters; and being the greatest of all the men of the East,
before his Affliction began; Job XLII. 16. and I. ver. 2, 3.

Jobs patience is wonderful; and so highly commended by the holy Ghost, Jam. V.
11. His Impatience too much accused, as by his friends then, so by some others
now; not weighing the burden of his Afflictions, outward, and inward; from
heaven, earth, and hell; and withal his fair clearing of God, and his justice;
and his full acknowledgement of his own sinfulness; though not of that
Hypocrisy wherewith his friends did falsely charge him, chap. VII. 20, 21. and
IX. 2, 3. 14, 15, 20, 21. and XIII. 26. and XIV. 17. and XXVII. 5, 6. and XXXI.
6. 33, 35, 36, 37. and XXIII. 10. and XIII. 15. and IX. 12.

Jobs three friends most likely were of the posterity of Abraham, viz. Eliphaz,
and Zophar of the posterity of Esau, Genesis XXXVI. 11, 40. Bildad of Abraham's
race by Ketura Genesis XXV. 2. 1 Chronicles. I. 32. And Elihu the fourth, of the race
of Nahor, Abraham's brother, Genesis XXII. 21.

Eliphaz, Bildad, and Zophar, speak in order, one after another; Eliphaz and
Bildad, thrice; Zophar, twice. To every one of which, Jobs Answers are annexed
and interposed.

Elihu speaks after they ceased, without any answer made by Job to him.

Jehovah speaks last of all; And Orders all.

Uz] Uz in Idumea, Arabia bordering upon it. So called from Uz the son of
Dishan, of the lineage of Seir, Genesis XXXVI. 28. Of this we read, Lam. IV. 21.
Jer. XXV. 20. Or in that part of Arabia the Desert, near to Chaldea, where Job
had such bad neighbors, the Chaldeans on the one side, and the Sabeans on the
other, chap. I. 15. 17. We read of Kings of the Land of Uz, Jer. XXV. 20. And
of Uz, the grandchilde of Shem, Genesis X. 22, 23. And of Vz, the son of Nahor,
Abraham's brother, Genesis XXII. 21.

three thousand Camels] When God blessed his latter end, chap. XLII. 12. a
wondrous number for one man. They were numerous, and of much use, in the
Eastern Countries. Fifty thousand taken from the Hagarites, 1 Chronicles. V. 20, 21.
The Midianites used very great multitudes of them in war; and put ornaments,
and chains of gold about their necks, Judge. VII. 12. and chap. VIII. 21, 26.
Some of them were swift; all, for burden, with bunches on their backs, fit for
that purpose; but not fit to go through the eye of a needle. David himself had
a special officer, only over his Camels, 1 Chronicles. XXVII. 30.

East] Whither Abraham sent his sons, Genesis XXV. 6.

and sanctified them] Sent to them, Number. X 1. 18. Exodus XIX. 10. Josh. III. 5.
and chap. VII. 13. 2 Chronicles. XXIX. 5.

continualy] On those days when their feasting was gone about.

the sons of God] The good Angels, Job XXXVIII. 7.

to present themselves] See 1 Kings XXII. 19. This is spoken after the manner of
men, as Romans III. 5.

among them] Not that Satan comes into Heaven. The similitude is taken from
earthly Kings.

escaped alone] Satan spared him, Job might quickly hear it.

winde] a great whirlwinde.

young men] And daughters also. Satan by his Commission might have taken away
his wife also, as well as his children; But he left her to vex him.

shaved his head] Did it himself,

thither] Into the womb of our common mother the earth; ver. 20.

sinned not] Contrary to that of Satan. ver. 21. not curses, as Satan said,
ver. 11.

earth] He has no power in Heaven;

skin for skin] Any skin for his own; though even that of his children, chap.
I. 19.

for his life] To save his life and person free.

sore boiles] Satan's power,

Curse] Hebr. Bless. Either it is an ironical scoff at Jobs piety, Kadesh,
Levit. VI. 29. Deuteronomy. XXII. 9. And with the Greeks, (...); and the Latins,
Sacer, and sundry others do. And so Cursing is here meant; as chap. I. 11. and
1 Kings XXI. 10. Some conceive that the crime of Blasphemy was so odious and
execrable in those days, that men could not endure to hear it called by the
proper name; but though they had a word to express it by, yet they chose
rather to understand it by the contrary. So a Sodomite, and a Whore (our
English word may happily be rather Hoar, from Hire; as Meretrix, from Merces)
have their names in Hebrew from holiness, being both most unholy, Job XXXVI.
14. Genesis XXXVIII. 21, 22. Deuteronomy. XXIII. 18.

and knew him not] At first sight.

wept] When they came near, and knew him.

Seven dayes] The three friends silence for seven days and nights is
wonderful; Ezekiel. III. 15, 16. See Lam. II. 10. and III. 28.

After this] Job first breaks off that strange silence;

conceived] i. e. borne or brought forth.

Then Eliphaz] Here begins the first Onset of Jobs three friends. Eliphaz does
accuse Jobs faintness under present miseries: glance at his former hypocrisy:
maintain in the general, that no good man was ever so punished; showing the
prosperous state of the godly, and the plagues of God upon the wicked: and by
relating a fearful Vision, he seeks to humble the excellencies of man, and
justify God in his doings above him, chap. IV. Moreover, he hints, that no
Saint is so afflicted as Job; and he shows that the prosperity of the foolish
sinner is but momentany: advises Job to submit his cause to God; who does
wonderful things and unsearchable; against the evil, and for the good: and
that he despise not the chastening of the Almighty; who then shall and will
deliver and defend him, preserve and prosper him and his, chap. V. After Jobs
answer to this; Then Bildad does reprove him for it: does justify God in his
judgments: and that if Job will seek to him, and be upright, God, who does
confound the hope of the hypocrite, will prosper him, and fill his lips with
rejoicing, chap. VIII. After Jobs answer hereupon; Then Zophar reproves Job,
more then the other did, for his former answer, as justifying himself more then
God; showing that God exacts of him less then his iniquity deserved: that God
and his ways are unsearchable: But if Job will pray unto him, and put away
iniquity; then his future state shall become secure and glorious, chap. XI.

who can withold?] Hearing such,

Is not this] This, as a touchstone, shows that formerly they were but
counterfeits. Thus Eliphaz unwittingly plays Satan's part, chap. I. 9, 10, 11.
and II. 5.

Remember] Give one instance, Jobs friends, we must not take for Scriptural and
Canonical truths; though some of their speeches be cited elsewhere in
Scripture. True it is that they said thus, though all be not true that they
said; specialy their false charges against Job, and misapplying of things to
him, chap. XLII. 7.

Lion] Seven names of Lions in Scripture. Annotations on this text; and
Buxtorfs Lexicon.

Now a thing] A Vision,

Shall] The voice speaking, Eliphaz might misapply the speech of this Vision;
as himself, and his companions did many other good grounds.

Loe] There is no comparison between Angels and God,

Saints will thou turn?]

wrath] Impatience in man;

To set up] This might serve as an encouragement to Job.

yea in seven] From many,

thou shall know] Now Promises of Blessings do follow;

Lo this] Application of all to Job,

But Job answered] Here I will sum up together his first Answers to each of
the three friends; chap. VI. He renews the mention, and bemoaning of his
miseries, as insupportable: he wishes death: confesses his sinfulness; and
craveth pardon, chap. VII. He acknowledges man cannot contend with God; and
that he will not answer God, or contend to justify himself, though he were
righteous, which he is not; but makes supplication to his Judge. He says, God
destroys the perfect and the wicked; that his days are few; his sorrows are
great; that God will not hold him innocent; that he cannot answer God; yet
would willingly speak to him, if his rod, and terrors were taken away from
him, chap. IX. He will speak to God and say, wherefore do thou so contend
with me; and search after my sin? Thou know I am not wicked: Thy hands
have made me: If I be wicked, woe unto me; and if I be righteous, yet will I
not lift up my head; I am full of confusion; Thou huntest me as a fierce Lion:
Oh that I had not been borne. Cease then, that I may take comfort a little
before I die, chap 10. He reproves his friends for their pleadings against him:
He knows what they know, and say, viz. That God does all things in the
governing of the affairs and states of men; even of the great ones. chap. XII.
Again reproves his friends, as before; and checks them for pleading for God, in
a wrong manner: bids them hold their peace; that he may speak: professes his
trust in God; his uprightness, void of Hypocrisy; and that he shall be
justified: he desires of God to know his iniquity, for which he writes such
bitter things against him, Chap. XIII. He entreats God for favor by the
shortness of life, and certainty of death; though life once lost be
irrecoverable; yet he waighteth for his change: he complains that God watches
over his sin; and concludes that God prevails over man, chap. XIV.

Does the wild Asse] So neither do I complain, ver. 3, 4.

Can that] Can it with any pleasure?

Cut me off] His wealth and health were taken away before;

not concealed] But professed before others,

Is not] Any help in me,

Pity should] Here he strikes at Eliphaz; Chapter.

Tema] That part of Arabia where the posterity of Tema, Ishmaels race, Genesis
XXV. 15. did inhabit See Jer. XXV. 23.

Sheba] In Arabia Foelix, South from Judea; whose Queen came to Solomon. And
whereof we read Psalm. LXXII. 10. Esaias XLIII. 3. and LX. 6. Ier. VI. 20. Ezekiel.
VII. 22, 23. and XXXVIII. 13. These seem to be the posterity of Cush, by his
fourth son Raamah, Genesis X. 7. The Ethiopians were no remote neighbors from
them.

ye are nothing] Hebr. not, to it; i. e. ye are like to that brook, ver. 15.
See the like various reading, Chapter XIII. 15. Psalm. C. 3. Esaias LXIII. 9. Exodus
XXI. 8.

to reprove words] As if my speeches were words without matter,

my righteousness is in it] Ye shall find me no hypocrite, if ye consider
better.

shall come up no more] Into this world: chap. XIV. 12. and chap. XIX. 26, 27.

I will complaine] Men in anguish think it some ease to complain.

Am I a Sea] Too bold a speech from a creature to God,

not depart from me] To give me the least intermission of pain.

I have sinned] Though not by hypocrisy; ver. 21.

How long] He seems to cut off Job in his speaking;

If thy children] Sons; chap. I. 18, 19.

If thou were Would be, ver. 5, 7.

Though thy beginning was small] After thy repentance. chap. XLII. 11.

yesterday] See the Observations on Deuteronomy. XV. 17.

Can the rush] No more could Jobs and his childrens prosperity continue, Job
and his children to be.

Arcturus] Jobs skill in Astronomy. chap. XXVI. 7. 13. and in XXVII. 18. in
some Translations. See the Annotations on Esaias XIII. 10. And we see Astronomy
in Gods speech to Job, chap. XXXVIII. 31, 32, 33.

without cause] High speeches against God, ver. 22.

should not] An angry beginning likewise,

I am clean in thine eyes] Indeed no hypocrite,

secrets of wisdome] The hidden ways of his providence,

wild Asses colt] So foolish,

the wicked] Concludes with the misery of the wicked; Job to be such an one.

ye are the people] Ye all three. Observations on Josh. XI. 4. and on Amos IV.
4, 5.

who calls upon God] Either the mocked or mocker,

answers him] The mocker; whereas Job himself, the mocked, is not answered.

of robbers prosper] This Job proves at large.

earth] This English word may seem to come from the Hebrew word (...).

Does not the eare] So easy is this point of trial.

with the ancient] This may relate to that, chap. VIII. 8, 9, 10. And indeed it
should be so, chap. XXXII. 7. but is not always so, ver. 20. and XXXII. 9.

are his] And subject to his authority and power.

girdle] Brings them to a lower condition.

what ye know] This relates to chap.

to reason with God] Rather then with his friends; Zophar in his wish, chap.
XI. 5. because he could clear his own innocence, before him, who sees his
heart; and that he is no hypocrite, ver. 16. as his friends take him to be, by
Gods harsh dealing with him.

of lies] Against God,

Hear now] Bids them save their labor in speaking, ver. 5. And now hearken to
him, and his reasonings, for God, against them, and in defense of himself.

mock him?] Or seek to delude and beguile him;

accept persons Though it be Gods own person.

what will] What ever become of me. Sam. XVIII. 23.

my flesh in my teeth?] Grief and plagues enough to make me tear my flesh.

put my life] Every moment be in danger to die.

yet will I trust] Here the Cetib, not: And so the Reading and rendering may
rather be this, should I not trust in him? And thus the denying Interrogative
is equivalent to an affirming Enunciative. The like may well be admitted, Esaias
XLIX. 5, 6. And there are sundry Interrogatives found in Scripture where the
Negative is suppressed; as Job XX. 4. Genesis XXVII. 36. 1 Samuel II. 27, 28. 2 Samuel
XXIII. 19. Jer. III. 6. and XXXI. 20. Ezekiel. XX. 30. Amos VI. 2. And the
Masorets in like cases to this in Job, do usualy adscribe (...), to him; as
their Keri in the margin. And they use this liberty more in this one word, then
in any other in the Old Testament.

before him] To plead his cause with confidence,

I have ordered my Cause] He prepares for his trial before God.

justified] For the various significations of this word, see the Annotations
here.

Only] That he may have a fair trial.

then] I will go on in my plea.

Then call thou] He offers the choice to God,

and answer thou me.] This is too much for any man, or creature, to say to God.
Yet the extremity of his case brings him to this extremity.

How many] Here begins his Plea; Chapter. Let me know my charge; and condemn me
not before I be heard.

wherefore] If no heinous cause be alleged.

break a leaf] No honor to a Giant to break and bruise an infant.

a print upon] Followest me step by step;

woman] In the Hebrew,

And do thou] Chap. VII. 17, 18.

me into judgment with thee?] So great a God, summo jure, most rigorously,
with such a worm and wretch, and not to pity him; as if this were a maine
thing that God looked at in his providence.

who can] Why then am I thus singled out?

Turn from him] From plaguing him so sorely for sin,

hope of a tree] But an impossibility after man's death,

and where is he?] No where among the living.

As the waters] As the flood fed by those waters then decays; etc.

till the heavens be no more] As now they are;

shall he live again] As chap. XV. 11. Genesis XVII. 17. a wonder it is; yet true.

Thou will have a desire] Thus at that time it will appear; Jobs comfort.

For now] Job concludes in a passionate fit,

the mountain] The strongest creatures yield to thy power.

Thou prevailest] Applies it to man,

his soul] For the various acceptations of this word, Annotations here.

Then] Here begins the second onset of Jobs three friends. Job, reflecting on
them, they do only lay load upun him, as upon a wicked man; drawing ill
Conclusions from his Passionate Speeches; and insisting upon it still, That so
many, and great calamities, as fell upon him, befell to none but to ungodly
men: But they afford him not one Exhortation to Repentance, or one comfortable
promise, as formerly they had done, chap. V. 8, 17. and chap. VIII. 5, 20, 21.
and chap. XI. 13, -- 19.

And Job, in his Replies, the more sharply reproves them for their inhumanity,
and uncomfortablenesse toward him, in his distressed condition; which sad
estate he still sets out copiously; and that it ought to move them the more to
pity and commiseration. He refels their false position, whereupon they stood
so much, viz. the Prosperity of the Godly, and the Punishment of the Wicked
only; and shows, That many times the wicked greatly flourish, and the godly
extremely suffer. And he refutes the slanderous imputations fastened upon him
by reason of the strange grievousnesse of his afflictions; He asserts and
defends his own innocence, and contends more eagerly for his integrity,
against hypocrisy, then he did before: He comforts himself in the certain hope
of a glorious Resurrection hereafter: and moves them to Repent of their ill and
hard dealings against him.

and restrainest Prayer before God] By thy ungodly speeches do discourage
men from Praying to God.

that we know not?] See chap. XIII. 2.

what is man] Eliphaz does but repeat the same argument which he used before,
chap. IV. 17, 18, 19. And makes little against Job; who confesses as much. And
yet Bildad uses it again, chap. XXV. 4, 5.

unto whom] Unto which wise worthy men God gave a continuance of undisturbed
prosperity.

The wicked] Here follow those wise sentences, Chapter. The same in substance
he had said before, chapter IV. and V. But here are they more lively set forth.

and the number] How long the Oppressor shall live.

He runs upon him] God sets fiercely on him,

dwells in desolate] His luxury fore-runs his poverty. chapter.

Though I speak] Job acknowledges that all those things had, Eliphaz had said
do befall wicked men: and he instanceth in diverse particular afflictions,
wherein, and whereby he complains of his misery, and the harsh and fierce
dealings of God, and his friends, against him, to verse 17. Yet denies himself
to be an ungodly man; and by arguments makes it good, from verse 17. to the end
of the chapter.

a surety] Job would be glad of a Surety to be put in;

astonied] At this dealing of God with Job.

stir up himself] For me, against the hypocrite; to clear me, and themselves,
from such men: and make better use of mine afflictions; as in the verse
following.

my hope] He was sailed past the Cape of good hope,

for thee] Bildad bitterly reproves Job,

the light of the wicked] In a sharp and angry speech he lays out to the life
the miseries of wicked men, chapter. And so he does but enlarge what he had
said, chap. VIII. And seems to imply thereby that they had not charged Job
unjustly, seeing him lie under such judgments, as God did not inflict but upon
ungodly men. And here he deals not with him by exhortation, and promises; as
there he did; but seems also to imply and threaten these judgments to Job, as
unavoidable by him.

the firstborn of death] The most terrible kind of death, the King of
terrors.

How long] Here Job again blames his friends, ver. 2, 3.

And be it] By a fresh commemoration of his miseries, verse 23.

skin of my teeth] Of my lips,

Oh that my words] Fearing to find little comfort in his friends,

But ye] Job admonishes his friends to be well advised of their ill dealing
with him; Job, and will be found so in the end.

that the triumphing of the wicked is but short] Being driven from that part of
their argument, Zophar now insisteth upon this; That though it be so, Yet their
Prosperity is but for a moment, or short; and ruin and destruction shall
befall them. And this he pursues to the end of the chapter.

sweet in his mouth] Zophar seems to insist upon this similitude, verse 23.

bow of steele] Of the Bow, Annotations on Zech. IX. 13. and chap. X. 4. Here
is mentioned a Bow of steel. And so Psalm. XVIII. 34. such, it seems, were in
use.

Wherefore do the wicked live] Job overthrowes Zophars assertion of the short
prosperity of wicked men in this world, ver. 7. in their children, ver. 8. in
their families, ver. 9. in their wealth, ver. 10. in their pleasures, ver. 11,
12. in their life and death, ver. 13. yea though they were notoriously wicked
men, ver. 14, 15. yet their counsel, and course is far from Job, ver. 16.
And he shows that God does oftentimes break off their prosperity; and plagueth
them verse 17, -- 21. And that God deals both ways thus diversely with them,
out of his unsearchable wisdom, whereunto we cannot reach, verse 22, -- 26. He
concludes with an application of the premises to his own case; relating their
false doom of him, and his, upon their false grounds, ver. 27, 28. And
refelling the same, by the testimony of passengers themselves, and their better
judgment, that many wicked men live and die prosperously, and peaceably, 29 --
33.

Then Eliphaz] Here begins the third Onset, Eliphaz, and Bildad, only. Wherein
being convinced by Job of the falsehood of their grand plea and position;
Eliphaz now does charge him home with particular sins; tells him the
justification of himself, and his righteousness, cannot be profitable to God;
and Exhorts him to Repentance, with Promises of Mercy, chap. 22. And Bildad
having little more to say, Concludes with this, That neither Job, nor any man
can be justified with God; And therefore Job should not contend with God, as if
he had done him some wrong in afflicting him more then was fitting, chap. 25.

And Job in his Replies, longs yet to appear and plead before God, in
confidence of his mercy. He asserts his innocence against Eliphaz; and
promises to himself an happy issue, though for the present God do seem to him
inexorable. He shows that God often winketh at many gross wickednesses
committed by ungodly men, which God punishes not in this world, but suffers
them still to prosper and flourish, chap. XXIII. and XXIV. And checking Bildads
impertinencies, He speaks more magnificently of God Power, and Wisdom, then
Bildad had done, chap. XXVI. And seeing his three friends at a Nonplus, He
goes on the more confidently to maintain his Cause, and clear his own
innocence, against hypocrisy. He acknowledges that Gods judgments light on
ungodly men in this world, and that their Blessings are turned into Curses;
though not always, chap. XXVII. And this by Gods wonderful wisdom, which
passes man's deepest wisdom, and is unsearchable, and carries things far
above the reach of the wisest men; whose highest wisdom is to Fear the Lord,
chap. XXVIII. And Job, it seems after some intermission of speech, finding his
friends still silent, goes on, And in his last speech, bemoanes himself and
excuses his impatience, by his great fall from so great prosperity, chap.
XXIX. to so great misery, chap. XXX. And for conclusion, He stands upon the
clearing of his own integrity, much more then before. And that by a solemn
Protestation of his uprightness, and piety in sundry several duties, without
any gross wickedness committed by him, chap. XXXI.

for fear of thee? Lest thy wickedness should hurt him?

Is not] He charge Job home, and in particulars:

old way] Happily relating to the time of the Flood.

By the pureness of thine hands.] God will not only do good to thee,

but he is not there] I cannot so see and find him,

in one minde] To lay load on me.

that is appointed for me] In his infinite wisdom,

cut off] By death;

Why] Why may not God hide his times of punishing the wicked,

yet God] Calls them not to account for their foolish sinful actions.

the way of the Vineyards] He walks not in those ways where men use to
travel to their work,

He evil intreateth] The oppressor does so in this,

ears of corn.] The not pronouncing this word rightly did cost so many
Ephramites their lives, Judge. XII. 6.

peace in his high places.] Job.

How] Job ironicaly taunts Bildad.

Dead things] Job now makes a more majestical discourse of Gods infinite power,
and knowledge, Bildad had done; so that his speech was impertinent and
needless.

crooked Serpent] Some understand this of the Orbs;

God liveth] He further asserts and clears his own innocence against
hypocrisy, ver. 11. These words are in the form of an oath.

will he delight himself] Even in times of adversity? Job does so.

I will teach you] Even that which you so much insist upon; Chapter.

Surely] Job shows how far man's wisdom goes, ver. 12.

But where shall Wisdome] He puts a period to humane wisdom; ver. 13, 14. nor
gotten by any price, ver. 15 -- 19. by any living man, ver. 20, 21. But is
proper to God, who alone has it: and teaches man a more humble wisdom, the
best for him, ver. 23 -- 28.

Mereover] In this Chapter Job wishes for his former prosperity,

But now] Job bemoaneth his present misery; ver. 10. in deeds, to ver. 16. by
describing his own grief and pain by reason of his soars, to ver. 19. by Gods
rough handling of him; to ver. 25. by lamenting his woeful estate, and the sad
effects of it, though not so deserved, as he conceives; to the end of the
chapter.

I made] In this Chapter Job most of all does clear his innocence, ver. 1, --
12. from ill dealing with his servants, ver. 13, 14, 15. from unmercifulness
to the poor; or wronging the widow, 16, -- 23. from trusting in riches, ver.
24, 25. from Idolatry, ver. 26, 27, 28. from desire of Revenge, ver. 29, 30. or
unkindnesse to strangers; or hiding his own sins ver. 32, 33. or provoking and
wronging others, ver. 34 -- 37. or detaining other men's lands; or the hirelings
wages, ver, 38, 39, 40. And he annexeth several solemn imprecations against
himself, if all the premises were not so in truth.

or my mouth has kissed my hand] Kissing the Idols was Idolatry, King. XIX.
18. Hos. XIII. 2. The Sun and Moon being at such a distance, could not be
kissed; therefore Idolaters used to put their hand to their mouth, in a way and
sign of their idolatrous Kissing and worshipping of them.

Oh that we had of his flesh] The flesh of him that hated Job. Jobs domestics
provoked him to take revenge on his hating enemies; professing, themselves
could not be satisfied, no not though they had eaten them up quick. Yet Job
free from any revenge.

of Job are ended] Which he had with his three friends.

of Elihu] Elihu, Buz, the son of Nachor, Abraham's brother, Genesis XXII. 20,
21. who had been present all the while, taking occasion of the silence now on
all hands used; and being partly offended at some things passed, on either
side; He begins his speech; yet modestly excusing the necessity of it; And he
continues it in six Chapters. He speaks to Jobs friends, by way of Preface,
most for Attention chap. XXXII. To Job himself, after a like Preface, in four
several Orations: wherein he repeats diverse of Jobs sayings; yet with some
strainings of some of them; and gathering Collections out of them; and so
thereupon, blaming him; and answering them, chapter XXXIII. XXXIV. and XXXV. And in
the XXXVI. and XXXVII. chapters, He seeks to allay Jobs Complaints of God, with
a magnificent setting out of Gods justice, mercy, power, glory, and wisdom,
which Job seemed to obscure by his bitter complaining of Gods harsh proceeding
with him. Elihu speaks more uprightly and wisely in this cause, then Jobs three
friends had done; As appears, in that he stopped Jobs mouth, that he answers
nothing, though he gave him liberty three or four times to speak; And God
himself blames not him at all, as he does the other three friends.

God thrusts him down] God by his judgments on him, Job is an hypocrite and
wicked man: though none but God can thrust him down from his own immovable
confidence; which God may happily do by the efficacy of his words in the mouth
of Elihu; As in a like sense Joseph speaks, Genesis XLI. 16. And Daniel, chap. II.
28.

They were amazed] Thus Elihu speaks of Jobs friends;

wherefore Iob] Now Elihu speaks to Job. ver. 1, -- 7. He falls close to his
work, in that which follows.

surely thou] Here Elihu begins to charge Job with undiscreet speeches, ver. 9,
10, 11.

I am clean] This chardge seems gathered out of chap. X. 7. and chap. XVI. 17.
and XXIII. 10, 11. and XXVII. 5. And yet elsewhere Job acknowledged his
sinfulness.

Behold, he findes] This seems gathered out of chap. IX. 17. and XIII. 24, 27.
and XIV. 16, 17. and XVI. 9. and XIX. 11.

Behold, in this] Elihu's Confutation; from Gods greatness, giving not account
of any of his actions, ver. 12, 13. And therefore Jobs expressions against God
were too unsavory and irreverent: And from man's weakness, not apprehending
Gods ways of revealing his mind and will; nor Gods aim and end in his
proceedings with man; the issue, effects, and fruits of his chastisements;
which he sets down in particulars, ver. 14, -- 28. And sums up all together,
ver. 29, 30. And makes a Conclusion and application of this his first speech to
Job, ver. 31, 32, 33.

Furthermore] Elihu's second speech to Job, Chapter, wherein the Preface is,
ver. 1, -- 4.

Job has said] His charge against Job, and the haynousnesse of it; ver. 5, --
10. This seems gathered out of chap. XIII. 18. and XXIII. 10. and XXVII. 2, 6.
and XXXI. 1, etc. And again out of chap. IX. 22. and XXI. 7, 8. and XXX. 26.
where he complains, that God had handled him like an ungodly man; and would
not let him clear himself: And that God destroyed good men, as well as bad; and
prospered evil men, and afflicted him so fearfully.

Therefore hearken] His Confutation of Job, Jobs friends, ver. 10, -- 15. to
Job himself, ver. 16, -- 33. and to his friends again, ver. 34, -- 37. To Jobs
friends, he argues against Job, from Gods justice, ver. 10, 11, 12. And from
Gods absolute Authority and Power, ver. 13, 14, 15.

If now thou] To Job himself; Job of injury done to God, ver. 17, -- 31. That
he injuries God, he argues from Gods just government, ver. 17, 18. from the
effects of it, upon Princes, ver. 19. upon whole Nations, ver. 20, -- 23. upon
strong and stout men; With Gods end in such proceedings, ver. 24, -- 30. Then
he teaches Job how to carry himself better, ver. 31, 32, 33. And lastly he
turns his speech to Jobs friends again; being confident of their consent with
him, That Job has spoken foolishly.

Elihu spake] Elihu's third speech; Chapter.

Think thou] His charge against Job, ver. 2, 3. Job said, That the
righteousness of his cause, [not person] was more then that of Gods: which he
would gather by consequence out of Jobs words, ver. 3. and chap. IX. 22. and X.
15. See chap. XXXIV. 9.

I will answer] Elihu's Answer, Job. He shows that Jobs sin, or
righteousness cannot either hurt, or help God, ver. 4, -- 8. that the
Oppressed and afflicted cry; but not to God; and therefore he does not deliver
them, ver. 9, -- 13. And he applies this case to Job, ver. 14, 15, 16. Therein
withal seeming to refute a saying of Job, ver. 14. taken out of chap. XXIII.
9. by averring; that God will judge; that Job should trust in him; that because
he does not so, God does visit him in anger, though in the extremity of his
affliction Job so well heeds it not; And so, vainly multiplies words, without
knowledge.

Elihu] This is Elihu's last speech, and largest; Chapter. And herein, after
his Preface, ver. 2, 3, 4. He propounds to Job, and dilates upon Gods Wisdom,
Power, Justice, Mercy; the good he aims at in sending afflictions, ver. 5, --
15. He applies this last point to Job. telling him what might have been, if he
had carried himself well in this affliction, ver 16. What is on him, because he
did not, ver. 17. What will be, if he repent not, ver. 18, -- 21. He advises
him to remember himself, what God is, in himself, and in his ways, ver. 22,
23. And in his works; in the Meteors of the air, the rain, the clouds, the
lightnings, whereby he can work good to his, and hurt to his enemies; And
whereby Job should be moved to magnify him, and his infinite wisdom, rather
then to stand on his own innocence, and quarrel so much at his rigorous
dealing with him, ver. 22, -- 33.

At this also] Elihu proceeds on to speak of Gods works of Lightning and
Thunder; ver. 1 -- 5. Of the Snow; storms; Whirle-winde; Frost; Clouds; And
this either for correction, or for mercy. And that Job should weigh, and
wonder at all this, ver. 1, -- 14. These natural things far surpass the
knowledge of man: and much more Gods strange and various proceedings with the
sons of men: And therefore Job must not so censure God, though he be in such
misery. And Elihu further pursues this same point; with the use, and
application of it, to the end of his speech, ver. 15, -- 24.

Then the Lord] Here Jehovah himself, Job. And this continues in two majestical
speeches; far beyond those of Elihu for matter, and manner. And herein by his
manifold, and marvelous works chap. XXXVIII. and XXXIX. And particularly by his
creatures, Behemoth, chap. XL. and Leviathan, chap. XLI. he convinces Job of
ignorance, and of impotencie; and therefore that he should not take upon him to
contend with God; to condemn God, that himself might be righteous. To each of
which speeches there is adjoined Jobs humble and penitent submission. And
lastly the Lord prefers Job, and his Cause, before his three friends; Orders
their Submission, and Sacrifice, and Jobs Prayer for them; Accepts Job, and
blesses him, giving him as many sons and daughters, and twice as much in all
particulars of his substance and wealth, as he had before, chap. XLII.

answer thou me.] Job had desired this more then once: And Zophar too, chap.
XI. 5. Job had been right in the maine; yet some rash, if not raging speeches,
had escaped from him; complaining of God, and his justice, if not injustice, in
his dealing with him. For which, as Elihu before, so Jehovah here more calls
him to answer.

where wast thou] Thou that take upon thee to censure me, ver. 4, -- 7^ the
Sea, ver. 8, -- 11. And need I thy counsel now in governing all? Have thou
caused and commanded the morning, and dayspring to know his place? ver. 12, --
15. Know thou the springs, and depth of the Sea? the gates of death? the
breadth of the earth? where light and darkness dwells? the treasures of the
Snow, and Hail, ver. 16, -- 23? Know thou who causes and orders the
lightning and thunder; the Waters, and watercourse, the Rain; Ice; Profit?
ver. 24, -- 30. And yet take thou upon thee to know and censure the depth of
my ways, and wisdom? Can thou order the Influences, and Ordinances of
heaven? Or call for and command clouds, and lightnings, and rain? or give
wisdom to man? ver. 31, -- 38. Will thou hunt the prey for the Lion? or
provide the Raven his food? If not these things; then much less order me, and
my ways, and wisdom.

Know thou] Having spoken of the Lion, Chapter of the wild Goat; of the
Hind, ver. 1, -- 4. Of the wild Ass, ver. 5, -- 8. Of the Unicorne, ver. 9,
-- 12. Of the Peacock, and Ostrich, ver. 13, -- 18. Of the Horse, ver. 19, --
25. Of the Hawk, ver. 26. Of the Eagle, ver. 27, -- 30. God shows his power in
these; in making and ordering them; in his Provision for them, which men take
no care for, nor cannot effect; in the extraordinary strength, and other
qualities, which he has bestowed upon them, in some whereof they far excel
men. In all which particulars Jobs weakness, and insufficiency does more then
sufficiently appear* And will Job then contend and debate his quarrel with God?
this God? reprove him? or think to apprehend, or comprehend the invisible
reasons of his proceedings?

Moreover] Here the Lord calls upon Job to answer; chap. 13. 22.

Then Iob] Jobs Submission.

Once] His sin is already too great, in speaking presumptuously against Gods
proceedings.

Then] Here the Lord proceeds yet further to press Job, verse; and challenge
in the next; He reproves him thus; Will thou disanul my judgment? will thou
condemn me, that thou may be righteous? ver. 8. Will thou be like God? ver.
9. Then do as he does, ver. 9 -- 13. And so God will confess it, ver. 14.

Behold now Behemeth] The Lord bids Job consider of the Elephant; ver: 15, --
24.

Can thou] The Lord does further argue by an instance in Leviathan, Chapter.
And shows Jobs weakness to encounter and grapple with him by strength, ver.
1, -- 10. And applies it thus, Who then is able to stand before me? ver. 10, 11.

I will not] Here follows a magnifical description of the Whale; ver. 10, 11.
Yet Whales seem now-a-dayes to be by Art more easily caught and conquered,
then they were in Jobs days.

Then Job] Here Job makes a more full profession of his Repentance, ver. 1, --
6.

have I uttered] More then was fitting,

And it was so] Gods sentence upon Jobs three friends, ver. 7, 8, 9.

seven bullocks] A great sacrifice for sin.

a burnt offering] There is in Leviticus a difference between Burnt-Offerings,
and Sin, and Trespasse-Offerings; yet likely not known in Jobs time.

the Lord turned] The restitution and restoration of Job, after all his
misery, ver. 10, -- 17.

After this lived] His age shows probably that he lived about that time of the
Israelites being in Egypt.

Psalms.
PSALMS, Luke XXIV. 44. Or Book of Psalms, Luke XX. 42. Acts I. 20. is
divided by the Hebrews into these five Parts: The first part ending with Psalm.
XLI. The second part, with Psalm. LXXII. The third, with Psalm LXXXIX. The
fourth, with Psalm CVI. The fifth, with Psalm CL.

The Division of them, from the Subject-matters of them, is very various. There
are Psalms Laudatorie, of Praises; Gratulatorie, of Thanksgiving: Psalms of
Supplications; of Deprecations; of Consolations; of Comminations; of
Imprecations: There are Penetential Psalms; Psalms to teach; to give
instruction; Psalms to bring to Remembrance, things past; Psalms Prophetical,
of things to come: And many Psalms are mixed of many, or most of these matters.
So as out of them, as out of a storehouse, every man may richly fit and
furnish himself for all and every particular occasion, either public, or else
private, according to his several conditions, in prosperity, or adversity, in
all his devotions, and addresses to God; still finding his own estate in some
one Psalm or other; These Psalms containing the very Anatomy of the soul, the
characters and representations of the thoughts, meditations, affections, and
workings of it, toward God, toward man, toward herself, throughout all the
changes of her pilgrimage in this world.

The number of them is one hundred and fifty. The LXX. and vulgar Latin, do
divide the ninth Psalm into two. And so their reckoning of the number does
constantly go on to exceed ours by one, unto the CXLVII. Psalm: which Psalm
does contain their CXLVI. and CXLVII. And so in the conclusion all agree in the
same number of CL.

Of these, eighty two bear David's title. Whereof these are upon several special
occasions, as appears in their Inscriptions* viz. the III. VII. XXX. LI. LII.
LIVE. LIX. LX. LXIII. And at Gath, before Achish or Abimelech, XXXIV. LVI. And
when he was in the Cave, Psalm LVII. and CXLII. His Psalms of Prayer are Psalm
17. and 86.

Some are his Psalms, and yet without his name in the Title as Psalm. II. Acts
IV. 25. And Psalm. XCV. Hebr. IV. 7. See also Psalm. XCVI. and CV. and CVI. See 1 Chronicles. XVI. 7. and LXXII. 20.

Other Psalms, without David's name, which have special Titles, are Psalms
XLV. LXXII. And, of or for Asaph, Psalms, L. LXXIII. to LXXXIII. See 2 Chronicles.
XXIX. 30. Of, or for the sons of Korah, LXXXIV. LXXXV. LXXXVII. Of Heman, for
the sons of Korah, LXXXVIII. Of Ethan, LXXXIX. Of Moses, XC. For the Sabbath,
XCII. A Prayer of, or for the Afflicted, CII. Psalms of Degrees, CXX. to
CXXXIV. Having Titles, are 125. The rest being XXV. the sixth part of the whole
number, are without any Title or Inscription at all.

In the Titles we have the persons, by whom they were written; or for whom they
were written; or to whom they were committed. And these last are either
generaly described, by their skill in Music; or more particularly named to be
of the Quire or Posterity of Jeduthun, of Korah, or of Asaph.

In some we have also the Times when they were made; or when to be used. In
some also their Quality and Excellency. In some their Matter Subject, as of
Prayer, of Deprecation, as Destroy not; of obtestation; of Gratulation or
Thanksgiving; of Praise; of Instruction, and Doctrine; of Commemoration, or for
Remembrance; of nuptial love.

The Music, either by voice, or instrument mentioned in some Titles, is but
little known in our days; yet for the voice, some Psalms may seem to point
to the Base, some to the Tenor, some to the Counter-tenor: And again, in some
men's opinions, some Psalms do intimate that the voice should lead, and the
instrument follow; as in those Titles (...): Some, that the instruments should
lead, and the voice follow; as in those Titles (...) But the truth is, That
howsoever Selah in the Text, used some seventy times in this Book, and three
times in that prayer of Habakkuk, chap. III. sometimes in the middle of a
verse, but mostwhat in the end; may seem to be a Musical Note; And Neginoth to
be an hand or stringed instrument; Shoshannim, of six strings; from Shesh, six,
as Shalishim of three strings, 1, Sam. XVIII. 6. Sheminith, of eight strings;
Nehiloth, a wind-instrument; Mahalath, likewise. And so other guesses may be
made of other words mentioned in sundry Titles of sundry Psalms; as Shoshannim
Eduth, Shushan Eduth, Mahaloth Leannoth, Muthlabben, Altaskith, Gittith,
Alamoth, Hammagneloth, Aijgeleth Shahar, Jonath-Elem-rehochim: As also of
Higgajon, Michtam, Maschil: All which belonging to those instruments, Music,
or Poetry, then in use, now unknown, nor greatly material for us now to know,
may admit of conjectural probabilities; yet no certainties can be had for the
exact notions and significations of them.

Psalm XIV. and LIII. are much the same. And so again, Psalm LX. and CVIII.
and Psalm XVIII. and 2 Samuel XXII. are more the same. And Psalm. CVIII. 1, -- 5.
are the same with the end of the LVII. Psalm. And ver. 6, -- 18. are the same
with the end of the LX. Psalm. Psalm XXV. begins each verse almost with the
several letters of the Hebrew Alphabet, in order. And so in a manner does the
XXXIV. Psalm. CXI. and CXII. begin each half verse with the letters of the
Hebrew Alphabet, in order: save that the two last verses in both Psalms, take
up three letters apiece, to fill up the number of the two and twenty letters of
the Hebrew Alphabet. Psalm. XXXVII. begins every second verse with the letters
of the Hebrew Alphabet in order. Psalm CXIX. without David's Title, begins each
of the first eight verses with the first letter of the Hebrew Alphabet: and
each of the eight next verses with the second letter of the Hebrew Alphabet.
And so continues along to the end of the Alphabet. Psalm CXLV. begins each
verse with the letters of the Hebrew Alphabet; omitting only the letter Nun.

Some Psalms composed long before David was borne; as Psalm XC. Some long
after he was dead; as Psalm LXXIV. LXXXIII. CXXVI. CXXXVII. Whereby it appears
that the Psalms were put into the form and order they now have, after the
return of the Jews from Babylon.

Some are set-formes, as Psalms XX. XXI. CII. CXXXVI. Esaias XXVI. 1.

The Book of Psalms authentical with the Papists, and by them fathered upon
Jerome, is confessed by him to be but a Translation out of the Greek LXX. not
out of the Hebrew text. And the Popish Bonaventure ventures but badly when he
substitutes the word Mary, or Lady, in stead of Lord or God; and with some
other alterations applies them to the Virgin Mary.

This Book of the Psalms is much cited in the New Testament: As does appear in
this Table following.

Psalms; Alleged, or Alluded to in 2. 1. Acts 4. 25. 7. Acts 13 33. Hebr. 1.
5. 9. Apoc. 2. 27. 19 15. 5. 9. Romans 3. 13. 8. 2. Matthew. 21. 16. 4, 5, 6. Heb
2. 6, 7, 8. 1 Co. 15. 27. 10. 7. Romans 3. 14. 14. 2. Romans 3. 10. 16. 8 -- 11.
Acts 2. 25 -- 28. 31. 13. 35. 18. 2. Hebr. 2. 13. 49. Romans 15. 9. 19. 4. Romans
10. 1^. 22. 1. Matthew. 27. 46. Mark 15. 34. 7, 8. Matthew. 27. 35, 39, 43. 16, 18.
Mark. 15. 24. Luke 23. 33. John 19. 23. 24. 34. 37 22. Hebr. 2. 12. 24. 1. 1
Cor. 10. 26, 28. 31. 5. Luke 23. 46. 32. 1, 2. Romans 4. 6, 7, 8. 34. 12 -- 16 1
Pet. 3 10, 11, 12. 37. 11. Matthew. 5 5. 40. 6, 7, 8. Hebr. 10. 5 6 7. 41. 9.
John 13. 18. 44. 22. Romans 8. 36. 45. 6, 7. Hebr. 1. 8, 9. 49. 4. Matthew. 13. 35.
50. 12. 1 Cor. 10. 26. 51. 4. Romans 3. 4. 53. 1, 2, 3. Romans 3. 10, 11, 12. 62.
12. Matthew. 16. 27. 68. 18. Ephesians. 4. 8. 69. 9. John. 2. 17. Romans 15. 3. 21.
John 19. 28, 29. 22, 23. Romans 11. 9, 10. 78. 2. Matthew. 13. 35. 25. John. 6. 31.
81. 12. Acts 14. 6 82. 6. John 10. 34. 90. 4. 2 Pet. 3. 8. 91. ^1. Matthew. 4. 6.
Luke 4. 10. 94. 11. 1 Cor. 3. 20. 95. 8 -- 11. Hebr. 3. 7 -- 11. 4. 7. 97. 7.
Hebr. 1. 6. 102. 25, 26, 27 Heb. 1 10, 11, 12. 104 4. Hebr. 1. 7. 105. 41. 1
Cor. 10. 4. 109. 8. Acts 1. 20* 110. 1. Mat. 22. 43, 44. Mark 12. 36. Luke 12.
42. Acts 2. 34, 35. Hebr. 1. 13. 4. Hebr. 5. 6. 7. 16. 112. 9. 2 Cor. 9. 9.
116. 10. 2 Cor. 4. 13. 1^. Rom 3. 4. 117 1. Romans 15. ^1. 118. 6. Hebr. 13. 6.
22, 23. Matthew. 21. 42. Mar. 12. 10, 11. Luke 20. 17. Acts 4. 11. 25, 26. Matthew.
21. 9. 132. 11. Acts 2. 30. 17, 18. Luke 1. 69, 70. 140. 3. Romans 3. 13, 14.
143. 2. Romans 3. 20. Gal. 2. 16. 144. 3. Hebr. 2. 6.

In these Citations and Allegations, and Allusions, The Penmen of Scripture
regard more oftentimes the sense and intent of the Text cited, then the precise
terms, where the one swerves not much from the other, and what is in the words
so read or employed, is of undoubted truth. And sometimes they cite not the
entire Text, nor tie themselves to the precise words of the place, nor observe
strictly the Order of them, as they lie in the Text; but pick only out of them
so much as may serve for their present purpose; which in quotation of places is
sufficient. So John XII. 40. Matthew. IV. 15, 16. Ezekiel. XX. 7. And in Citations
in the New Testament, the holy Penmen in some places follow the LXX. as then
most in use in Synagogues, and Schools, publicly, and privately, though
therein departing from the Hebrew, but yet only in matters of no concernment as
to the present Allegation. Some are Accommodations only; when Prophesies
besides their Litteral sense; have sometimes another in this sort affixed to
them, To which when they are accommodated, they are said to be fulfilled, i. e.
to have a more eminent accomplishment in a higher sense; As Esaias IX. 1, 2. the
great Light and comfort and deliverance from Sennaoherib, and out of Babylon,
is accommodated, Matthew. IV. 13, -- 16. to Christ's preaching the Light and
comfort of the Gospel, and his deliverance of them from the bondage of Sin and
Satan.

Blessed] This is the maine end man aims at.

Walks not] Some here observe a Climax, or treble Climax, gradation, or
ascension, from the less and lower, to the greater and higher: And so there is
indeed in the sins here mentioned: But not in the shunning and avoiding of
sin, as some conceive. For so the first degree here mentioned seems to them
to be the highest of the three, in that kind. And so the speech does not
ascend, but descend lower, in each degree. A true Climax is that Romans VIII. 29,
30. And again, ver. 34. And Jer. XV. 5. The sense here agrees with David's
words, Psalm. XXVI. 4, 5.

He shall be like] Jer. XVII. 7, 8. VIII. 16, 17. Ezekiel. XIX. 10. and XXXI. 4.
Psalm. XCII. 12, 13, 14.

a tree] No mind or mention here of the Palm tree, or allusion to the tree of
Life in Paradise.

not so] Thus are these words used, Genesis XLVIII. 18. Exodus X. 11. Number. XII. 7.
Deuteronomy. XVIII. 14. Prove. XV. 7. Esaias XVI. 6. repeated Jer. XLVIII. 30. Ephesians. IV.
20. And in Matthew. XX. 26. where Christ forbids not the exercise of Superiority
among Christians, or among Ministers of the Gospel, or requires parity of
authority among them; but says, that those things, though good and lawful in
themselves, yet have no place in, nor relation to, his spiritual Kingdom,
which is in the soul.

not stand] As Number. XXX. 5, 12. Josh. II. 11. and VII. 12, 13.

Knoweth] Acknowledge and own; Exodus III. 7. Deuteronomy. XXXIV. 10. Psalm. XXXI. 8.
and XXXVII. 18. and CXLII. 5. and CXLIV. 12. Prove. XII. 10. Hos. XIII. 5.
Matthew. VII. 23. Romans VII. 15. John X. 14. Job XXIII. 10. Prove. II. 8.

Why] I his Psalm by many of the Ancients is joined to the former, Psalms.
But Saint Paul does distinguish them, Acts XIII. 33. And the Church does
ascribe this Psalm to David, though it bear not his Title, Acts IV. 25. And in
this Psalm David bears a Type of Christ, who is here more realy, properly,
principaly, and immediately intended. All which appears Acts IV. 25, 26. and
XIII. 33. Heb. I. 5. and V. 5. So that the first and open sense points to
David; the mystical and more abstruse to the Messiah. And no doubt, but this,
and such allusions more, were out of all question, even from the beginning so
forecast, and appointed, as it were, by the holy Ghost.

Why] The Psalmist demands, and wonders at the banding and conspiring of all,
and all sorts of enemies, against David and his Kingdom typicaly, as did Saul,
Ishbosheth, Abner, the Philistines, Jebusites, and others: But against Christ,
and his Kingdom principaly, as is the prime purpose* maine scope, and intent
of this Psalm, Acts IV. 25, 26. Mark III. 6. John XI. 53. Luke XIX. 14. Though
all in vain, ver. 1, 2, 3.

The Kings] 2 Samuel VIII. and X.

heavens] 1 King. VIII. Jer. XXII. 24. Psalm. CXXXIX. 7. The King of heaven
against those Kings of the earth, ver. 2.

laugh] And have them in derision, as Job XLI 29. dictum (...); intelligendum
(...). Psalm. XXXVII. 12, 13. and LIX. 8. Prove. I. 26.

wrath] No passion properly has any place in Gods will. in him, but without
him; not in his affection, but in his act. These expressions are but
condescentions to the weakness of our capacities, Psalm. LXXVI. 6, -- 9. and
CIV. 32.

yet have I] God the Father who makes and orders all earthly Kingdoms, Dan.
IV. 14. and II. 21. and VII. 14. Ezra I. 1.

my King] Prove. VIII. 22, -- 30. Acts II. 36.

Sion] See the Observations on Deuteronomy. III. 9. and on 1 Chronicles. XI. 5. See Psalm.
LXXVIII. 68. and LXVIII. 17. and CXXXII. 13. and LXXXVII. 2. Esaias II. 2, 3, 4.
and IV. 4.

I will declare] David typicaly;

The Lord has said] Hebr. V. 5. Psalm. CX. 1.

my sonne] Not as holy men. Princes, David, or Angels are called the sons of
God, John I. 12. Jer. XXXI. 9. Psalm. LXXXII 6. Job I. 6. But in a peculiar
manner far above all these, Hebr. I. 4, 5, 9. not by adoption or grace, but by
nature.

This day] Relates to his Nativity, as man; not to his Divinity, as God. And as
(...), he is called the Son of God, Luke I. 35. Heb. I. 5. And that raising
up of Jesus, Acts XIII. 33. relates to this Exhibition of him in the flesh,
mentioned also, ver. 23. That other raising him from the dead speaks plainly of
his resurrection from the grave, Acts XIII. ver. 34, -- 37. Romans I. 4.

have I begotten thee] Not relating here to his eternal generation as the Son
of God, the second Person and Hypostasis in the Trinity: But to his gigniture
(...), when he revealed him to the world.

Ask of me] God Decrees, Assuerus to Ester, chap. V. 3. And Herod to the
daughter of Herodias, Mark VI. 23. And God himself to Solomon, 1 King. III. 5.
So, and much more here God the Father to Christ his Son, the Mediator. Thus
Christ asked and prayed, in the days of his flesh; and was ever heard in
whatsoever he asked, according to the nature of his asking, John XI. 22, 42.
Heb. V. 7. John XVII. 9.

and the uttermost] Psalm. XXII. 29, 30. Heb. I. 2. Dan. II. 44.

them] Thine enemies, ver. 1, 2, 3.

rod of iron] Esaias XXX. 14. Jer. XIX. 11. See the actual execution, Apoc. II.
26. and chap. XII. 5. and XIX. 15. Esaias XI. 4.

Be wise] Take better counsel then that, ver. 2; use better wisdom.

now] Heb. V. 7. Prove. V. 7. and VII. 24. and VIII. 32. Esaias XLIV. 1. Delay is
dangerous.

Kings] Ye, ver. 2.

serve] Kings; Luke I. 74, 75. Psalm. CXVI. 16.

with fear] A filial fear, which is joined with joy, Psalm. C. 2.

rejoice with trembling] These two also are coexistent; joy, Romans XIV. 17. Ps.
IX. 2. 14. Phil. IV. 4. Trembling, Phil. II. 12. The regenerate man is a kind
of mixed person; has, as Rebecca, two struggling in him.

Kisse] A sign, Genesis XXXIII. 4. 1 Samuel XX. 41. Romans XVI. 16. 1 Cor. XVI. 20.
Of Subjection in inferiors, Genesis XLI. 40. 1 Samuel X. 1. Prove. XXIV. 26. Of
religious adoration, 1 King. XIX. 18. Job XXXI. 27.

the Sonne] 1 John II. 23. John V. 23.

lest he be angry] Genesis III. 3. Certainly he will, ver. 5. 2 These. I. 8. Apoc.
VI. 16, 17.

and ye perish from the way] The way of happiness; you, and your way perish,
Psalm. I. 6. or your way of combination against Christ, ver. 1, 2. or in the way
of your conceited peace and secure prosperity.

Blessed] Apoc. XIX. 9. Romans IX. 33. John III. 36.

ten thousands of people] And likely more now gathered against him, Absalom.
Most of David's Psalms in order of time go before this Psalm.

my glorie] The glory of my Kingdom which God has promised me,

godly] (...), Macc. 7. 13. 2 Macc. XIV. 6. may seem to have their name. And
whence the Pelican has the name of (...), from the pious benignity it shows,
as to her young ones, so to her dam when overgrown with years, as some write.
And from her Greek name (...) arises the Greek Proverb (...), to denotate a
retribution and recompensation of pious duties, offices, and benefits, such as
the Pelican uses. The same word (...), is taken also and used by some for the
Stork, as Jer. VIII. 7. the Stork having the like pious benign properties and
qualifications.

stand in awe and sin not] Ephesians. IV. 26. Be anrgy, and sin not. And that
sense the word here used will bear; David speaking thus to his friends; Let not
your indignation, and just resentment of these scandals and confusions in my
sufferings, proceed to a sinful murmuring against God; but consider of it
wisely in your most retired thoughts, and be silent, contented, and quiet.

into thy house] David.

toward thy holy Temple] And so David, Psalm. XXVII. 4. and XXIX. 9. and LXV. 4.
and LXVIII. 29. and CXXXVIII. 2. And yet in David's days the Temple was not
built. He minded that which after his days he knew presently should be: And
mean time he styles the Arc, or Tabernacle, by the name of the Temple. See
the Observations on Exodus XXXIII. 7.

rebuke me not] Psalm.

heal me] David was in some soar sickness at this time.

bed to swim] See the Observations on Josh. XI. 4.

If I have done this] Whereof Cush Saul's Courtier or Favorite,

return thou on high] To ascend, Kings X. 19. And this; to judge for me; and
against Cush; as it follows in the rest of the Psalm.

Out of the mouth] This is alluded to Mat.

What is man] This, ver. 5, 6. are applied to Christ by the Apostle, Heb. II.
6, -- 9. 1 Cor. XV. 27. Ephesians. I. 22. so taking in both Christ the head; and
mankind, specialy the faithful, as members; showing thereby that mysticaly and
propheticaly in these words is intimated the humiliation and exaltation of the
man Christ Jesus.

O thou enemie] A kind of scoff and derision, David upbraids him for his
bloody designs and threats.

Know thy name will] Know experimentaly, verse 20. in all their hearts, and
souls; in themselves; as the phrases of Scripture are, Josh. XXIII. 14. 1 Samuel
VI. 9. Heb. X. 34. Of this knowledge is that John XVII. 3. and 1 John II. 3, 4,
5. and chap. III. 19 24. and chap. IV. 6, 7, 8, 13. and chap. V. 2. 18, 19. 20.
Noetical, speculative knowledge, swimming only in the brain, and not sinking
into the heart, is none of this knowledge.

till thou find none] Rid the world of them,

flee a bird] 1 Samuel XXVI. 19.

If the foundations] In Church and Kingdom.

what can] He help; but suffer in such a general ruin?

The fool] Psalm. Psalm are by Saint Paul applied to all mankind in general,
in the state of the Fall, and natural corruption, Romans III. 10, 11, 12.

usury] Of this see Exodus Levit. XXV. 36, 37. Deuteronomy. XXIII. 19, 20. Neh. V. 17.
Levit. XXVIII. 8. And the Annotations on Ezekiel. XVIII. 8. and XXII. 12, 13. Mat.
XXV. 27.

that hasten] Or give gifts to another god. Ezekiel. XVI. 33, 34. The true God
needs them not, ver. 2. But false gods do; which gifts do redound in the end to
the damage and sorrows of the givers.

their drink offerings of blood] Their Offerings and Sacrifices of man's blood.
The drink offerings to the true God, were of wine, according to his Law, Number.
XV. 5. But Idolaters in stead thereof did many times offer man's blood. Paul's
readiness to be offered, Phil. II. 17. 2 Timothy IV. 6. imports no more then his
willingness to die and spend his blood, for Christ's cause, and the good of his
Church and people.

their names] See the Observations on Josh. XXIII. 7.

I have set the Lord] Acts II. 25, -- 31. David speaks here of himself, in this
regard, as having Christ in his loins, in a Prophetical spirit relating to
Christ.

right hand] Psalm. CIX. 31. and CX. 5. and CXXI. 5.

not be moved] Psalm. CXVIII. 6. CXXXV. 1. Romans VIII. 31, etc.

my glory] My tongue, II. 26. Psalm. XXX. 12. and LVII. 8. and CVIII. 2. Genesis
XLIX. 6.

my flesh also] As Romans VIII. 19. 21.

my soul in hell] A Prophecy of Christ's Resurrection. David speaks here in the
Person of Christ.

Soul] Sometimes is taken properly, sometimes improperly, for the whole person
of man, Genesis XIV. 12. Acts XXVII. 37. sometimes for the life of the person,
sometimes for the body, Genesis XVII. 21. sometimes for the dead carcass, Levit.
XIX. 28. and XXI. 1, 2. Number. VI. 6. and V. 2, 9, 10. Hag. II. 14. And so (...)
is taken also. Here, my soul, i. e. my self.

hell] the Hebrew (...) is taken for the grave, Psalm. CXLI. 7. and LXXXVI. 13.
and XXX. 13. and LV. 15. Genesis XXXVII. 35. and XLII. 3. 1 Kings II. 6, 9. Number.
XVI. 30. Jonah II. 1, 2. Not for a place of souls under the earth. See Doctor
Rainolds, Praelect. 81. and 82. upon the Apocryphal books: and Robert Parker
upon Christ's Descent into hell; (...) is taken for death, or the state of the
dead: for the place invisible; for the grave, in relation to the body, Acts II.
27. And in relation to the soul, for heaven to the godly soul, as in our Creed;
and for Hell, to the soul ungodly; and so most usualy. Christ's soul did not
descend to the lower parts, or that imaginary place of Limbus Patrum. This
place here meant is a place of punishment, and therefore it is mentioned as a
mercy, that Christ was thence delivered; Christ's soul was not therefore there
in triumph. The scope of the Apostles in citing this place is not to deal
about the deliverance of Christ's soul out of Hell, but punctualy of Christ's
Resurrection: They infer nothing else out of this Text. But Resurrection is
properly of the Body, not of the Soul. Gehenna is sometimes taken for the
Grave; and most-times further, for Hell it self. The true meaning and sense of
the Article of Christ's Descent into Hell, as the Latins very improperly
translate the words, (...), seems to be thus rendered rather, he went into the
place of invisible souls: and to be understood of Christ's Soul; for his body
remained in the Grave; And his soul in that interim to pass to the place of
souls; to Heaven or Paradise; as the souls of the godly did, and his
principaly. As the souls of the wicked went to Hell. For (...) as a general
name does certainly and evidently signify both places. And thus the Articles
go on methodicaly, without any tautologie; That after Christ's death, his body
was buried in the Grave, his Soul went to the place of blessed souls; and the
third day, both soul and body were reunited in his Resurrection. This verse
then, and two before, and one following, are most properly meant of Christ, and
of his Resurrection. Acts II. 25, -- 28, 31. and XIII. 35, 36, 37.

Thou will show me] Experimentaly.

me] Christ spea^s of himself.

the path of life] Of glory after his Resurrection. David, of all his members.
Christ's Resurrection, and Glorification is the beginning of ours; he the
Author, and means of it to us; in our first Resurrection here by Regeneration,
to the life of Grace; whereby Christ lives in us, Gal. II. 20. He in us, and we
in him by Faith, Ephesians. III. 17. Romans I. 17 And in our second Resurrection, to
the life of Glory; as follows in. this verse.

In thy presence] Before thy face; in the light of thy countenance. See Genesis
XXXII. and Exodus XXXIII. 14, 15. Number. VI. 23. Psalm. IV. 6. and XXXI. 16. and
LXXX. 3. Deuteronomy. XXXIV. 10. Esaias VI.

fulnesse] Yet all the former but in part, whiles we are in the way; in
fullness, when we come to our country, or heavenly Canaan, Job XIX. 26, 27. 1
John III. 2. 1 Cor. XIII. 12. Matthew. V. 8. And yet this beatifical Vision of
God in glory shall be to our fullness; not to his. The fullness of his infinite
Essence, by any created power of Saint, or Angel by the eye of flesh, though
glorified, or by the intellectual eye of a soul or spirit glorified cannot be
seen, 1 Timothy VI. 16. But to our fullness, as far as creatures are capable
of, our vessel thrown into this infinite Sea, shall be brim full, though it
contain not all this Ocean, Psalm. XVII. 15. And how great then shall this
fullness then be, when of things in this kind revealed of God to his Apostles
in this life, by his Spirit, the Apostle so speaks, as we read, 1 Cor. XI. 9.
out of Esaias LXIV. 4? This is a fullness beyond all that of Faith, and Hope, a
fullness that fills up all desires, a fullness of fruition, of satisfaction,
without satiety. Apoc. III. Consider that saying of the Queen of Sheba, 1 King.
X. 8. and of the Disciples at Christ's Transfiguration, Mat. XVII. 4.

At thy right hand] And by thy right hand, Psalm. XX. 7. LXIII. 9. CXVIII. 16.

for evermore] Without which eternity there were no true felicity.

right] My plea for my righteous cause; ver. 2.

I am purposed] Psalm. XXXIX. 1.

of thy lips] Guiding and directing me.

when I awake] Our of the sleep of death, Esaias XXVI. 19.

with thy likenesse] 1 Cor. XV. 49. 1 John III. 2. Apoc. XXII. 4.

Horne] Signifies power, Psalm. XCII. 10. Amos VI. 13. And Christ called the
Horn of Salvation, Luke I. 69.

earth shook] Here, David's victories, in some sort Poeticaly set forth.

thundered] Thunder is called Gods voice, Apoc. X. 3, 4. and XIX. 6. Of
thunder. See Psalm. XXIX. 3, 10. and LXXVII. 18. and CIV. 7. Exodus XIX. 16. and
XX. 18. Jer. X. 13. Job. XXVI. 14 and XXXVIII. 25. Esaias XXIX, 6. Apoc. IV. 5.
and 8. 5. Some proud blasphemers have labored to imitate the thunder: and some
impious Tyrants have exceedingly feared it.

according to my righteousnesse] The justness of my Cause against Saul,

thy self froward] Meet with them in their own way. Levit. XXVI. 23, 24.

Bow of steel.

Therefore will I give thanks unto thee] This verse is applied, Romans XV. 9. to
the Calling of the Gentiles to the faith of Christ, and praise unto God
therefore. And so formerly, ver. 43, 44. and again, verse 50. are more truly
verified in Christ, then in David.

to his Anointed, to David, and to his seed for evermore] To his Messiah, his
Christ, as Psalm. II. 2. to David literaly; to Christ mysticaly called by the
name of David, Jer. XXX. 9. Ezekiel. XXXIV. 23, 24. and chap. XXXVII. 24. Hos. 5.
to his seed, both himself properly, called the seed of David, Romans I. 3. Acts
XIII. 23. as the seed of Abraham, Gal. III. 16. and to his seed, Esaias LIII. 10.
Heb. II. 13. And thus properly it is for evermore.

Day unto day] Or day after day:

There is no speech] Among all variety of Languages, ver. 4.

Their line] Romans X. 18. Micah V. 2. with Matthew. chap. II. 6. And again in Romans
IX. 33. with Isa. chap. XXVIII. 16. The Apostle fits this Testimony to his own
purpose; not derogating thereby from the truth of the literal sense. As that
Exodus XVI. 18. is applied, 2 Cor. VIII. 15. Or rather the Apostle retains the
literal sense, for the preaching of the Gospel to all the world, Romans XV. 19.
Col. I. 6, 23. And out of this testimony of the Psalm in its literal sense
proves that the Gentiles had heard and learned somewhat of God and piety
before, out of the book of the Creation, Romans I. 19. Acts XIV. 17. Which was a
forerunner to this more ample Doctrine and School of the Gospel, which now God
was pleased to vouchsafe unto them. In sum, the Apostle herein follows the
LXX. And applies this to the preaching of the Gospel to the Heathens; as God
had formerly taught them, in another and a weaker manner and degree, by his
works of Creation. They had as a voice to speak; so a line to write, rule,
direct, and instruct, as Esaias XXVIII. 10.

sunne] The carbuncle of heaven; the eye, and heart of the world, for its
light, and heat.

to run a race] His race, is without intermission, or weariness; and the
swiftness of his running,

The Law] From the Book of Gods works, verses. And in this School, each verse
in a manner does express the name, the nature, the effects, the preciousnesse
of this Word; much against all those imbasements and impeachments which the
Papists would put upon it.

gold] Gold of Havilah, Genesis II. 11, 12. Ophir, 1 Kings IX. 28. Uphaz, Jer. X.
9. This is the chiefest gold, Dan X. 5. Job XXVIII. 15. Psalm. CXIX. 72. See the
Observations on Esaias XIII. 12.

great reward] Which reward yet is of grace, Romans VIII. 3. through Gods free
grace and bounty; not the merit of our works. The Apostle does thus distinguish
of merit, Romans IV. 4, 5. and XI. 6. There is no merit properly, if the work be
not properly out own; and not otherwise due debt; and justly equal to the
reward. They are justly due out of his true and free promise.

who can] Where then is that possibility,

dominion over me] There are sins reigning; and not reigning, but rebelling,
Romans VI. 12, 22. and VII. 15, -- 20.

The Lord hear thee] This Psalm, David, for a public form of a Prayer in the
one, of a Thanksgiving in the other, to be used by the people, for himself the
King. They seem to stretch this Psalm too far, and that without ground, who
make it to be a Prophecy of Christ's Sufferings, and his deliverances out of
them, for which the Church with him triumphs. As also the next Psalm to
gratulate the victory and Salvation of Christ.

Save Lord, let the King hear us] Most here understand God, or the Messiah.
Some David. The LXX. not observing or keeping the Hebrew distinction Athnach,
render it thus, Lord save the King, and hear us when we call upon thee.

for ever and ever] Psalm. David lived but seventy years: yet in his royal
posterity, for many ages; and in Christ, the Son of David, Matthew. XXII. 42.
for ever and ever, eternaly, Romans VI. 9. Apoc. I. 18. Heb. VII. 25. See the
Observations on Deuteronomy. XV. 17.

Thine hand] King David's hand.

In some Psalms there are passages that properly and literaly belong to David;
and to Christ only, as David was a Type of him. But in this Psalm, are some
Passages, as ver. 16, 17, 18. (besides many other which are applied to Christ
in the New Testament, as ver. 1, 7, 8, 22, 27.) which literaly and properly
belong to Christ, and are appliable to him only, or to him more then to David.
Then here is no place left for that question of the Eunuch, Acts VIII. 34. The
allegations out of this Psalm, Matthew. XXVII. 46, 35, 43. Heb. II. 12. and the
body of the Psalm it self do show, that little of it can be applied to David,
as a Type, most of it is proper and peculiar to Christ alone, as I formerly
said, 1 Pet. I. 11, 12.

my God] Jesus on the Cross little before his death, Matthew. XXVII. 46. Heb. V.
7. upon the weight of Gods wrath, under the burden of our sins; The Deity by
a special providence and dispensation withdrawing and suspending its influence
from the Humanity for this time; God withdrawing all sense of his favor from
him. Not that the hypostatical union of both natures was then or ever severed
or dissolved. But yet he suffered chiefly in his soul, all the pains, pangs
and agonies of a justly angry and punishing God, even more then can either be
expressed or imagined, even so far above the measure of ordinary sufferings,
as himself was above ordinary men; without any influence, or joy, or comfort
streaming from the Vision of God upon his mind and will for that time. So that
he suffered as in body, so in soul, in his whole man; as in his sensual part,
so in his intellectual also, in his whole soul, and body, and in all the parts,
powers, and faculties of them. And the greatest sufferings, as was said, that
could be sustained in this life, Lam. I. 12. yet without any derogation to the
integrity, purity, innocence, dignity of the person of Christ our Surety and
Savior. These words then are not a complaint out of impatience, ignorance,
disobedience, or diffidence. They are the words of sense, not of infidelity.
See ver. 24. Luke XXIII. 46. He strongly calls him his God, even in that
instant of these suffering; so expressing his firm faith in him. But they are
a Protestation of the bitterness of his Passion, so stricken, smitten of God,
and afflicted, and so far prevailing on him, in whom the spirit of fortitude
had his residence.

forsaken me] This sense of dereliction and carencie of Divine favor for the
time, as it was the Fathers pleasure to have it so, so the Sons office called
him unto it; and he did not contract it by any fault of his, but did
voluntarily undertake it for our sins, and the expiation of them: as he did
the death it self. So that in this then there could not be any defect or
defanlt of faith, and hope requisite in him, And likewise that Prayer and
Speech, Matthew. XXVI. 39. bewrayes the sense of the flesh; but joined with the
obedience of the Spirit in him: A double Will in him, against Monothelites: but
joined both in one holy obedience and subjection. All which show the nature of
sin, the infinite wrath of God against it; the infinite Love of the Father,
and the Son, toward the children of men; and the verity of Christ's Humane
Nature, both in body and soul.

roaring] Like that of Lions Psalm. XXXII. 3. and XXXVIII. 8. Matthew. XXVI. 38.
Mark XIV. 33. Luke XXII. 44. so that he had need of an Angel for his
Comforter. Yet he so wrestles and prevails, that no sign of halting was left
remaining after; no sign or voice of despair; as some are shamelesly wronged
to charge upon him. All the agonies of Christ's soul ceased with his death.

but thou hear not] We read that God ever heard him, ver. 24. John XI. 42.
Heb. V. 7. But here this Prayer was only conditional; a signification of a
natural desire; not an absolute, and plenary Prayer.

inhabit the praises of Israel] Whose praise thou art, Deuteronomy. X. 21. And they
praise thee, in thy House and Sanctuary. Thou art still praised by them for thy
benefits to them, and acknowledged their holy one.

Our fathers] And shall I be so forsaken,

Cried] Crying or clamor, Psalm III. 4. and XVIII. 7. Jer. VII. 16. Jonas III.
8. Micah III. 4.

a worme] So vile and contemptible in the eyes of men, Esaias LIII. 2, 3. as Job
XXV. 6. Esaias XLI. 14. Not only made lower then the Angels, Psalm. VIII. 5. Heb.
II. 7. but disesteemed more then Barrabas, or the two theives.

All they that see me] This verse, Matthew. XXVII. 39, -- 44. Luke XXIII. 35. Not
that Christ herein murmurs against God; but declares and deplores his own
misery, whereunto for man's sake, and his redemption, he willingly subjects
himself.

laugh me to scorne] Matthew. XXVII. 39.

He trusted] Matt.

But thou art] This verse, David, Psalm. LXXI. 5, 6, 7.

out of the womb] By a natural, not miraculous way; as David was, Psalm. LXXI.
5. by the opening of the womb, without any loss or laesion of Blessed Mary's
Virginity; not by a miraculous penetration of dimensions and substances, to
keep the womb still closed and shut.

breasts] So Job XXXI. 18. Psalm. LXXI. 6. 2 Timothy III. 15. Esaias XLVI. 3. and
XLIX. 1. Luke I. 15, 41.

I was cast] By him saved from Herod's intended murder, Mat. II.

Be not far from me] Therefore he was not utterly forsaken, ver. 1. So Psalm.
X. 1. and XXXVIII. 22, 23. So again, Esaias XLVIII. 9.

for trouble is near] Death it self.

none to help] Esaias LXIII. 3, 5. His Disciples fled; Peter forswears him: none
but God could help him.

Many Bulls] So afterward Lions, ver. 13. Dogs, ver. 16, 20. Such were his
enemies to him; the Devil and his instruments; the Priests, and Rulers of the
Jews, in our Saviors days.

Bashan] See the Annotations on Micah VII. 14.

roaring Lion] Even they forced Pilate, Matthew. XXVII. 17. -- 26. John XIX. 1,
-- 13.

like water] Such is his state. Sam. XIV. 14. His bones, heart, bowels, melted,
burnt, as it were, with the heat of Gods wrath.

the Assembly] In their Councils, Mark XIV. 55. and XV. 1. John XI. 47.

They pierced] Our Hebrew Bibles have (...), as a Lion. Which yet by anomalie
in Grammar may signify (...), they pierced. And such anomalies are found
sometimes in the Hebrew text, as Ezra X. 16. 44. Psalm. X. 15. And (...) is
confessed to be found in some ancient Copies, or (...); So that the text here
may be said to admit diverse readings. Yet the Spirit of God in the New
Testament does constantly render it, they pierced. The ancient Jews maintain
this reading; And some of the modern. The other reading as a Lion, is but a
various reading; and though in the text, yet in good sense it seems not so
well to stand; and therefore this foderunt, set in the margin, is to be read.
And some Copies have foderunt in the text; yea, and the other reading as was
said by anomalie in Grammar, not unusual in Scripture, will signify foderunt
also. And thus they dealt with our Savior Jesus Christ, John XX. 25. Luke
XXIV. 40. Zech. XII. 10. compared with John XIX. 37.

stare upon me] As Psalm. XXXV. 21. LIVE. 9. They fed their eyes with my
miserable spectacle; with all pleasure, and without any pitying of me.

parted my garments] John XIX. 23, 24. their Captain or Centurion, were there
present.

lots] Of Lots, see the Annotations on Jonah I. 7. Lots are for division; or
consultation, and Divination.

my darling] Psalm. ver. 11.

Unicorns] See the Observations on Number. XXIII.

I will declare] Recount,

unto my brethren] Heb. II. 10, 11, 12. brethren in that one and common
sanctification.

ye that fear the Lord] Christ's speech and exhortation to his Church, to
praise, Psalm. CXXXV. 1. etc.

has not despised] Christ, in his low and base estate; Esaias LIII. 3.

he heard] Heb. V. 7.

my praise] As Christ exhorted others; so himself will not be behind,

vowes] See the Annotations on Jonah I. 16.

The meek] Spiritual feeding, Sam. VI. 18, 19. See Esaias LV. 1, 2. Prove. IX. 5,
6.

All the ends] The large bounds of the Church of Christ, Psalm. II. 8. Genesis
XVII. 18. and XLVIII. 10. Esaias XLIX. 22. Acts XIII. 47. and XIV. 14.

worship] 1 Samuel I. 3* 19, 28. John IV. 20, -- 24.

For the Kingdome] His Kingdom of Grace, Esaias II. 4.

All they] All sorts and conditions of men shall worship before him, James I.
9. the rich and great ones, Psalm. XLV. 12. Esaias XLIX. 23. and the poor hungry
ones ready to die and perish, Matthew. XI. 5.

A seed] Christ's Church shall be Catholic, Esaias LIII. 10. Those worshippers in
the former verse, shall have a seed and succession to continue from generation
to generation, Psalm. LXXXVII. 5, 6. Acts XV. 16.

They shall come] They that are first in Christ,

shall declare his righteousnesse] In performing his promises, in the
exhibition of the Messiah, and the benefits of redemption and salvation by him,
Psalm. XL. 10. and LXXI. 15.

that he has done this] Like that Psalm. XXXVII. 5.

Shepheard] A frequent similitude: David the more willingly use it, as having
been a Shepherd himself. It is used of God; of Christ; and of Magistrates, and
Ministers under them. And the godly are called by the name of sheep. The texts
are numerous.

I shall not want] 1 Cor. III 21. Mat. V. 33.

in green pastures] Ezekiel. XXXIV. 14. Esaias XLIX. 10.

thou art with me] Genesis XV. 1. and chap. XXI. 22. 1 Chronicles. XI. 9. 2 Kings VI.
VI. 12. Acts XVIII. 9. Jer. XV. 20. Esaias XLIII. 2.

Thy rod and thy staffe] Micah VII. 14. Zech. XI. 7.

dwell in the house of the Lord] The place of Gods worship, Judge. XIX. 18. Psalm.
LXVI. 13. and XXVII. 4. yet God dwells not in Temples made with hands, Esaias
LXVI. 1. Acts VII. 48.

The earth] 1 Cor. X. 26, 28. twice alleged by the Apostle; and to two several
purposes; and both appositely

hill of the Lord] Though all the earth be the Lords, verse 1. yet the hill of
Zion, Psalm. II. 6. is his holy place. As Exodus XIX. 5. Deuteronomy. X. 14. Of this
hill, see Esaias II. 2, 3. Micah IV. 1. See Psalm. XV. 1.

holy place] Place, not capable of holiness in it self, of any inherent
holiness: But of a relative holiness, in a relation to Gods presence therein,
for the time, either by extraordinary signs and tokens as Exodus III. 5. or by
appointing his ordinary means of worship therein; ceremonial under the Old
Testament; which now is done away, and not to be recalled; or spiritual, under
the New. The former, though of Gods appointment and ordination, had not in
themselves, nor could give absolute holiness to the worship therein performed:
And much more now the Places of Gods worship do not make holy the Services
therein performed; but by them rather are made holy only relatively, being
appointed to such holy uses.

He that hath] Esaias XXXIII.

clean hands] Psalm. XVIII. 21. Esaias LVI. 2. Ezekiel. XVIII. 8.

pure heart] Matthew. XV. 19. Prove. II. 19. Jer. XVII. 9. yet Acts XV. 9. 1 Timothy
I. 5. Psalm. CI. 2.

nor sworn deceitfully] Oaths are taken in a strict and proper sense; or at a
great latitude. They are Assertorie, or Promissorie; single, or with a curse or
execration annexed; lawful in themselves; an act of Religion, Esaias XIX. 18.
Lawful in the Old Testament, by Gods precept, promise, and examples of holy
men. Lawful in the New Testament by same nature, and use of them, as in the
Old, Hebr. VI. 16. by those warrants, Esaias XLV. 1. Jer. XII. 16. speaking of
the times of the New Testament; by the example of the Angel, Apoc. X. 16. of
the Apostle, Romans I. 9. 2 Cor. I. 23. That text, Matthew. V. 34. and so that
James V. 12. is not to be understood simply and absolutely; but relatively, as
Christ thereby opposes the corrupt practice of the Pharisees, and their false
interpretation of Gods Law concerning swearing, as if swearing, so as Gods name
were not directly used in it, and no falsehood or perjury contained in it, were
no sin with them; but ever and altogether lawful, though it were never so
lightly and slightly, vainly, and customarily, unnecessarily, and causelessly
done, where yea and nay had been sufficient. Thus Christ opposes and
forbids even all swearing as much as lies in us; but forbids not lawful
swearing, upon just, urgent and necessary occasions. Of Oaths, see more in the
Observations on Hos. IV. 15.

He shall] He is a true member of the invisible and Catholic Church, Romans IX.
6. Matthew. VII 21. The former are members properly, univocaly, essentialy,
formaly, inwardly, in truth, and in the judgment of God; The later only
equivocaly, externaly, materialy, not formaly and essentialy, in show, in the
opinion of men as rotten members, or ill humors in the body, 2 Timothy III. 5.
Gal. V. 24. These are in the visible Church, as chafe is among the wheat.

receive] Not by merit of condignity, for the worth of his works, Dan. IX. 18.
Romans VIII. 18. For the works are imperfect in themselves; and again, not our
own, and wholly from our selves, and besides due debt otherwise, without this
reward; and lastly no wise equivalent, and equipollent to this reward. But
receive the blessing and reward by and because of Gods free grace, rich mercy,
bountiful promise, whereby he has freely engaged himself to give such and so
superabundant a remuneration. And so he gives it in justice now because engaged
and obliged thereunto by the truth of his so free, gracious, and bountiful a
promise. God is just to perform his promise, 1 John I. 9. 2 Timothy IV. 7.

Blessing] Genesis XII. 2. Gal. III. 9. Ephesians. I. 2. Mat. XXV. 34.

righteousnesse] Of Justification, and of Sanctification; Righteousness, with
the increase, fruit, and reward of it, according to Gods righteous promise and
performance.

This is the generation] This kind of men. Luke XI. 29. and XVI. 8. Matthew.
XII. 39. Not those that brag of being Abraham's or Jacobs seed, Matthew. III. 9.
John VIII. 33. but these are the true seed and generation, Gal. III. 7, 29.
Romans IX. 6, 7. These are the true Israel of God, that seek him.

that seek] Deuteronomy. IV. 29. Psalm. XXVII. 8. 2 Kings XX. 3, 4. which grace comes
of God, Esaias LXV. 1, 2.

thy face O Iacob] O God of Jacob. Or, this in Jacob; or the generation of
Jacob, that seek Gods face; as Jacob did, Genesis XXXII. 24, 30. See John I. 47.
Romans IX. 6. and II. 28, 29.

Lift up] Having mentioned the hill of the Lord, ver. 3. This may seem to
relate to the gates and doors of the Temple, vowed by David, and to be built by
Solomon; and to the coming in of the Ark into it: or rather, proceeding from
the Type to the Truth, we may mysticaly refer this to the Church of Christ,
and the true members of it, to lift up the gates and doors of their hearts and
everlasting souls, that the Lord whom they seek may come into his Temple, Mal.
III. 2. that they prepare themselves to receive and entertain him at his
coming in the flesh, at his coming into their hearts, Apoc. III. 20. who is
indeed the true King of glory. Apoc. XVII. 14. 2 Cor II. 8. the true Jehovah,
Exodus III. 15. Psalm. LXXXIII. 18. Col. II. 9. and Christ, compare Number. XXI, 5.
with 1 Cor. X. 9. and Esaias VI. 1. with John XII. 41. Even Jehovah our
righteousness, Ier. XXIII. 6. the mighty God, Esaias IX. 6. the increase of
whose Kingdom and government shall have no end, Esaias IX. 7. Dan. VII. 14. Mat.
XXVIII. 18. for whose in-coming the doors of our hearts and affections should
lie open.

To make the Alphabetical order perfect in this Psalm, verses in it not to be
rightly all distinguished: as namely, the second, and the fifth. And (...) to
seem wanting in the beginning of the seventeenth verse. And, the last verse to
be only the later part of the foregoing verse.

without cause] Given on my part;

for it is great] And so needs much mercy,

seek ye my face,] Deuteronomy. IV. 29. David's soul did most seek it, to be near where
the Ark of God was, and so before the face of the Lord, as the Scripture
phraseth it: being out of heart when he was barred from it, ver. 4. Psalm. LXV.
4. Psalm. LXXXIV. and XLII. 1 Samuel XXVI. 19. Gods command here was David's
request, and the thing he aimed at.

regard not] Esaias V. David to the Crown; in managing the matters of this world,
as to the godly, and as to the wicked; in husbanding man's salvation by
contraries, etc. Romans XI. 33.

in the beauty of holinesse] Psalm. XCVI. 9. the glorious, holy Sanctuary.

The voice of the Lord] Of thunder, Exodus IX. 23. Job XXXVII, 4, 5. and XL. 9.
See the Observations on Psalm. XVIII. 13.

Sirion] See the Observations on Deuteronomy.

but a moment] Esaias XXVI.

in my blood] By any violent death, Saul's means.

into thy hands] Luke XXIII. IV. 19.

My times] And troubles,

O how great] Esaias LXIV. II. 9.

in a] As in a fensed City.

in my hast] 1 Samuel XXIII. 26. Psalm. LXXVII. 7. etc. 2 Cor. I. 8, 9. yet this
might stand mixed with faith; as Psalm. XXII. 1. And as Fear and Confidence are
not altogether inconsistent, Phil. II. 12. Heb. III. 6, 14.

Blessed] Saint Paul, Romans IV. 6, 7, 8. alleges this to prove justification
by Faith, without Works. Faith and Works are inseparable, Ephesians. II. 8, 9, 10.
James II. 14, 17, 18, 20, -- 26. That Faith which is without Works is dead, no
true Faith. But Faith only acts in the point of our justification before
God, applying Christ and the Promises, believing according to the Covenant of
the Gospel; whereby Christ does become ours his righteousness our
justification; and all the benefits of his redemption do redound and amount to
our salvation.

imputeth] Frequent is the use of this word in the point of justification.

mule] See the Annotations on Genesis

near unto thee] To hurt thee: or not near to thee to do thee service, unless
forced by the bridle, Iam. III 3.

Harp] Invented by Iubal, Genesis IV. 21. made by Solomon of Almug trees, 1 Kings
X. 12. called the pleasant Harp, Psalm. LXXXI. 2 much used for mirth and joy,
Genesis XXXI. 27. Job XXI. 12. Esaias V. 12. Ezekiel. XXVI. 13. And much used in Gods
worship and service, in the praising of him, by ordinance in the Temple, 1 Chronicles. XV. 21. and XXV. 1, 3, 6. And upon other religious occasions^ both
public, as 1 Samuel X. 5. 2 Samuel VI. 5. 1 Chronicles. XV. 16. 2 Chronicles. V. 12. Nehem.
XII. 27. and private, wherein David excelled, 1 Samuel XVI. 16, 23. and abounded,
Psalm. LVII. 8. and CVIII. 3. And much in holy use with others also; as here;
and so XLIII. 4. and LXXI. 22. and XCVIII. 5. And of spiritual harps we read in
the Revelation, chap. V. 8. and XIV. 2. and XV. 2.

Psalterie] Or Lute, or Viol. In Hebrew Nebel. Whence the Greeks and Latins
seem to have the names of their instruments Nablium, Naulon.

a new Song] So Psalm. XL. 3. XCVI. 1. and XCVIII. 1. and CXLIV. 9. New still,
upon new and fresh occasions renewed. As Love is said to be both an old and a
new Commandment. Yet in Scripture phrase very much, Things appertaining to the
times of the Gospel, are called New; as a New Covenant, Heb. VIII. 13. a New
Testament, 1 Cor. XI. 25. a New Jerusalem, Apoc. III. 12. New Heavens, and a
New Earth, Esaias LXV. 17. a New name, a New man, Ephesians. II. 15. Esaias LXII. 2. a
New Commandment, John XIII. 34. a New way, Heb. X. 28. a New heart, Ezekiel.
XXXVI. 26. yea and all things New, 2 Cor. V. 17. Apoc. XXI. 5. See that Song,
Luke II. 14.

Abimelech] The common name of the Kings of the Philistines, Achish being the
proper name for this King of Gath, a City of the Philistines, 1 Samuel XXI. 10.
The LVI. Psalm is also upon this same occasion. And this one of the
Alphabetical Psalms: Only Zain is omitted, and Phe twice used.

They looked unto him] To God; David.

afflictions] They serve to them as cures, Psalm. CXIX. 67, 71. Heb. XII. 6, etc.

not one of them is broken] See Exodus Number. IX. 12. John XIX. 36. The sense here
is more general.

Let them] See the Observations on Psalm.

False witnesses] Mat. XXVI. 59.

my prayer returned] Though they got no good by it,

my darling] Psalm. XXVI. 20, -- 23.

within my heart] I verily believe it of them,

not good] Extremely bad. Observations on Prove. XX. 23.

great mountains] Mountains of God. Observations on Jonah III. 3. and on 1 Samuel
XIV. 15.

The matter of this Psalm, Job is much upon it, as chap. XXI. 7. etc. and
chap. XXIV: and chap. XXVII. and in other places. Diverse other Psalms also
insist upon it more or less; as Psalm. XLIX. and LXXIII. and XC. Jeremie
professedly, chap. XII. 1. etc. And Habakkuk somewhat, chap. I. 13. The case in
point of fact is plain and undeniable. The Providence, Wisdom, and Justice of
God in it, is a Mystery to man. Yet to the Christian who believes the
Resurrection of the body, and eternal life, things not so clearly revealed in
the infancy of the Church, the difficulty is now soon dissolved. And the well
and wise weighing of the point by an Heathen, or natural man, may much avail
him for his further and better information in matters of great consequence and
concernment. See the Annotations on Psalm. XLI. 1. The greatest doubt arising
hence to the godly, may seem to be this, How these same occurrences of
administrations in Gods Providence may stand with such constant, continual, and
abundant promises of Gods blessings in temporal things to the godly in this
life, 1 Timothy IV. 8. and with his like threatenings of plagues and punishments to
the wicked in this world. The issue will be, That these Promises and
Threatenings, specialy under the Law, are spoken to vulgar capacities, in those
times; and yet have their exceptions and limitations in the Word: And that the
prosperity of the wicked is but a seeming prosperity; and a short, and
momentany prosperity in relation to eternity; and many ways disadvantageous
and hurtful to them; and ends with an overthrow sudden, and terrible, and
everlasting: And again, That the affliction of the godly is but momentany,
nothing to eternity, and mainly profitable for the work of Grace here, more
then abundantly recompensing and over-poizing their afflictions; and for the
increase of Glory hereafter. Yet super-adding this, That Gods wisdom and ways
of Providence are not commensurate with man's finite and shallow capacity, Psalm.
XXXVI. 6. Romans XI. 33. Genesis XVIII. 25. Esaias LV. 8, 9.

Fret not] Another Alphabetical Psalm. verse, but every second verse, begins
with the letter of the Hebrew Alphabet in order. Only verse 7, 20, 29, 34.
stand single in their due order, without any other letter or verse interposed.

cease from anger] Upon unjust causes, Ephesians. IV. 31. yet in it self lawful,
Ephesians. IV. 26. Mark III. 5.

A little] Prove. XV. Eccl. IX. 7.

I have been young] This was David's experience in his time.

to bring to remembrance] That he might remember Gods chastisement upon him for
his sin;

lest otherwise] A like argument or expression God uses, Deuteronomy. XXXII. 27.

to Jeduthun] Or for him, Chron. XXV. 3. So Psalm. LXXVII. title.

Even from good] Not much unlike that idiotisme and expression, Genesis XXXI. 29.
Number. XXIII. 25.

the fire burned] See Jer. XX. 9. Job XXXII. 18, 19.

a moath] The moath is suddenly crushed, Job IV. 19. and does insensibly
consume a garment, Job XIII. 28. Hos. V. 12.

That this Psalm should wholly be understood of Christ; David; may seem not
so safe and warrantable.

I waited] They are David's words throughout this Psalm. Heb. X. 7, 8, 9.

and heard my cry] Thus from experience of mercy formerly received, in Gods
hearing his Prayers, and delivering him from deepest dangers, in the former
part of the Psalm; he strengthens his faith in Prayer for obtaining like
mercy, and deliverance, in the later part of the Psalm: so as there is no
show of opposition or contradiction, between the beginning, and ending of it.

an horrible pit] Not that imaginary Limbus Patrum: David was plunged after
his conversion, and the graces of faith, hope, and invocation appearing in him,
ver. 1.

a new song] For new benefits and deliverances;

many shall] Psalm. XXXII. 6.

fear, and shall trust.] These two conjoined in a pious soul; fear, and faith;
a reverent fear, and trust in Gods mercy, Psalm. CXXX. 4.

unto our God] To god, and Christ.

his trust] Whose sure mercy to them is such, Tim. IV. 10. Deuteronomy. I. 31. and
XXXII. 10, 11, 12. John III. 16.

Many, O Lord my God] David speaking to God and Christ;

Sacrifice] Christ's words, Heb. X. 5. So that these words, and the next are
spoken unto God, in the person of the Messiah, who was to come of the seed of
David, Heb. X. 5, 6, 7. See the like before, XVI. 10. David having spoken in
the former verse of Gods wonderful works and thoughts toward mankind, does
in this manner in the words of the Messiah rise up to the very highest of them
all in these two verses. For Sacrifices, see my Table of them in Leviticus.

not desire] Jer. VII. 22. Hos. VI. 6. Prove. XXI. 3. 1 Samuel XV. 22. Psalm. L. 5,
-- 16. Matthew. XII. 7. Mark XII. 33. And Christ was now to put an end to them,
Dan. IX. 27. as not able in themselves to purge away sin, Heb. X. 4.
Therefore God desired them not simply of themselves, without inward piety
concurring, as the very life and soul of them; Or, in comparison of the
spiritual worship of God; or, in comparison of that all-sufficient Sacrifice of
Christ, which he was to offer in the body of his flesh, Heb. X. 1, 4. Romans
VIII. 3, 4. After which these Legal Typical Sacrifices were to be abolished, as
was said. And that Sacrifice of Christ one offered never to be reiterated, Heb.
IX. and X. chapters; contrary to that blasphemous sacrifice of Christ in the
Popish Mass.

mine ears have thou opened] Dug open, or peirced; made me obedient to thy
voice: or bored, to make me thy servant for ever; in allusion to the Law Exodus
XXI. 6. For these words here, we read, Heb. X. 5. but a body have thou prepared
me, or fitted me. Wherein the Apostle either follows the LXX. or cites, not
the words, but the sense, Romans VIII. 3. Phil. II. 7. it being the same both
ways, in issue. Besides that varieties of readings in both places are alleged
out of ancient Copies by the learned. Papists themselves deny not this text to
be incorrupt. The Apostle faithfuly retaining the sense and scope of the place,
without tying himself to the letter of the words in his quotation. The
variation is but a change of the figurative phrase into a proper, to express
the ready obedience of Christ to do the will of his Father in the work of the
redemption of mankind, John V. 30. VI. 38. and IV. 34. whereunto by framing him
a body God had fitted him.

Sinne-offering] Heb Sin. Put often in the Law for the Sinne-offering. So
Levit. IV. 3. 24. Exodus XXIX. 14. In which sense Christ is called Sin, 2 Cor.
V. 21.

Then said I, Lo, I come] When thou had so fitted me, Mark X. 32, 33, 34.

In the volume] or Scroll rolled up, Jer. XXXVI. 2. Ezekiel. II. 9. The Volume of
the Law and Scripture, Luke XXIV. 27, 44. John V. 39.

of the Book] Sepher, or Book generaly signifies any writings, Court-rools,
etc. Deuteronomy. XXIV. 1. 2 Kings V. 5, 6. Jer. XXXII. 11.

it is written of me] So Christ himself says, Matthew. XXVI. 24 John V 46. See
Luke XXIV. 44, 46. Acts XIII. 29.

I delight] Luke XXII. 15. Heb. X. 10.

to do thy will] Heb. X. 10. John VI. 38. Luke XXII. 42. In all things to be
performed by me in my flesh, which are required by thee for the redemption and
salvation of man; even to my obedience in suffering the death of the Cross,
Phil. II. 8. Thus Christ in regard of his humane nature was truly less then
the Father, John XIV. 28. was subject to him; his will to the will of his
Father; took upon him the form of a servant, Phil. II. 7. was truly a servant,
Esaias XLII. 1. obeyed the mandates of the Father, John XII. 49. and XIV. 31. and
XV. 10. Being our Surety, was made under the Law, Gal. IV. 4. under the Law of
Moses, Moral, and Ceremonial; that the righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in us, Romans VIII. 4. And these are not figurative and metaphorical,
but proper elocutions, in regard of Christ's humane nature; not making a Person
in it self, distinct from the Person of the Son of God, with Nestorius; nor
yet hereby making the Person of the Son of God hypostaticaly uniting to
himself the Humane Nature, inferior to the Person of the Father, as Arius
would.

I have preached] Though Gods works were such as the fifth verse expresses;
John XVII. 6. Luke XXIV. 47. even Gods righteousness, faithfulness, truth,
loving-kindnesse, salvation, to the great Congregation of his people, Romans III.
21, 22. Esaias LXI. 1, 2, 3. and XLIX. 6. which office and duty David also the
Type, in his degree, and all Christ's messengers in their place and function, do
perform.

withold not thou] David prays here for what he had preached in the former
verse,

heart fails me] Psalm. and XXXVIII. 10.

Be pleased] Hence to the end of the Psalm agrees with Psalm. LXX. David
petitions, verse; the confusion of his enemies, verse 14, 15. to the joy of the
godly, and the glory of God, verse 16.

confounded] David's imprecation against his enemies. Sam. XV. 31. and Acts IV.
29. and Psalm. LXXXIII. 16. more then a mere prophetical prediction of evils to
befall them. Here is more: And so Psalm. XXXV. 4. and LXX. 2, 3. and CIX. 7.
etc. and LIX. 13. and 2 Timothy IV. 14. And in many other places. David here, and
other holy Prophets do not thunder thus against their enemies, desperate
sinners, out of any immoderate carnal passions, of private hatred, or desire of
revenge; or out of any rash and inconsiderate zeal; but moved and inflamed
rather by the Spirit of God; acting herein the public cause of God, and of his
glory; against those whom they knew by the spirit of discerning, 1 Cor. XII.
10. to be Gods, and their forlorn foes. Yet possible that in some of these
imprecations some mixture of humane infirmities might be: as in Jeremie XV. 15,
16, 17. But for us; touching private and personal enemies, our duty is, as we
read, Matthew. V. 44. as we find in the example of Christ, Luke XXIII. 34. and
of Stephen, Acts VII. 60. and 1 Pet. II. 23. And for public enemies of God and
his Church; we may not absolutely use execrations against their persons; as not
knowing but God may convert them afterward, of Saul's make them Paul's; and lest
we incur that rebuke, with those Disciples, Luke IX. 55. Let us stay till we
know that we be of their spirit before we do as these Prophets did. Of
imprecations, see more in the Observations on Psalm. CIX. 14. and the
Annotations on Neh. IV. 5.

Let all those] David's prayer for those that seek God,

But I] He concludes with commending his own case to God,

Blessed] This Psalm by some is applied to Christ;

deliver him] That is, the poor or sick weakling: David so comforts the poor
afflicted. So we must judge charitably, that God in his ordinary course of
providence will in due time, raise and restore them whom for a while he has
cast down. Some by him understand him that considers the poor.

his bed in his sicknesse] Make it to his ease.

As Acts XXVIII.

eat of my bread] This our Savior applies to Judas, John XIII. 18. See Psalm.
LV. 12, 13, 14.

Amen] A concurrence of wishes, Psalms.

Korah] This, Psalms, without David's name in the Title, are inscribed for
Korah's posterity, to be sung in the Temple, with voice, and instrument. Heman
the singer, the grandchilde of Samuel the Prophet, being one of his posterity,
1 Chronicles. VI. 33, -- 43. See the Observations on Number. XVI. 32.

This Psalm seems written by David; and when he was banished by Absalom, or
Saub rather, from the Sanctuary, and sacred Assemblies, and Solemnities, verse
1, 2, 4, 6. 9.

As the Hart] Or Hind. Hind; reading the Hebrew here in the foeminine gender;
for which the Hebrews render diverse reasons. And though the Hebrews have a word
of the masculine gender for the Heart, and of the foeminine gender for the Hind;
yet by either of them many times the other sex is understood. And so it is also
in other names of beasts with the Hebrews. As in Zech. IX. 9. the word for Ass
is of the masculine gender, yet the female sex is thereby understood, Matthew.
XXI. 2. So the name of the fish which swallowed Jonas is named both in the
masculine, and in the foeminine termination. See Jer. II. 24.

Kept holy day] Three solemn feasts in the year. Exodus XXIII. 14. and XXXII.
5, 6 19. Deuteronomy. XVI. 14, 15. Judge. XXI. 19, 21. Esaias XXX. 29.

for the help of his countenance] Or, his presence is salvations i. e. number
is used to advance and amplify the matter subject whereunto it is applied, as
in this word, Ps. XVIII. 2. and XXVIII. 8, and XLIV. 4. and LXXIV. 12. So in
others; as may be seen in the Observations on Psalm. LI. 17.

from the land of Jordan] From the places of his banishment,

Deep] Afflictions upon afflictions, breaking in as billows, wallowing as
waves,

Seems written by David,

hill, and to thy Tabernacles] The Ark was then at the hill of Kiriathjearim;
Nob, or Gibeon.

This Psalm of Instruction, David's reign; or of the Babylonish captivity; and
not to be extended to the days of Antiochus Epiphanes.

and cast them out] Or rather did propagate, Psalm. LXXX. 12. Ezekiel. XVII. 6.

them] That is, our fathers.

command] Psalm. XLII. 8. Deuteronomy. XXVIII. 8. Psalm. CXXXIII. 3.

But] Having remembered Gods former mercies, Psalm. LXXXIX.

Yet] They profess their integrity.

neither] In Hebrew it is, and. But this particle is diverse times taken to
signify neither. And so Psalm. L. 8. and Prove. XXXI. 3. Esaias XLI. 28. and chap.
XXVIII. 27, 28. See the Cinnus p. 182, 183.

for thy sake are] Applied by Saint Paul, to the present state and condition of
himself; Romans VIII. 36.

Awake,] They beg his help, and mercy.

a song of loves] A marriage song or Epithalamion of the well-be-loved
(Virgins) verse 9, Ephesians. V. 32. It sets forth Christ in his glory; and his
Spouse, the Church, in her beauty. See Heb. I. 8. John III. 29. Apoc. XXI. 9,
10. Typified here in Solomon, and Pharaohs daughter; wherein yet some things
are proper only to the Antitype.

My heart] Matthew. XII. 34.

touching the King] My Poems of the King.

Thou art fairer] Cant. V. 10, -- 16. I. 16. Heb. VII. 26.

lips] Cant. V. 13. Luke IV. 22. Esaias L. 4. John I. 18. and III. 37.

gird thy sword] The spiritual sword is the Word of God, Ephesians. VI. 17. Apoc.
I. 16. And with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked, Esaias. XI. 4.

ride prosperously] As in a triumphant Chariot, Esaias LIII. 10.

because of truth, etc.] Sitting and riding as it were, upon these three royal
virtues and graces; and they, as it were, drawing the Chariot.

truth] Ephesians. I. 13. Prove. XX. 28.

Meeknesse] Matthew. XXI. 5. and chap. XI. 29. and chap. XII. 19, 20. Esaias XLII.
2. Zech. IX. 9.

righteousnesse] Verse 7. Dan. IX. 24.

teach thee] Experimentaly, by its own actings, Psalm. XCVIII. 1. Esaias LXIII. 5.

Thine arrows] Heb. IV. 12. 2 Cor. II. 14, 15. and X. 4, 5. verse not so
properly suits to Solomon, or befits him. Therefore a greater then Solomon is
here, Matthew. XII. 42. Esaias XLIX. 2. Of these arrows is that true, 2 Samuel I. 22.
and 2 King. XIII. 17.

Thy Throne] Heb. I. 8. 2 Samuel VII. 16. Psalm. X. 16. Esaias IX. 7. Luke I. 33.
Dan. III. 44, 45. and VII. 14 Psalm. CXLV. 13. John XVIII. 36. Solomon, either
for the perpetuity of his Throne; or righteousness of his Scepter: But to
Christ, who is here called God.

the Scepter] Esaias XI. XCVI. 10.

Thou love righteousnesse] Esaias XI. 3, 4, 5. and chap. IX. 7. and LXI. 8.

Therefore] To that end and purpose anointed; not anointed for that cause and
merit, because he loved righteousness. As Esaias LXI. 1. And so is therefore to
be understood in the second verse aforegoing. So Genesis XVIII. 5. and XIX. 8.

God thy God] The first of these may be read either in the Nominative, or
Vocative case. The later is God anointing; who is truly the God of the Messiah;
as Psalm. XXII. 1.

has anointed] God anointed him to his Offices of Prophet, Priest, and King:
as such Officers were of old anointed, Exodus XXIX. 7. 1 Samuel IX. 16. 1 King.
XIX. 17. But this anointing here is to be understood of spiritual, inward,
invisible anointing, Acts X. 37, 38. And so Psalm. CV. 15. The Patriarchs are
styled anointed, who never were so outwardly with material oil. And this
spiritual Anointing here is the superabundant infusion of the gifts and graces
of the holy Ghost, not into the Divine nature of Christ properly, which is
incapable of grace infused, or of having any thing added to it; but into his
Humane nature, plentifuly furnishing him with all abilities and graces for his
execution of his said Offices, Luke IV. 17, -- 21. Esaias LXI. 1. Dan. IX. 24.
Yet as he is (...), Emmanuel, the Mediator, reserving ever the property of
either nature entire to it self, He may be said to be anionted in both natures,
taking anointed in that sense as it denotes the designation and inauguration of
him to his said Offices. And this Anointing may be appliable specialy to the
time of his Incarnation, of his Baptism, and of his Rising from the dead.

above thy fellows] Both Kings, Priests, and Prophets, Psalm. LXXXIX. 27. above
all his fellows, in nature, Heb. II. 14. in Christian Prerogatives, 1 John II.
20, 27. Apoc. I. 6. 1 Pet. II. 5, 9. And this both extensively, and
intensively; Esaias XI. 2. John I. 16. and III. 24.

garments] Are odoriferous,

out of the Ivory palaces] 2 Kings XXII. 39. Amos III. 15. 1 Kings X. 20.
Meaning, that either the King comes out of them, as the bridegroom; like that
Psalm. XIX. 5. Or that the garments were taken out of such palaces or coffers.

Whereby they have made thee glad] By those odoriferous smells and perfumes:
Prove. XXVII. 9. Or those that meet thee, or the bridegromes friends John III.
29. by their joyful acclamations and congratulations. Or, as some, more then
theirs that make thee glad, i. e. thy garments more odoriferous then theirs,
thy fellows and friends. All this was true in Solomon literaly. Much more in
Christ spiritualy and mysticaly. Whereof his Spouse makes use, Cant. I. 3. Esaias
LXI. 10.

Kings daughters] The daughters of minor-Kings, Judge. VIII. 18.

thy honorable women] Those beloved Virgins, intimated in the Title; honored
also by their invitation to this marriage, and honoring it, as the brides
maids.

thy right hand] The prime place next the King: as the left hand is the second
place; the King being in the middle. So Bathsheba, 1 King. II. 19. So Christ in
respect of his Humanity, Matthew. XXVI. 65.

did stand] Or sit; had her seat, or station. So both standing and sitting on
Gods right hand, in one and the same sense, are ascribed to our Savior, Mark
XVI. 19. Acts VII. 56. For us, See Ephesians. II. 6.

the Queene] This royal and honorable English word is very nigh the dishonest
name of a Queen. And so the Hebrew word here used (...) for a Queen, a wife,
is very nigh to the unseemely word (...): for which the Massorets, as more
mannerly forsooth, still in the margin put another word (...), Deuteronomy. XXVIII.
30. Esaias XIII. 16. Zech. XIV. 2. Jer. III. 2.

in gold] In cloth of gold; of threads of gold, of fine glistering gold, with
rings, chains, and bracelets of gold, the most pure and splendent gold, Job
XXXI. 24. Cant. V. 11. Dan. X. V. Of the several names of gold in the Hebrew,
see the Annotations on Job XXVIII. 15, -- 19.

of Ophir] See the Observations on 1 King. X. 11.

He arken] Matthew. XVII. 5. Romans X. 17.

O daughter] John I. 13. Apoc. XXI. 9, 10.

forget also] Luke IX. 23. and XIV. 26. Matthew. X. 37. As Abraham did, Genesis XII.
1. and Ruth, chap. I. 16, 17.

So shall] Upon these terms,

greatly desire] This true in Solomon. But Christ loves his Spouse first, 1
John IV. 10. Loves her in her blood, Ezekiel. XVI. 6.

thy Lord] 1 Pet. III. 6. Judge. XIX. 26. And that no common or vulgar person.
In the highest degree is Christ so to his Spouse the Church, even her Lord and
God.

Worship thou him] Pharaohs daughter was with civil worship to do it to
Solomon, with civil reverent incurvation and adoration. The Church to Christ,
with religious worship.

of Tyre] Of this City, Annotations on Amos I. 9. This rich Merchant-Citie,
the prime Mart for traffic, should bring to Solomon's Spouse gifts and nuptial
presents. And much more, Tire and all Heathen Nations should bring themselves,
and their Gifts, with all offices of submission and subjection, to the Spouse
of Christ, Esaias XLIX. 23. and LXVI. 12. Psalm. LXXXVII. 4.

the rich] Esaias LX. 3, 10, 11, 16.

glorious within] 1 Pet. II. 4, 5. Helen without, and Hecuba within. This true
in Solomon's Spouse partly. But in Christ's Spouse true altogether, by her
bridegroomes donation and operation, Ephesians. V. 27.

brought] With pomp,

of needle-work] As formerly costly for matter; so here curious for Art and
work. As the like, Exodus XXVIII. 6, 8, 15, 39.

with gladnesse] As is fit in marriage solemnities.

they be brought] The Spouse first; the Virgins and brides maids, following and
waiting on her; Cant. IV. 8. Apoc. XIX. 7, 8, 9. 2 Cor. XI. 2.

palace] As the wise Virgins, Matt. XXV. 10.

thy children] We read not that Pharaoh's daughter had any child by Solomon.
Esaias XLIX. 18, -- 21. and LIVE. 1, 2, 3. Heb. II. 13.

I will] Says the Psalmist; by himself;

thy Name] The name of the Bridegroom.

therefore] By my example; as well as for all the reasons foregoing in this
Psalm.

praise thee] Christ the Bridegroom, for ever and ever: whereas Solomon by his
foul fall worthily merited and inherited shame and dispraise.

present help] Deliverer;

will not we fear] Though a natural fear; as Prove. XIV. 16. and XXII. 3. Matthew.
VIII. 26. yet not a godless, and faithless fear. Here faith triumphs over
such a fear.

though the earth] Hyperbolical expressions, usualy intimating the fearful
alterations of States, and Polities; or the most dreadful dangers.

a river] Alluding to that of Kidron, Gihon, Shiloah: intending chiefly that,
Ezekiel. XLVII. 1. Joel III. 18. Apoc. XXII. 1. Or, the meaning of this seems
best expounded in the next verse; and in the two verses following.

He maketh] Esaias XLV. 7. Amos III. 6. Psalm. LXXVI. 3.

Exalted] Esaias XXXIII. 9, 10. and XXX. 15.

O clap] A sign of joyful acclamation used at the coronation of Kings 2 Kings
XI. Ezekiel. XXV. 6. See Psalm. XCVIII. 8. Esaias LV. 12. Psalm. LXVI. 1. The Psalmist
exhorts all people to sing Praises unto God, ver. 1. 7. A thing usual in the
Psalms.

For the Lord] Reasons, from Gods nature and properties; Mal. I. 14. Matt.
XXVIII. 18.

He shall subdue] The Jews enemies. Ezekiel. XX. 37.

He shall choose] He did choose Canaan for his people Israel, Psalm. LXXVIII.
55. Canaan, that inheritance incorruptible, 1 Pet. I. 4. for all that believe
and hope in him.

for us] The Jews seeming here to include the Gentiles, as called by Christ
into the same communion of the Covenant, for grace, and glory, John X. 16. Ephesians.
II. 14.

the excellency of Jacob] High and glorious excellency, whereby Jacobs
posterity excelled, Ezekiel. XXIV. 21. Amos VI. 8. and VIII. 7. Nahum. II. 2. viz.
the Temple, Priesthood, etc. all those most excellent and precious promises and
blessings made in Christ unto Jacob, and his posterity.

God is gone up] When the Ark was carried from Kiriathjearim to the house of
Obed Edom: David: thence by Solomon into the Oracle: 1 Chronicles. XIII. 8. and XV.
28. and 2 Chronicles. V. 13. Spiritualy and mysticaly, when Christ ascended with
triumph into heaven. See Ephesians. IV. 8. Col. II. 15.

the King of all the earth] The universal Kingdom of God, and of Christ. verse
8. Differing from earthly Kings.

with understanding.] 1 Cor. XIV. 15. The word Maschil is here used for Psalm,
which is the Title of sundry Psalms, signifying an instructing Psalm. Thereby
to instruct your selves, and others, of the Kingdom of God, and Christ; and of
your duty.

of throne of his holinesse] Psalm. IX. 4. Apoc. IV. 2.

The Princes] The voluntary,

of the God of Abraham] His spiritual seed, Luke III. 8. VIII. 33. etc. Romans
IV. 16, 17.

Sheilds] He is the great Shield, Genesis XV. 1. Psalm. V. 12. and XVIII. 35. the
great conqueror, and protector of all. And Magistrates Sheilds under him; Hos.
IV. 18. Psalm. LXXXIX. 18.

greatly exalted] Psalm. XCVII. 9.

A Song and Psalme] used; the voice began, and the instrument after; And where
the Inscription is a Psalm and Song, there likely the instrument began, and
the voice followed. Of the former sort are, as this Psalm; to Psalm. LXVI.
LXXXIII. CVIII. Of the later, are Psalm. LXVII. LXVIII. LXXV. LXXXVII. and XCII.

whole earth] Or Land of Judea. Exodus X. 15. and most likely Matthew. XXVII. 45.

the sides of the North] The Temple on Mount Moriah, and the City of Jerusalem,
joined North to Mount Sion. Moriah is the North part of Sion. So Esaias XIV. 13.

the Kings were assembled] The Philistian Princes, 2 Samuel V. or those
Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. XX. or of Ezekiah, 2 Kings XVIII. Upon some of which
occasions this Psalm seems to be composed and inspired, Psalm. XLVI. 6.

marvailed, and were troubled] At Sions beauty,

Thou breakest] As in a Shipwreck; Sam. V. 20.

Tarshish] See the Observations on 1 Kings X. 22.

East wind] See Ezekiel. XVII. 10. and XIX. 12. Hos. XII. 1. and Chapter XIII. 15.
Jonah IV. 8.

As we have heard] Psalm. XLIV. 1.

seene] By experience.

because of thy judgements] In confounding thine enemies,

tell the towers] Mark if any of them be demolished,

that ye may tell it] How God had preserved and kept them.

a parable] A sententious, Prove. I. 6. not beseeming simple ones, Prove. XXVI.
7. used by Balaam, Number. XXIII. and XXIV. by Ezekiel at Gods command, chap.
XVII. 2. and XX. 49. and much by our Savior himself in his preaching, Matthew.
XIII. 35. sometimes in plainer manner, Mark IV. 33 sometimes in intended
obscurity, Luke VIII. 10. requiring sharpness of wit to understanded and
expound them. Here the Psalmists extraordinary Preface ushering it in; and this
enigmatical manner of delivering it, argues the matter to be of great weight and
difficulty. As indeed it is that which so much troubles and puzleth the wisest
and the best men of the world; the afflictions and miseries of the godly, and
the prosperities of the wicked. See Psalm. XXXVII. 1. and LXXIII. 2, 12. and
XCIV. 3, 4. Job XXI. 7, 13. Jer. XII. 1. Hab. I. 4, 5. And the wicked thereby
take encouragement to evil, and nourish impious conceits in their hearts
touching God, and his providence; Job XXI. 14, 15. Psalm. X. 3, 6, 11, 13. and
XIV. 1. and XCIV. 7, 8. Mal. II, 17. and III. 15. See more of this in the
Observations on Psalm. XXXVII. 1.

should I fear?] The godly should not fear,

boast] The wicked, and wealthy,

wise men die] Eccl. II. 16. and III. 19.

Their inward thought] They hunted after honor,

Neverthelesse] They shall have no more good by their honors, Psalm. XXXVII.
36. 1. John II. 17.

abides not] Heb. Abides not for a night. Which text many Jews, and other
Writers, both old and new, do urge for their opinion, that Adam fell the same
day wherein he was created; which point the great Linguist and Chronologer
Master Hugh Broughton does press and prosecute, even with some heat, and
overmuch passion, at large. But the learned Gataker does clear this text from
any such meaning, and gives reasons most probable, That Adam did not fall the
same day wherein he was created, in his Cinnus, p. 189. -- 198.

yet their posterity] Not warned thereby; Psalm. X. 3.

like sheep] Rotten sheep that die of themselves.

feel on them] And devour them.

and the upright] The righteous in Christ, men of sincere integrity.

in the morning] Of the resurrection; when Christ the Sun of righteousness
shall arise at his second coming.

But God] This answers that question, verse 5.

will redeem, etc.] Raise up my body, and receive me into everlasting life;
which is here opposed to all the worldly prosperity of faithless wicked men.
See Genesis V. 24. Psalm. LXXIII. 24. John XIV. 3. Acts VII. 15. 1 These. IV. 14. A
clear testimony of the resurrection of the body, the immortality of the soul,
and the life everlasting.

Be not thou afraid] Stumble not,

never see light] Job XXXIII. 28, 30. Psalm. LVI. 13. nor the light of heaven,
Matthew. VIII. 12.

man] Verse 12.

beasts] The Sheep, verse 14.

Asaph] Either the Author, Chron. XXIX. 30. Or chief Singer; to whom, and his
sons, and posterity it was committed, 1 Chronicles. XVI. 5, 7. and XXV. 2. to tune
it, and sing it, and play it upon musical instruments. And thus, Psalm. LXXIII.
to LXXXIII. are entitled all to, or for Asaph.

The mighty God] God himself is brought in as a Judge upon the Bench,

the perfection of beauty] Psalm. XLVIII. 2. Lam. II. 15.

a fire] As at Mount Sinai, Heb. XII. 18, 19.

call to the heavens] As Deuteronomy. IV. 26. Esaias I. 2. Micah VI. 1, 2.

not reprove thee for thy Sacrifices] Jer. VII. 22. Esaias I. 11, 14. and LXVI.
3. Micah VI. 6, 7 Hos. VI. 6. Amos IV. 4, 5. The meaning here is according to
that 1 Samuel XV. 22.

Offer] The inward, Psalm, verse 23. Hos. XIV. 3. Heb. XII^. 15.

pay thy vowes] Of vows, see the Annotations on Jonah I, 16.

But unto the wicked] Here God sentenceth those gross hypocrites that place
all Religion in outward Rites and Ceremonies: Psalm.

And speak against] Psalm. LXIX. 13. Psalm. XXVI. 4. 5.

Nathan] To reprove him for his sin, Sam. XI. and XII. chapters. Written,
upon that argument, though not at that time.

gone in] Genesis VI. 4.

Bathsheba] The daughter of Eliam, 2 Samuel XI. 3. called also Bathshua, daughter
of Ammiel, 1 Chronicles. III. 5.

Have mercie] A rare example of repentance:

wash me] And so verse 7. Levit. XI. 25, 32. Exodus XIX. 10. Number. XIX. 19. Thus
he prays, and thus he deals throughout this Psalm; even after Nathans
absolution. And thus true Penitents will do.

For I acknowledge] Prove. XXVIII. 13. 1. John I. 9. So Esaias LIX. 12. Jer. III.
13.

Cited, Romans III. 4. with no variation in sense.

thee only] Not because he a King, and so exempt from the power of others: Sam.
II. 24, 25. and such a God, so good to him, 2 Samuel VII. 18, 19. and that God
should so suffer in this his sin; 2 Samuel XII. 14. who yet only could pardon
his sin, Matthew. IX. 3. as against whom, and whose commandment properly, all
sin is committed.

in thy sight] God then sees the sins of his Saints; yea more, he is offended
with them, reproves them, makes his Saints smart for them; as in the Scripture
plentifully appears. That place Number. XXIII. 21. is blindly brought against this
truth, as if they would make God a blind idol, and not an omniscient God. Or,
as if that text had not relation to the Saints under the Old Testament, before
that grace, which they say, is given in the New.

that thou might be justified] Acquitted, glorified, by this my confession,
Josh. VII. 19.

when thou speakest] In thy reproof by Nathan.

and be clear] Clearly overcome, be unreprovable, and win the victory in
judgment.

when thou judgest] In sentencing my sin, and my punishment for it: Or, when
thou art judged; in the opinion of men, and in their censures, for thy dealing
with me. Saint Paul citing these words, Romans III. 4. applies them from the
hypothesis, in David's singular case; to the thesis, to Gods general faith and
truth in all his promises and proceedings. And thus the injustice of man does
commend the justice of God.

in iniquity] This we call Original sin. Romans VII. 17. whereby all men are
carnal, sold under sin, John III. 6. Romans VII. 14. The fountain of actual
sins, John IX. 34. Ephesians. II. 1. So as whole man is in evil, and whole evil
is in man.

the hidden part] The hid man of the heart, 1 Pet. III. 4.

thou shall make me] Thus rising up by faith to this hope: have made me; thus
opposing that integrity which God requires, to his present state of corruption
by his foul fall contracted.

to know wisdome] 1 John II. 4. by his sin now eclipsed.

with hysop] Exodus XII. 22. Levit. XIV. 4, 6, 49. Number. XIX. 6, 18. Heb. IX. 19.

Create] Ephesians. II. 10. and IV. 24. Jer. XXXII. 39. Ezekiel. XI. 19. and XXXVI. 26.

take not] Yet Gods holy Spirit was in him; even in this case,

free spirit] Freely and bountifully bestowed, freeing me from the bondage of
sin, making me free to righteousness, 2 Cor. III. 17. Romans VI. 18. 22.

blood-guiltinesse] Bloods of Uriah, and others slain with him.

Open thou my lips] Give me new occasion by the pardoning of my sin:

not Sacrifice] See the Observations on Psalm. XL. 6. Indeed we find not
expressed any sacrifice for murder,

the Sacrifices] The plural number is here used for the greater emphasis, and
amplification. Judge. VII. 10. 2 Chronicles. XXIV. 25. and chap. XXVIII. 3. Prove. I.
20. Mal. I. 6. Lam. III. 22. 2. Sam, XXII. 1.

unto Sion] The whole Church was in danger of Gods judgment by his sin: Sam.
XXIV. 15.

and whole-burnt-offering] See Levit. VI. 23.

the Edomite] Of Edom, Idumea* or Adonite, from Adam, a City in Reuben; or
Admah, a City in Judah; or Adam* a town in Naphtali; or Adummin, in the
borders of Judah and Benjamin. The History of this is in 1 Samuel XXI. and XXII.
chapters. Here we have David's (...) ^ation of Doeg; and imprecation against
him; and his own glorious (...) in God.

This (...) ^uch like the fourteenth Psalm. Psalm are much alike.

(...) fear was] Deuteronomy. Levit. XXVI. 36. Job XV. 21. (...) XVIII. 1.

(...) Citizens of Ziph in the tribe of Judah,

said (...)] This they did twice, 1 Samuel XXIII. 19. and again, chap. XX^I. 1.

strangers] Though of the same tribe, Job complains, chap. XIX. 13, 14, 15. and
so estranged from God, Psalm. LVIII. 3. No strangers more strange then they that
cast off the bands of civility, and nature, wherein they were bound.

cut them off in thy wrath.] Psalm. CXLIII. 12. Of Imprecations, see the
Observations on Psalm. CIX. 14.

and make a noise] In the earnestness of his Prayer,

cast inquity upon me] From themselves upon me,

my heart] Psalm. XXXI. 9, -- 12.

O that I had] A passionate with, Psalm. XIV. 7.

flee away] As a bird, Psalm. XI. 1. swiftly and speedily.

wildernesse] As Apoc.

divide their tongues] Their language, Genesis XI. 7. 2 Samuel XVII. 1, 5, 14.

not an enemie] Psalm. XLI. 9. John XIII. 18.

mine equal] My Peer, Achitophel: and the whole Psalm, to his distress in
his flight from Absalom, and his conspiracy.

quick into hell] As Number.

Evening, VI. 10. Acts III. 1. and chap. X. 9.

battel] 2 Samuel XXVII. 2, 3.

because they have no changes] In their temporal estate and prosperity, Job X.
17. ( David therefore blesses God for afflictions, Psalm CXIX. 67, 71.) which
yet should have made them change from evil to good; but it wrought no change in
them, but the contrary; they were in evil unchangable, Jer. XIII. 23.

drawn swords] Psalm. LVII. 4. and LIX. 7. and Prove. XII. 18. and XXX. 14.

cast thy burden] 1 Pet.

half their dayes] Job XV. and XXI. 21. Psalm. XXXVII. 35, 36. Jeremie XVII. 11.
Eccles. VIII. 12, 13.

Jonath Elem Rechokim] Many take not these words for a musical instrument;
concerning the dumb Dove in a far place; understanding them of David himself,
and his case and condition now in Gath. See Psalm. XXXIV. and the Title. Of
Gath, see the Annotations on Amos VI. 2. Michtam is a jewel, or golden Psalm.

I am afraid, I will trust in thee] Faith and Fear stand together. And so Fear
and Love.

In God I will praise his Word] So again verse 10. 1 Samuel XXX. 6. in his word
and promise. Psalms, is not worth the while to take notice of them.

shall they escape by iniquity?] It is not fit so to do. Psalm. VII. 15. and IX.
15. and X. 2. Prove. V. 22.

my wandrings] From Saul's presence to Gath. Adullam; to Mizpeh in Moab; to the
Forest of Hareth in Judah; to Keilah; to the Wilderness of Ziph; of Maon; to
Engedi: hunted as a Partridge in the Mountains.

wilt not thou] Verse 9. 2 Cor. I. 10. Surely thou will, Psalm. CXVI. 8. 9.

Al-taschith] That is, Destroy not: which seems to be the subject matter of
this Psalm. The same is in the Titles of Psalm. LVIII. LIX. LXXV. Possibly the
word here may relate to that, 1 Samuel XXVI. 9. though that fell out after his
being in the Cave.

Cave] 1 Samuel XXIV. 3. And in the Cave he made a Prayer, which is the CXLII.
Psalm.

performs all things for me] Psalm. CXXXVIII. 8. Phil. I. 6.

Some understand this Psalm in this sense, Psalm, exclude all, or any
relation had to Saul, and his wicked Courtiers.

Doye] He appeals to their consciences.

speak righteousnesse] Or dumb justice: boasting so to do, when indeed justice
was dumb, and opened not her mouth.

O congregation] O assembly, company of Saul's Courtiers and Counselors;
complying with the King against David.

you weigh] Not justice;

from the womb] Esaias XLVIII. 8. John IX. 34. Ephesians. IV. 18. Jer. XIII. 23.

Charmers] The Addars craft against them is recorded by diverse Authors. Acts
VII. 57. Charmers seem to practice thus upon Addars, Eccles. X. 11. Jer. VIII.
17. And Charmers are forbidded by Gods Law, Deuteronomy. XVIII. 11. Yet this may seem
a proverbial speech used by David, without any purpose to maintain either the
truth of the thing in matter of fact, no more then Sirenum voces, or Cygnea
cantio do prove such things to be; or else the lawfulness of it in relation to
God and his Law. And Proverbs and Similitudes may be taked from things in
themselves unlawful; as from a thief, Apoc. XVI. 15. the unjust Steward, Luke
XVI. 18.

O God] The plural word Elohim here used is most times meant of one true God in
the singular number. Genesis XX. 13. and XXXV. 7. And so may be understood that in
Exodus XXXII. 1. and verse 4. comparing therewith Neh. IX. 18.

Before your pots can feel the thornes] The general meaning is plain, verses.
Yet this proves a thorny text, to expound aright the simiiude of thorns here
used, and the rest of the words contained in this verse. Pots, thorns, living,
are words here of various significations; whence three maine renditions and
interpretations do arise, thus: Before your pots can feel the fire of thorns,
which is short, Eccles. VII. 6. so shall God take them away, as raw (flesh) by
the heat of his indignation. Or thus, as quick, or as yet living, and
flourishing, in his wrath. Or thus, Ere men shall perceive your young springs
of thorns grow to a perfect pricking bramble, God will as with a whirlewinde
destroy every one of them, even as alive or quick, even in wrath as in burning
anger. Thus speaking to the wicked, of their sudden destruction. Or thus, As
raw flesh is snatched out of the pot, or flesh snatched out of the pot, being
yet raw, before the heat of that light bramble-fire be come to it; so God, etc.
Thus variously we may extend our minds and meanings; without any peremptory
determination of any one particular.

wash his feet] As Psalm. Esaias LXIII. 3. Mal. IV. 3. Apoc. XIV. 20.

at evening] Saul's messengers watching the house to kill David. verse 14.

of his strength] Saul's. Deuteronomy. V. 10. Dan. IX. 4. Mich. I. 2. meaning David's
strength. And so it is verse 17.

my mercie] So by the vowels, his mercy.

Slay them not] At once; verse 13. he says Consume them -- that they may not
be. And in the next words, and let them know. All which may so well agree
together, as needs no words of reconciliation.

Shushan-Eduth] Shushan signifies an instrument of six strings, from (...)
six; or a Lilly called (...), because it consists of six leaves: Eduth
signifies Testimony; either implying this Psalm to be a testimony of David's
faith and thankfulness; or to be sung by the Priests before the Ark of the
testimony; or rather, being joined to the former word by a Maccaph, as in some
kind a part of it, it makes up the name of the musical instrument.

to teach] The Doctrine in this Psalm contained; that all might learn it. As
Deuteronomy. XXXI. 19. 2 Samuel I. 18. 2 Chronicles. XXXV. 25.

when he strove] See the Histories, 2 Samuel VIII. 13. 1 Chronicles. XVIII. 12. And
see the Observations on 2 Samuel VIII. 5, 13.

Edom] The Edomites joining with the Syrians.

in the valley of salt] At the South end of the dead Sea. Or, that called the
valley of Siddim, Genesis XIV. 8. Or the valley of Saveh, verse* 17.

twelve thousand] And after in the pursuit of the victory, six thousand, or
these six thousand, by Abishai, before the main battle. From both does arise
the number of eighteen thousand. Which victory being archieved by David's two
Generals, Joab and Abishai, both under him, is ascribed to each of these three,
in the places before cited. And as David, and his Generals, obtained a victory
here, 2 Samuel VIII. 13. So afterward did Amatziah slay of Edom in the valley of
Salt 10000. And other 10000. were cast down the top of the rock, or Selah, or
Petra; which Amatziah took by war, and they all were broken in pieces, 2
King. XIV. 7. 2 Chronicles. XXV. 11, 12.

Thou have given] Now a banner of conquest and victory.

That] From hence to the end accords with Psalm. CVIII. 6,

I will reioyce] David by reason of Gods truth, Judea, and those bordering
about it.

I will divide] This implies a possession first.

Shechem] It was a City in Mount Ephraim near Samaria; given to the
Kohathites-Levites, and a City of Refuge. Abram came thither. Jacob had his
daughter Dinah ravished there. Joshua thither gathers all Israel, and renues
Gods Covenant with them a little before his death. The Shechemites conspire
against the house of Gideon to make Abimelech King, and he destroys them.
Thither Rehoboam came to be made King; but Jeroboam gains the Kingdom of
Israel, builds, or repairs Shechem, and dwells in it. Of this see the
Annotations on Hos. VI. 9.

Succoth] Not that in Egypt, Exodus XII. 37. But that where Jacob built booths,
Genesis XXXIII 5. Afterward a City in the Tribe of Gad, upon the river Jabbok,
East of Jordan; justly destroyed by Gideon, Judge. VIII. But repaired after.

Gilead is mine] Thus David triumphs in having, Judea beyond Jordan, though
they stood longest out for Ishbosheth, Saul's son.

Moab is my washpot] I can and will use it to base offices, Sam. 2. VIII. Psalm.
CVIII. 9.

Over Edom] Trample it under foot, or use it to base offices. See Matt. III.
11. as to pull off my shoe, to wipe my shoe; or as Sapores the Persian used
Valerian the Romand Emperor; or Temerlan the Scythian used Bajazeth the Turk;
or Pope Alexander the third used Frederik the Emperor; and Pope Caelestine the
third did to Henry the Emperor: bring it to a base and ignominious subjection.

triumph thou] An ironical apostrophe, or bitter mock to Philistia, or the
Philistines, in the West border of Palestine. And diverse such ironies are in
Scripture; See the Observations on Amos IV. 4.

who will] The answer is in the two next verses.

Through God] David's wish, Chron. XIX. 13.

From the end of the earth] Of Judea; Saul, or Absalom rather, 2 Samuel XVII. 24.

prolong] In this likely David has a principal eye to Christ.

once, twice] See the like Job XL. 5.

mercy; for thou renderest] Even reward it self is of mercy.

in the wilderness of Judah.] Sam. XXII. 5. and XXIII. 14, 15. Thus David's
Psalms are not set down in this Book according to the Order of time, and
occasions, wherein, and whereupon they were made and inspired.

seen thee in the Sanctuary] David's desires to the Sanctuary, Psalm. XXVII. 4.
and LXV. 4.

meditate] David's night-meditations.

my soul follows hard after thee] 1 Cor. VI. 17. Phil. III. 13, 14.

that swears by him] Swearing here taken for the whole worship of God, Deuteronomy.
VI. 13. Esaias XLV. 23. and LXV. 16. Of Swearing; see the Observations on Hos.
IV. 15.

O thou that hear prayer, to thee] An heavenly encouragement to Prayer.

choosest, and causest] Gods free grace; not man's free will.

Thou visitest the earth] This Psalm may seem composed after some year of
famine.

with the river of God] The rain, Deuteronomy. XI. 10, 11.

submit] Though feignedly and falsely, Psalm. XVIII. 44. 1 Samuel XXII. 45. As the
faithful shall obey God willingly and sincerely.

with the incense of rams] Meaning their fat which was burned on the Altar:
Levit. II. 1, 2, 16. and VI. 15.

If I regard] John IX. 31. IV. 3. Job XXVII. 8, 9. Prove. I. 28, 29. Esaias I. 15.
Micah III. 4. Ezekiel. VIII. 18. Prove. XV. 29. He that turns away his ear from
hearing the Law, his prayer is abomination, Prove. XXVIII. 9.

David penned by inspiration this Psalm; over the Philistines, and other
neighboring enemies; and upon the occasion of that public joyful solemnity in
bringing the Arc into the City of David, 2 Samuel VI. 1 Chronicles. XIII. XIV. XV.
chapters. It consists most of Praises, and Prophesies.

Let God] These words Moses used, Number. X. 35 at the removing of the Arc and
Tabernacle from Mount Sinai. And may be taken as a Prayer, or a Prediction; or
an assertion of what is done when God thus arises.

arise] To help his: to scatter his enemies. See Psalm. III. 7. and X. 12. and
LIX. 5.

extol him that rides upon the heavens] Verse 33. Psalm. XVIII. 10. Deuteronomy.
XXXIII. 26. Esaias 19. 1. some translate thus, make an highway for him; prepare
it, as Esaias XL. 3, 4. Matthew. III. 2. Luke I. 76. as Matthew. XXI. 8. And thus was
done. Or thus, him that rides in the Deserts; that is, as he did in the
Wilderness of Arabia before his Arc and people, verse 7. This variety of
interpretation is of small concernment.

Jah] Some would have it the contract of (...) as (...) is of (...), if not of
(...), to signify the strong God. Jah is used again, ver. 18. God is called
also by the Heathens (...) and Jove or Jupiter, that is Iah-father; deemed by
Varro to be the God of the Jews. This is the proper name of God, Esaias XLII. 8.
Exodus VI. 3. 2 Chronicles. VI. 33. Acts XVII. 23, 25, 28. Psalm. LXXXIII. 18. See
more in the Observations on Esaias XXVI. 4.

habitation] Of heaven; ^ings VIII. 30, 38, 39.

solitary in families] Senseless here is the Popish text; Bellarmines
interpretation, and application. See Exodus I. 21. Psalm. CXIII. 9. Ruth IV. 11.

a dry land] Without fountains of waters, or showers of rain. A special
judgment in those hot countries.

when thou wentest forth] Judge. Egypt; in giving them the possession of Canaan;
in destroying the Kings their enemies, verse 7 -- 13.

The earth shook] Ezod. XIX. 18. Judge. V. 4. Psalm. CXIV. and CIV. 32. Heb. XII.
18.

Sinai] An hill of a great height. Of Sinai see more in the Observations on
Exodus II. 11. and on XIX. 3.

a plentiful raine] God did bless his inheritance of the Land of Canaan which
he gave to them, Canaan, and all temporal promises, and earthly blessings to
them were shadows and types, intimations, and pledges of spiritual blessings,
and eternal life in heaven; Heb. XI. 13, -- 16 and 26. John V. 39.

gave the word] The occasion; Psalm. CXVIII. 23.

of those that published it] The word here is of the feminine gender; and so
may be understood of maids and women, entertaining, and publishing these good
news of victories with Songs and melody. As Exodus XV. 20. Judge. V. 11. and XI.
34. 1 Samuel XVIII. 6. Or of men, as the feminine is used for a masculine, in
Koheleth, Eccl. I. 1. Such publishers, as 2 Samuel XVIII. 19.

did flee] Deuteronomy. Exodus XIV. 25, 27. Josh. X. 11, 16. Judge. V. 19, 22. and VIII.
12. 2 Samuel V. 25. And in this verse again, the Popish text scarce bears any
sense; and their interpretations are suitable.

though ye have lien among the pots] A promise and consolation for the future:
Heli and Saul ye have lien in black darkness of afflictions, as a Skullion
lies in a Camp or Leaguer among pots.

as the wings of a Dove] Shining and bright.

When the Almighty] (...),

scattered] Dispersed, discomfited, vanquished the Kings by his powerful
presence, that they did flee apace, verse 12. Or, when he shall so do: so
continuing and amplifying the former Promise.

Kings] His, and their enemies, in Canaan.

in it] In thy inheritance, wherein thy Congregation did dwell.

it was white] An emblem of prosperity and joy; shall be black no more, as
verse 13. but joyous and prosperous: or, white with the dead bones of the
scattered slaughtered enemies.

Salmon] Judge. IX. 48. A Mountain nigh Shechem, and Samaria, in the tribe of
Ephraim, not far from Jordan: likely snow was much upon it.

as the hill of Bashan] Of Bashan, Annotations on Micah VII. 14. The hill of
Sion does equal, yea excel it; by reason of all its spiritual prerogatives and
privileges; as verse 16. Or thus, the Hill of Bashan is an hill of God, i. e.
a most excellent hill; for so the Hebrews express the most excellent things.
See the Observations on Jonah III. 3. and on 1 Samuel XIV. 15. It is an high
hill. All this is true: yet falls short of the hill of Sion; as it is in the
next verse.

Why leap ye] Insult proudly, Sion.

dwell] Psalm. LXXXVII. 1, 2. and CXXXII. 13, 14. This does infinitely advance
this humble hill of Sion above you.

for ever] And not flit with his Ark and Tabernacle from place to place, as
formerly.

The Chariots] Gods glory in Sion by the multitudes of his ministering Angels,
Heb. XII. 22. as it was in Sinai, when he gave the fiery Law, Deuteronomy. XXXIII. 2.
Gal. III. 19. Acts VII. 53. Or rather these words may have a direct relation to
the glorious manner of Christ's Ascension, with the attendance of infinite
Angels. Angels appeared and ministered at his Incarnation, Luke II. 9, 13. Heb.
I. 6. And why not so, or more, at his Ascension into the highest heavens? See
Acts I. 10. well might the Angels then sing that song, Apoc. V. 11, 12. We read
of a Charet of fire, and horses of fire at the rapture of Elias. And of a
mountain full of horses and Charets of fire round about Eliseus in his defense.
And why not these Angels here to attend our Saviors triumphant Ascension, set
down in the next verse.

Thou have ascended] Literaly and typicaly true, David. But without any type,
it is Mysticaly most tr^e, and most verified in Christ, and his Ascension into
Heaven. And so David here turns his speech to Christ himself. Whereunto the
Apostle does apply it, Ephesians. IV. 8. Ascended in his humane nature properly. In
Ephesians. IV. 8, 9, 10. He is said to descend; which being understood of his Divine
nature, is spoken improperly. But Christ being God and Man in one person, That
one Person without dissolving it, by reason of the Union of both natures in it,
admits properly and truly of such speeches as contain the Proprieties of
either Nature; the natures themselves, and their properties, nevertheless
remaining ever realy distinguished. The person then of Christ, without the
conversion of the one Nature into the other, in proper speech did ascend in his
Humanity, by the power of his Deity; localy from mount Olivet, into that third
heaven of Paul, which our Savior calls his Fathers house, John XIV. 2. above
these visible heavens, Ephesians. IV. 10. Our Saviors humane Nature then is
contained in Heaven, Acts III. 21. is not in the Popish hoasts; and much less
every where, according to the Ubiquitarian fancy. Though a time was, when
Christ in his body was in the grave; in his soul in Paradise, in his Divine
nature or Deity every where; yet without dissolving the Unity of his Person.

captivity captive] Lead and taken them captives; or a multitude of captives;
subdued thine enemies unto thee, made them thy captives Judge. V. 12. Not
leading the Fathers out of Limbus Patrum; but captiving the World, and the
Flesh, Sin, and Satan, Death, and Damnation, which otherwise held Gods people
in captivity and slavery. Col. I. 15.

received gifts for men] Taken gifts for them i. e. receiving, gave; as the
phrase is, Exodus XXV. 2. And in diverse other places taking is used for giving,
1 King III. 24* and XVII. 10. Judge. XIV. 2. And giving is sometimes used for
taking, as Genesis XLII. 30. What the chief of the Gifts were, are specified,
Ephesians. IV. 11, 12.

rebellious also] Even the most averse and rebellious of them, that God might
dwell in them; as Soul made a Paul, Tit. III. 3, 4, 5.

dwell in them] Jah in them; not they dwell in the Church.

Blessed] David blesses God,

loadeth us] With those gifts and blessings which Christ received for us, verse
18.

and unto God the Lord] Here (...) has the points of Elohim, Adonai* And so
still when (...) and Adonai are joined together, lest otherwise Adonai should
be twice read. But where Adonai is not conjoined, (...) has the pricks of
Adonai more often then of Elohim. Or, Jehovi here may be used as a more
pathetical kind of expression; as in Genesis XV. 2, 8. Deuteronomy. III. 24.

issues from death] As 1 Cor. X. 13.

But God] This seems to be the fruit and powerful effect of Christ's Ascension,

The Lord said] Number. Exodus XIV. 13, 14. i. e. as I did from Og, King of Bashan;
and from Pharaoh at the red sea. Thus he recals to their memories these two
great victories: and to strengthen their faith for like victories over their
enemies in David's days, or in times of future extremities.

thy foot may be dipped] So great should the slaughter of them be. Jehu did, 2
Kings IX. 10, 36.

thy goings] In the procedure of the verse, Genesis XLIX. 9. And it is very
frequent with the Hebrews to pass from one person to another. Thy goings then
and thy doings, thy ways and administrations, i. e. when God marched out of
Egypt, through the Wilderness before his people: or when David brought the Ark
into Jerusalem.

The singers] All sorts,

damzels] As Exodus XV. 20, 21. Judge. V. 1. and Chap. XI. 34. 1 Samuel XVIII. 9, 7.

Bless ye God] The beginning of their song, from the fountain of Israel] Ye
that flow from that fountain, are of that progeny, Esaias XLVIII. 2. Deuteronomy.
XXXIII. 28. Deuteronomy. V. 15, 18.

There is] Both those near, Psalm. LX. 9.

little Benjamin] The youngest son of Jacob; and least Tribe, since their
fatal blow, Judge. XX. and contesting most for Saul's house against David. Yet he
here one, if not first among them. And all the rest likewise^joyne.

ruler] Of the enemies; or rather, of the Benjamites; but no way of the other
Tribes.

Thy God] He petitions for strength and growth of blessings;

has commanded] So Deuteronomy. XXVIII. 8. Psalm. CXXXIII. 2. XLII. 8. and XLIV. 4.
and LXXI. 3. See Psalm. XXXIII. 9. Matthew. VIII. 8, 9.

thy strength] The strength of the King, and of the people.

Because of thy Temple] Because of thy Promises made to thy Church,

Shall Kings] David, and his successors shall therefore with all grateful and
thankful acknowledgement worship thee.

Rebuke] He petitions against the adversaries of the Church, cruel, and
malicious* Rebuke them in word, and deed. The meaning is contained in the last
words of the verse.

the company of spear-men] Of enemies armed with Lances and Spears; or Reeds
fitted and used for Spears; or arrows, as the manner of those times was.

bulls with the calves] The robustick and strong enemies; with the rest of the
rude and Epicurish multitude, Psalm. XXII. 12. Amos. IV. 1.

submit himself with pieces of silver*] Though hypocriticaly. Or rather, that
glories and vaunts himself in his brave attire embroydered with pieces of
silver* and out-braves and tramples upon others; or is so rich, as he seems to
tread silver under foot, yet indeed trusts in it, and boast himself of it. And
such usually, though unprovoked, delight to break forth into war and
wrong-doing: such enemies of thy people rebuke and break.

Princes] Prophesying of the calling of the Gentiles to Christ, Ephesians. III. 5,
6. Esaias XLIX. 6. and LXVI. 19.

stretch out her hands] In prayer, in offerings, in way of subjection.

a mighty voice] Psalm. XXIX. His thunder, Heb. IV. 11.

Ascribe] Adds arguments for Gods praise.

terrible] To be had in reverence in the assembly of his Saints;

fail while I waite] The constancy and earnestness of David's hope and
expectation.

For the zeal of thine house] Literaly true in David, Psalm. XXVII. 8.
Principaly true in Christ the Son of David; and to him applied by his
disciples, John II. 15, 16, 17. And so are the later words of this verse, by
the Apostle, Romans XV. 3.

They gave me also gall] Verified in our Savior: John XIX. 28, 29.

Let their table] This used by David against his enemies: Romans XI. 9.

Let their habitation] That which David speaks here of his enemies; Peter
applies to Judas the traitor, Acts I. 20.

blotted out] Phil. IV. 3. Apoc. III. 5. Luke X. 20. Heb. XII. 23. Observations
on Psalm. CIX. 14, 15.

Sion] The Type of the Church.

inherit it] Under the temporal promises of the Land of Canaan, Psalm. CII. 28.
to the true Israel of God, the true members of the Church, Esaias XLIV. 26.

for to bring to remembrance] For to record. Psalm. XXXVIII. Both Psalms are,
not to remember any notable deliverance or benefit already received: But rather
a time and case of affliction and distress. For the matter of both show, that
they were inspired in such a time; and do make earnest petition for deliverance.

to deliver me] This Psalm is in a manner the same with Psalm. XL. 13, -- 17.

Cause me to escape] Likely from Absalom. Psalm may seem to be penned by
David, though his name be not in the Title, and in his old age.

God.] This word is Jehovih, Elohim. So again verse 16. and Psalm. LXVIII. 20.
And so it is usually written when, as I have said, Adonai goes before it, or
next follows it. At other times having the vowels of Adonai, it is pronounced
Lord. See 2 Samuel VII. 18, 19, 20.

a wonder] Esaias VIII. 18. Heb. II. 13. Zech. III. 8. and 1 Corinthians. IV. 9.

even of thine only] not mine own:

quicken me again, in the Hebrew margin; but us, us, in the text.

For Solomon] Made by David for him; verse ult* by David in his old age. The
like inscription is Psalm. CXXVII.

This Psalm is composed, as in the name of the Church. And contains a Prayer,
a Praise, and a Prophecy, of the just, peaceable, righteous, merciful,
plentiful, flourishing estate, and large extent and bounds of the Kingdom of
Solomon; set out indeed with some hyperbolical expressions; scarcely appliable
to him, or to any mortal man. So as Solomon may be the immediate object of the
words, he literaly intended in them. But yet he so, as a Type of Christ, and of
his Kingdom; who is in truth the maine subject of this Psalm. For all in a
mystical sense is appliable to Christ more truly, then to Solomon; appliable to
him in a spiritual sense, exactly without any hyperbole. For Solomon, see that
2 Samuel VII. 14. etc. For Christ, see that Heb. I. 5. And that passadge, Psalm.
LXXXIX. 19, -- 37. is not unlike the subject matter of this Psalm. This
premised, may serve to clear the hardest places of this Psalm.

The prayers] Psalms,

are ended] As the like is said of David's words, 2 Samuel XXIII. 1. The one may
be as an Appendix of the other. This his last Prayer, though not placed in the
last place. Or the last of those that David set in order before his death: or
the last in this second part or book of the Psalms, as they are all divided
into five parts. Or his last, touching Solomon; and his prophesying of Christ
and his Kingdom. So various may our thoughts and interpretations be; and so
uncertain and unsafe to pitch and fix upon any single one.

Truly] The Psalmist premiseth this, Ier. XII. 1. and Hab. I. 12, 13.

covers them as a garment] They wear it, Psalm. CIX. 18, 19. But the meek, and
godly cover and array themselves otherwise, Ephesians. IV. 24. Col. III. 10, 12,
14. Phil. IV. 5. Gal. III. 27. Romans XIII. 14. Ephesians. III. 17. cum Gal. IV. 19.

Their eyes stand out] Stand out in the Hebrew is in the singular number.
distributively, for either or each of their eyes. The like is Genesis XLIX. 22.
Exodus XVII. 12. and XXXI. 14. Josh. II. 14. Job XII. 7. Prove. III. 18. and XIV.
1. and XXVII. 9. Joel I. 20.

Therefore his people return hither] Gods own people turn to these thoughts
and tentations following;

verily I] Thus subject to these dangerous tentations.

As a dream when one awaketh] Job XX. 8. John XVI. 21. and to that Acts XII.
9. and to that Psalm. CXXVI. 1.

when thou awakest] To judgment, Psalm. LXXVIII. 65. and VII. 6. and XXXV. 20.

thou shall despise their image] their pageant of worldly pomp, and pride, make
it to be despised. Yea, in their own eyes, if God awake their consciences.

Maschil] An instructing Psalm.

of Asaph] See on Psalm. L in the Title. This Psalm most likely was committed
to some of Asaphs posterity, long after David's time, to tune, sing, and play it.

The time of desolation which this Psalm mentions, and bemoanes, seems not to
be that in the days of Antiochus Epiphanes; who profaned and polluted much
the Temple of Jerusalem; but did not cast it down, and burn it to the ground.
And he himself was long after the Canon of the Old Testament was concluded. But
that rather in the days of Nebuchadnezzar, and Nebuzaradan, 2 Kings XXV. 8.

the rod] Or tribe; Jer. X. 16. Deuteronomy. XXXII. 9.

thy congregations] Meaning the Temple, where the holy Congregations assembled.
verse 7. it is in the Hebrew, thy Sanctuaries in the Plural number, meaning the
Temple. The Plural number being used discretively to note out, and design one
of many. And so is that Genesis XXIII. 6. Judge. VII. 10. and XII. 7. 2 Kings V.
13. 2 Chronicles. XXIV. 25. John VI. 45. Acts XIII. 40. Zech. IX. 9. Mat. IV. 3
compared with Luke IV. 3. And so we may understand that, Matthew. XXVII. 44.
compared with Luke XXIII. 40* And that 2 Chr. chap. XXVIII. 3. compared with 2
Kings XXVIII. 3. And that Matthew. XXVI. 8. compared with John XII. 4.

no more any Prophet] Ezekiel, Jeremie, were now dead. Others happily not so well
known or regarded, Lam. II. 9.

Dragons] The Princes of Pharaoh.

Leviathan] Pharaoh.

gave him to be meat] Him, as Prove. XXX. 25, 26. Or, their spoil, as meat to
the Israelites. Or gave meat, that is, Manna, to him, that is, thy people in
the Wilderness.

When I shall receive] This Psalm seems to be penned by David, Asaph to use;
and likely at the time, and upon the occasion of the State of affairs at, and
upon the murder of Abner by Joab, 2 Samuel III. which being then much shaken and
shattered, he promises to uphold, and rectify. And rebuking the foolish,
proud, and presumptuous opposers of his Promotion, he renueth his resolution to
proceed in judgment toward the wicked, and the righteous, uprightly.

the pillars of it] He did so, Gal. II. 9.

cup See Esaias LI. 17. Ezekiel. XXIII. 32. Ier. XXV. 15. Apoc. XIV. 10.

In Salem] Of Salem, see the Observations on Josh. X. 1.

There brake he] This likely was done in the Assyrian Came Gods Angel, Hezekiah,
2 Chronicles. XXXII. 21. ^^p by

then the mountains of prey] A proverbial expression of greatest glory. Esaias
IX. 3. and LIII. 12. Or, from the mountains of prey, where the Assyrian armies
were preying upon thy people, and now slain by thy glorious power, and given by
thee as a prey to thy people.

their sleep] of death.

shall praise thee] Turn to thy praise.

the remainder] Keep within compass the further attempts of our enraged
enemies.

to Ieduthun] Psalm. and LXII. 1 Chronicles. XXV. 2, 3.

my soar ran] Or, my hand was stretched out,

and was troubled] Or,

Thy way, O God* is in the Sanctuary] Or, in sanctity; most holy. And thy manner
of administration and proceeding is to be learned in thy Word, which is taught
in the Sanctuary, Psalm. LXXIII. 17.

The waters saw thee] Psalm. CXIV. 3, 5. the waters of the Red Sea.

The clouds] Exodus XIV. 24. Psalm. LXVIII. 7, 8, 9, 33. and XVIII. 13, 14.

Thy way is in the Sea] The Red Sea, XIV. 21.

footsteps are not known] Before or after; the waters returned, and hid that
way, Exodus XIV. 27. Or more generaly, Gods ways are unsearchable, Job XXVI.
14. Psalm. CVII. 23, 24. Romans XI. 33, 34.

in a parable] Matthew. parable; and therefore with some alteration of the words
of the Psalmist. And that form of allegation is usual with the Evangelists, as
well in allusive and indirect, as in more direct and proper applications. Of
Parables, see more in the Observations on Psalm XLIX. 4.

The children of Ephraim] Some make this relate to that, Chron. VII. 21, 22.
while their father lived in Egypt. Others to the Ephramites flight before
Jephthah, Judge. XII. 46. Others understanding all the Israelites under that
name, refer this to their flight before the Philistines, 1 Samuel IV. 10. Or
before Abijah, 2 Chronicles. XIII. 17. And others understanding by Ephraim, the ten
Tribes, whereof Ephraim was the head, make it to relate to the final
extirpation of that Kingdom, 2 Kings XVII. 7. etc. whereof Hosea prophesied,
chap. X. 11, 14. So various expositions may these general words admit.

By sending evil angels] As Job I. 12, 16. i. e. messengers of evils; which may
be understood, either of good Angels; or of Moses and Aaron.

hinder parts] 1 Samuel V. 1, 6, 9, 12.

he refused] Shiloh, Ephraim, the son of Joseph: The Ark never came thither
again.

his Sanctuary] Temple, Solomon. By this, and some other passages, this Psalm
may seem not to be composed by David; but by some later inspired Prophet.

the Heathen This Psalm seems composed, Antiochus Epiphanes; but in the times
of the Babylonish captivity rather. Bemoaning those miseries which were brought
upon them by those barbarous Babylonians.

Poure] Ier. X. 25.

our neighbors seven-fold] That did not pity us in our calamity; Genesis IV. 15,
24. Esaias LXV. 6, 7.

Shoshannim Eduth] See the Observations on Psalm. Eduth here, which signifies a
testimony, to import the Churches testimony and profession of her faith in the
promise of God for her deliverance out of the Babylonish captivity, at the end
of seventy years, Ier. XXIX. 10. And so this Psalm to be made in the time of
that captivity.

Asaph] See the Observations on Psalm. L.

upon the man of thy right hand] Thy beloved one; Benjamin was, Genesis XXXV. 18.
And here may be meant, David, in his posterity, Psalm. CXXXII. 10, 11. and
LXXXIX. 19, 20, 21, 35. Or, Zerubbabel particularly. But both as shadows and
types, of Christ the substance, principaly intended, Col. I. 13. Psalm. XLV. 3.
Luke XXIV. 19. Heb. II. 18.

in the new moone] Psalm seems sung at the Jewish Feasts.

When he went] Or had gone.

I heard a language] Was a stranger.

in the secret place of thunder] In that pillar of a cloud, Exodus XIV. 24.
happily troubling the Egyptians with thunder, lightning, and tempest, Psalm.
LXXVII. 17, 18.

gave them up] See the Observations on Esaias VI. 9.

congregation of the mighty] Assembly, Romans XIII. 1, 2. and they so called
gods, Exodus XXII. 8, 9, 28. John X. 34, 35. And the cause before them, the
cause of God, Deuteronomy. I. 17. 2 Chronicles. XIX. 6.

all the foundations] Laws,

Alleged by our Savior, John X. 34.

like men] As Adam did. Hos. VI. 7. Job XXXI. 33. But rather the sense is more
general; ye shall die as other men do, that last line of death shall put an end
to your height and haughtiness, Psalm. CXLVI. 3* 4. Ye die as the meanest men
do; for so the word is most what taken, specialy when it is put in opposition,
as here, Psalm. XLIX. 2. and LXII. 9. Esaias II. 9. and V. 15. Death makes no
distinction between man and man; as is excellently expressed by Heathen Poets:
die all shall, equaly and alike, one with another.

like one of the Princes] As one of the other Princes of the world, as other
mortal men; as one, or any one, even the meanest, who among the rest of men
make but a number, as it were.

A Song as Psalme] See the Observations on Psalm. XLVIII. title.

This Song seems composed and inspired, as a form of Prayer, when the Church
and people of the Jews were in great danger by many enemies conspiring against
them, to destroy them: And this likely either in the days of David, 2 Samuel
VIII. or rather long after David's time, in the days of Jehoshaphat; or of
Ezekiah.

thy hidden ones] Hidden as his peculiar treasure, Exodus XIX. 5. secret,
preserved under the shadow of his wings, Psalm. XVII. 8. and XXVII. 5. and XXXI.
20. Whose life also is hid with Christ in God, Col. III. 3.

Hagarens] And Hagarites, Chro. V. 10, 19, 20. So called from Hagar, the mother
of Ishmael, Genesis 16.

Gebal] The Giblites, Sidon, whence Solomon had stone-cutters, 1 Kings V. 18.
Ezekiel. XXVII. 9. See Josh. XIII. 5.

Endor] In Manasseh; Dor, which lay on the mid-land sea* Saul goes to a Witch
at Endor; which indeed was not far from the mountains of Gilboa, where Saul
was slain. Taanach, and Megiddo not far from it.

whose name alone is Jehovah] Which has his being of himself, Exodus III. 14.
Deuteronomy. VI. 4. An eternal Being, Esaias XLIV. 6. Apoc. I. 4, 8. and IV. 8. and XI.
17. and XVI. 5. And gives being to all things, Acts XVII. 25. to his word, and
promises, and threatenings, Exodus VI. 3. Ezekiel. VII. 27. See the Observations on
Esaias XXVI. 4* of Jehovi, see the Observations on Psalm. LXXI. 5. Of Jah, see the
Observations on Psalm. LXVIII. 4.

Gittith] So Psalm. Obed-Edom, a Levite, and Porter or Singer in the Tabernacle,
is called a Gittite, 2 Samuel VI. 10. happily from Gath-rimmon, a City of the
Levites, Josh. XXI. 25. And there is Gath a City of the Philistines. The word
then may signify an Instrument of music, not such as our Gitterne; such as
was used in Gath; or rather used by the posterity of Obed-Edom the Gittite: Or
it may import that those three Psalms were sung upon occasion of David's
removing the Ark from Kiriathjearim to the house of Obed-Edom the Gittite; and
from thence to Jerusalem, 1 Chronicles. XIII. and XV. chapters. More certainty is
not found out.

Korah] See the Observations on Psalm. XLII. Title.

thine Altars] The places near them might happily become the nests of birds,
Josh. XXIV. 26. Or this may relate to the Psalmists longing and crying after
them, by an abrupt and pathetical exclamation and naming of them, Oh thine
Altars, thine Altars: not yet excluding the force of that argument from the
birds nestling, either near, or elsewhere. Some hence conceive, That this
Psalm was penned by David in the time of his Exile and banishment from Gods
house and service by the means of Saul, verse 9. not so likely of Absalom.

the ways of them] Of the travelers that go up to God house,

of Baca] Or Mulberry trees, Jerusalem, 2 Samuel V. 22, 23. Joshua XV. 8.

make it a Well] By digging Wells therein for water: no drought, or
difficulties shall hinder them from coming to Gods house, but they will break
through them. Or, make him a Well; that is, God in stead of a Well to them,
Jer. II. 13. and XVII. 13. Psalm. XXXVI. 9.

the rain also fills the pools] Which they dug; God so provides for them.
Or, the bountiful rain of Gods blessings, of grace and comfort, shall cover and
comfort them.

from strength to strength] increasing so, Romans I. 17. 2. Cor. III. 18. Or,
from company to company; from troop to troop; as by troops they came up to Gods
house thrice a year.

of thine anointed] David the type; the truth.

a door-keeper] Fixed* and a servant,

grace and glory] Many refer grace to this life, glory to that which is to
come. But grace rather may seem here to signify favor, estimation, honor,
as Prove. III. 34. James IV. 6. 1 Pet. V. 5. Exodus III. 21. Number. chap. XII. 36.
and XXXIII. 12. Genesis VI. 8. and XXXIX. 4. and L. 4. Esther II. 15. 17. and V.
2. Prove. XXII. 1. and chap I. 9. and IV. 9. Luke II. 52. and I. 28. compared
with verse 30.

Thou have been] Formerly.

brought back] Out of Babylon. Some understand this of the bringing back of
David to Jerusalem after the rebellion of Absalom. But not so likely.

covered all their sinne] See the Observations on Psalm. LI. 4.

Turn us] Do now so again.

I will hear] Complain no more;

are met] Will meet.

have kissed] Will kiss, verse 4, 5. This, and what follows had it most
complete fulfilling in and by the coming of Christ.

A Prayer] So is the Title of Psalm. set form of prayer for the godly in
distress; without any particular circumstances used in it of persons, places,
or times; appliable to all; and may not unfitly be applied to Christ.

I am holy] So rather then as in the margin, one whom thou favourest. The
Hebrew word is (...), which imports an active, rather then a passive
signification. And so Psalm. IV. 3. and XXXII. 6. and L. 5. and LXXIX. 2. This
word is actively taken, and that rightly in our translations; though many
learned men, not so well advised therein, render it passively, to denote, not
the author and agent, and his quality, but the object spoken of.

Among the gods] Verse 10. Psalm. LXXXIX. 6. Deuteronomy. XXXII. 39. Esaias XXXVII. 16*
and XLIV. 6. 1 Cor. VIII. 4, 5, 6. Exodus XV. 1^. From the first Hebrew letters
of which four words in Exodus came the name of the Maccabees, as is thought.

unite my heart to fear thy Name] Loose it from all other things,

give thy strength] John XV. 5. II. 13. and IV. 13.

a toaken] as in the end of the verse.

His foundation] Gods,

Mountains] Moriah, and Zion. Not now in a flitting Tabernacle.

Glorious things] See Esaias LIVE. and LX. Apoc. XXI. and XXII. And see the
Observations on Josh. 10. 1.

Rahab] So LXXXIX. 10. Esaias LI. 9. See the Observations on Genesis XII. 10. Egypt
is meant hereby: And the calling of Egypt to the fellowship of the Church. Of
whose calling, see Esaias XIX. 19, 21, 25.

to them that know me] Or among them; as of my known familiars.

Philistia] Palestine, the Philistines, Psalm. LX. 8.

this] And the rest before named, were born in the City of God; by regeneration
spiritual made the sons of God, and of the Church, verse^ 5, 6. 1 Pet. I. 23.
James I. 18. Esaias XLIV. 5.

Singers] The spiritual joy both great,

Springs] Of my joy, and of Gods spiritual gifts and graces also; John VII. 38.
Esaias XII. 3. Ephesians. III. 10.

A Song] See the Observations on Psalm. title.

Mahalath] A kind of winde-instrument, Psalm. LIII.

Leannoth] May either make up the name of the Instrument; or may seem to
signify to sing by turns or courses, as Exodus XV. 21. Ezra. III* 11.

Heman] The next Psalm^ is of Ethan. These were sacred Singers and Musicians,
descended of Levi, 1 Chronicles. XV. 17, 19. and XVI. 41, 42. and VI. 44. Of Heman,
see 1 Chronicles. XXV. 1. 4, -- 7. He was of the posterity of rebellious Korah, and
grandchilde of Samuel the Prophet, 1 Chronicles. VI. 33. and himself King David's
Seer, 1 Chronicles. XXV. 5. There were two brethren, Heman, and Ethan, of the
posterity of Judah, 1 Chronicles. II. 6. men renowned for their wisdom, 1 King. IV.
31.

This Psalm is one of the most doleful of all the Bible: And may serve as a set
form of a sad complaint to any man in his greatest distress. Some make
application of it to Christ in his Sufferings.

free among the dead] Psalm. XXXI. 12. III. 18, 19.

I am shut up] As a close prisoner in the Dungeon of sorrows,

wilt thou] Psalm. VI. 5. Esaias XXXVIII. 18.

prevent thee] Psalm. V. 3. II. 1.

into darknesse] That they hide themselves from me,

a Covenant] In faithfulness, verse 1, 2. How then comes it to be made void?
verse 38, -- 45.

David] The figure, and father of Christ; who is also called David, Ezekiel,
XXXIV. 23. Jer. XXX. 9. Hos. III. 5. Of him this Psalm is chiefly to be
understood; though not in all the particular passages.

Rahab] See the Observations on Psalm. LXXXVII. 4.

Tabor] Westward, Observations on Judge. IV* 6.

Hermon] Eastward, see the Ohervations on Deuteronomy. IV. 48.

joyful sound] Of the Trumpet,

to thy holy one] To Samuel, who anointed David.

laid help upon one that is mighty] Or, help against the mighty: both ways
meaning David: who yet here may be taken as a Type of Christ.

I will set] Psalm LXXII. 8.

my Father] This, verse 27, 28, 29. universaly and plenarily belong to Christ:
And only imperfectly, as in a weak type, are applyable to David, or Solomon, 2 Samuel VII. 14. Heb. I. 5. Luke I. 32, 33.

my first-borne] The firstborn had the privileges of double portion, Col. I.
15, 18. Matthew. I. 25. Romans VIII. 29. Heb. I. 6. Apoc. I. 5.

His seede] Verse 36. Christians, his spiritual seed; Esaias LIII. 10. Heb. the
everlasting Father, Esaias IX. 6.

his throne] Verse 37. Heb. I. 8. Dan. II. 44. and VII. 14. Luke I. 33. The
accomplishment of these Promises cannot be found in Solomon.

If his children] So 2 Samuel VII. 14, 15. Solomon, and of his children; and
cannot be understood of Christ's person; who was not the natural of son of
Solomon; but of his brother Nathan; And who was without sin, 1 Pet. II. 22:
But as he bare our sins, and was made a Sacrifice for sin for us, 2 Cor. V.
21. Esaias LIII. 6. Yet this may have a right understanding of Christ's spiritual
children, who are subject to the lapses and infirmities of sin, 1 John I. 8.
Romans VII. 15.

sworne] Of Oaths, Observations on Hos. IV. 15.

as the Moone] Which although it sometime waxes,

Witnesse] See Jer. XXXIII. 20, 21. And Christ is so called, Apoc. I. 5. Esaias
LV. 4.

But thou] The Psalmist complains of the miseries of the Church,

youth have thou shortned] Wherein by thy promises he should have flourished,

how short] How vain,

the footsteps of thine Anointed.]

Blessed] The voice of faith, end of the third Book of Psalms. See the
Observations on Psalm. XLI. ult. and on LXXII. ult.

of Moses] This seems inspired and penned by Moses for the use of the people,
Number. XIV. 22, 23, 29, 34.

Returne] The body to the earth;

watch] The night divided into four Watches;

threescore years and ten] So for the most part, David. And none of the Kings
of Judah, or Israel, after him attained to those years. Or seventy here, in
regard of that judgment denounced, Number. XIV. 29.

even according to thy fear, so is thy wrath] Thy wrath is as thy fear
teaches it to be: which teaches us to fear thee for thy wrath. But who
knows the power of it?

to number] They might number the utmost extent of them, Number. XIV. But not how
much sooner they might die.

establish] Esaias XXVI. 12.

he shall deliver thee] Having practiced in the second verse what he taught in
the first; others to do the like, applies his example to them.

not be afraid] Esaias XLIII. 2. shall work for our good, if we be not delivered
out of them, Romans VIII. 28.

his Angels charge over thee] Alleged by the Devil to Christ, Mat. IV. 6.

in all thy wayes] Of holiness and righteousness. These words the Devil
omits; as making against his temptation, which was against the mind of the
text.

tread upon the lion] Esaias XI. 6, -- 9. Hos. II. 18. without harm or damage.
Not as the Pope applied it to his treading upon the neck of the Emperor.

on high] Safely above all perils and dangers.

with long life] If God shall see it good and fit for him.

for the Sabbath day] For the Rest on this day, Observations on Exodus XII. 16.
For Hallowing it; That was, by an holy convocation; by offering of Sacrifices;
singing Psalms; reading, and expounding, and hearing Scriptures; Praying;
Disputing, and Conferring; by meditating on Gods word, and works; and doing
works of mercy, Exodus XX. 10. Esaias LVIII. 13. Jer. XVII. 21, 22. Levit. XXIII.
3. Number* XXVIII. 9, 10. Acts XIII. 15. and XV. 21. and XVI. 13. and XVII. 2. and
XVIII. 4. Matthew. XII. 2, -- 7, 8, 11, 12.

as the Palm tree] The LXX. read, (...), tree. As the Hebrew word here does;
And the meaning of the whole verse imports. Yet hence many learned men, taking
it up one from another, have raised that fable of a wondrous bird called a
Phoenix, which yet never was seen, or known in the world.

holiness becomes thy house] In the services,

The Lord knoweth] Cited,

But judgment shall return unto righteousnesse] Though they might seem
awhile parted;

O come] David's Psalm; Heb. III. 7. and IV. 7.

to day] This extends to the whole time wherein Christ speaks by his Gospel,
Heb. III. 7. 13, 15. and IV. 7, 8. So 2 Cor. VI. 2.

Provocation] Meribah,

temptation] Massah, in the Hebrew. See Exodus XVII. 1, -- 7. Number. XX. 1, 3, 13.
Deuteronomy. VI. 16.

tempted me] Tempted Christ,

my work] Works, Heb. III. 9. of miraculous mercies; and judgments.

I sware] At Kadesh-barneah, etc. Heb. III. 17, 19.

my rest.] Canaan; a Type of a better Rest, Heb. IV. 3, 8, 9, 11.

O sing] This Psalm, Psalm CV. 1, -- 15. with small alterations, make up that
Psalm composed by David, upon the bringing of the Ark from Obed-Edoms house,
into the City of David, 1 Chronicles. XVI. 8, -- 36.

a new song] See the Observations on Psalm. XXXIII. 3.

beauty of holinesse] In the glorious holy Sanctuary.

searoare] In token of joy.

the trees] Humane affections ascribed to insensible creatures;

for the cometh] Or, when he comes. Which may relate to Christ's coming into
the world, Matthew. XII. 20. Acts X. 42. and chapter XVII. 31. Psalm. XCVIII. 9. and
CX. 6. Esaias II. 4. and XI. 3, 4. and XVI. 5. 2 Timothy IV. 1. Apoc. XIX. 11.

The Lord reighneth] Here seems the Kingdom,

a new song] See the Observations on Psalm.

made known] Esaias LII. 10.

Let the sea roare] Psalm. XCVI. 11.

let the people tremble] And so, Apoc. XI. 17, 18. Acts XVII. 13.

The Kings strength] God mixeth his power with justice, Job XXXVI. 5.

Moses and Aaron among his Priests] Moses did many things of the Priestly
office. Cohen here used, does signify also a Prince, and principal officer, as
2 Samuel VIII. 18. and in many other places.

though that tookest] Even when thou tookest vengeance of their inventions,

and not we Or, and his we are; as the Hebrew in the margin reads it, Deuteronomy.
VII. 6, 7. and chap. IX. 4. etc. Psalm. XCV. 5.

A Psalm of David] This seems inspired and written by David,

not know] Matthew. VII 23.

of the afflicted] Or, for the afflicted. A set form of Prayer for him, for
any in a poor afflicted estate. And so diverse other set forms of prayer are
found in Scripture, in a set form of words. As Number. VI. 24, 25, 26. Matthew. VI.
9, -- 13. And again at another time, and upon another occasion, Luke XI. 1, --
4. Psalm. XX. and XXI. This Prayer may seem inspired and composed by Daniel, or
some other Prophet toward the end of the Babylonish Captivity, verse 13, 16.
Zech. I. 12, 13.

the appointed time] Jer. XXIX. 10. Dan. IX. 2, 24. etc.

in her stones] Neh. II. 13. etc. and IV. 2. Zech. I. 22.

Of old] This verse, Heb. I. 10, 11, 12. and applied to prove the Deity of
Christ.

This Psalm,

thy youth is renewed like the Eagles] Thou keep thy self fresh and vigorous,
Job XXXIII. 25. And like the Eagles youth, or strength and vigor; which abides
so long, even to and in old age, and length of very many years; and seems to
renew her youth by the casting of her feathers yearly, not her bill; the upper
beak whereof grows at last in an extreme old age, so to over-grow and bend
over the lower beak, as causes the Eagle to die of famine, not of feebleness,
Arist. lib. 9. cap. 32. de historia animalium. See Esaias XL. 31.

hoasts ye Ministers] Both Angels, Ephesians. 3. 10. Col. I. 16. 1 Kings XXII. 19.
Genesis XXXII. 2. Psalm. CIV. 4. Dan. VII. 10 Apoc II. 1. Esaias LXI. 6. Neh. IX. 6.

This Psalm is exquisite for loftiness,

with light, as with a garment] Genesis I. 3. 1 Timothy VI. 16. He wholly so shines,
as the eyes of any, no not of the Angels, are able to behold the luster and
splendour thereof. As neither we, that of the Sun.

the beams of his chambers in the waters.] Makes and distinguishes the
regions of the air, ver. 13.

his Angels spirits] Alleged and interpreted of Angels, Heb. I. 7. uses them
being spiritual substances, as speedy, active messingers, ministers, and
executors of his will, Heb. I. 14.

his ministers a flaming fire] The Angels such, 2 Kings II. 11. and chap. VI.
17. Or, the flashes of lightnings, and other meteors are his ministers to do
his will.

waters stood above the mountains] At the Creation, Genesis I. 2. And at the
Flood, Genesis VII. 20.

to cover the earth] Job XXXVIII. 8, Jer. V. 22. Genesis IX. 11, 13, 15.

oile] Psalm. XXIII. Eccles. IX. 8. Matthew. VI. 17.

her house] In them is her house, Psalm. LXXXIV. 4. Job XXIX. 18. Matthew. VIII.
20. Luke IX. 58. Dan. IV. 12.

Conies] Prove. XXX. 24,

in wisdom have thou made them all] By wisdom here to understand Christ
punctualy, Prove. III. 19. though that be a sacred truth, Heb. I. 2.

Sea] Not that Psalm. that; which particle does distinguish the great Midland
Sea, from the other lesser.

go the ships] See verse 10. Genesis II. 14. Esaias XXXIII. 21.

Leviathan] The Whale, Job XLI.

renewest] By causing new creatures to come in the place of the old, Eccles. I.
4.

Praise ye the Lord] In the Hebrew, Halelu-jah, Praise ye Jah. This Halelu-jah
is kept in the Greek, and in other languages; set sometimes in the beginnings,
sometimes in the end of Psalms. Apoc. XIX. 1, 3, 4, 6.

O give thanks] See the Observations on Psalm. David's Psalm.

his strength, seek his face] The Ark, where God declared his power, and
presence, Psalm. LXIII. 2. and LXXVIII. 61. See the Observations on Psalm. XXVII.
8.

his judgements] Esaias XXVI. 9.

oath unto Isaac] To Abraham, Isaac, Genesis XXII. 17. and XXVI. 3.

mine anointed] This is spoken of the Patriarchs:

my Prophets] So Abraham is called, Genesis XX. 7.

with fetters] Gen XXXIX.

his word came] Gods word in dreams touching his advancement, Genesis XXXVII. 7,
9. came to be fulfilled. Or, Joseph's word in the interpretation of the dreams
of Pharaohs Officers, and of Pharaoh himself.

He turned] See the Observations on Esaias VI.

they rebelled not] The Signs and Wonders did not: Moses, and Aaron did not
rebel, etc.

hail for raine] Rain rare in Egypt, Zech.

first-borne] Thus all the ten plagues of Egypt are reckoned up;

a cloud for a covering] A large cloud to cover all that host from the
parching heat of the Sun.

Quailes] Twice; Exodus XVI. 13. Number. XI. 31.

dry places] In the deserts of Sin, Zin: from the rocks of Rephidim, Exodus
XVII. and Kadesh, Number. XX.

That they might] Obedience the end of all Gods mercies, Exodus XIX. 4, 5, 6.

leannesse] By their ratson, razon, leanness; yea, a plague and death, Psalm.
LXXVIII. 30, 31. Esaias X. 16.

Dathan] Korah is omitted here.

Oxe] Elsewhere the term of Ca^^ is used.

Ham] Genesis X. 6.

pleasant land] Deuteronomy. Ezekiel. XX. 6. See the Observations on Zech. VII. 14.

Baal-Peor] See the Observations on Judges VIII. Baal signifies Lord, Master,
Husband, or Patron. Peor is the name of a mountain: And Beth Pehor the name of
Baals Temple there, Number. XXIII. 28. Deuteronomy. III. 29. For the idolatry committed
to this idol, the Scripture sometimes for the word Baal, uses Bosheth, which
signifies shame. Hos. IX. 10. See Jer. III. 24. and XI. 13. and the
Annotations of learned Master Gataker upon those places.

of the dead] Offered to those dead idols, Number. XXV. 2. Jer. X. 5.

And that was counted unto him for righteousnesse] i. e. this fact of Phineas
was approved of God as just and righteous, and for such ever to be esteemed.
The same phrase used Genesis XV. 6. has another sense of justifying Abraham's
person before God by faith, though a man without faults in himself otherwise.
And so is rightly applied by Saint Paul, Romans IV. 3, 5, 8, 9, 22, 23, 24. to
the justification of sinner before God by Faith merely.

for righteousnesse] A right and just action; not the fruit of a rash zeal;
though done without ordinary authority.

unadvisedly] Number. XX.

Devils] Levit. XVII. 7 See the Observations on Judges VIII. 33.

his Covenant] This, verse 8 are the ground of Gods free mercies.

among the heathen] among whom diverse Israelites were scattered, Saul, by
reason of their often troubles at home, till the Kingdom came to David, whose
words these are, 1 Chronicles. XVI. 35, 36.

This Psalm has much elegancy and sublimity in it.

South] In the Hebrew, Sea; meaning the Red Sea, which was South from Canaan.
But much more usualy in Scripture by Sea is understood the West, because the
great Mediterrane Sea lay West from Canaan.

mount up] And hyperbole. Observations on Josh. XI. 4.

them] Mariners,

rivers] Watery fruitful places.

dry] Barren, thirsty.

will observe] Not that such deliverances are vouchsafed always to all in such
dangers:

A Song, a Psalme] See the Observations on the Title of Psalm XLVIII.

This Psalm is composed of Psalm. LVII. 7, -- 11. and Psalm. LX. 5, -- 12. See
the Observations on both those Psalms.

glorie] See the Observations on Psalm XVI.

wash-pot] So Psalm. Moab; or their Land to be washed in blood; or themselves
wiped clean away, as a pot is wiped. But rather to be used to servile, sordid,
base offices.

of David] By the matter of the Psalm, Saul's reign, when all things were
grown to a forlorn and wicked state. See 1 Samuel XXVI. 19.

unto Prayer] The use and comfort of Prayer.

Set] Many Imprecations follow. Psalm. XXXV. 4, -- 8. and LIX. 5, 13. and LXIX.
22, -- 28. and LXXIX. 10. and CXIX. 84. and CXL. 10. Job XXXI. Nehem. VI. 4. 5.
and VI. 6, 14. Esaias II. 9. Jer. XI. 20. and XV. 15. and chap. XVII. 18. and
XVIII. 21, 22, 23. and XX. 12. 2 Timothy IV. 14. And these with exquisite forms
of speeches. And uttered by David, and the rest, against transcendent sinners,
rather as Prophets, but of zeal to God and his glory therein, then in relation
to their private passions of revenge, or respect to themselves as parties. And
yet these, or the like Prayers and Imprecations may possibly be mixed with
Humane infirmities; as those in Jeremy. See the Annotations on Nehem. IV. 5. Or
in some they may be understood with silent limitations and reservations.

right hand] He plead and prevail against him.

condemned] Go out guilty,

become sinne] Let no suit, or defense of his avail for him, but rather hurt
him.

8 his office] Applied to Judas, Acts I. 16,

their desolate places] Their houses and families that are desolate and
destroyed.

fathers] Thus God punishes to the third and fourth generation, Exodus XX. 5.

As he clothed himself with cursing] See the Observations on Psalm, LXXIII. 6.

Let it be unto him] The curse wherein he delighted in cursing others; which
pleased him as water, and oil, Let that same be unto him. Or, let a curse thus
cover, and cleave unto him; and come into his bowels and bones. See the
Observations on Psalm. LXXIII. 6.

shaked their heads] Psalm.

This Psalm is all Prophetical; Matthew. XXII. 44. Mark XII. 36. Luke XX. 42.
Acts II. 34. Heb. I. 13. and V. 6. and VII. 17.

The Lord] The Messiah himself applies, verse to himself, Matthew. XXII: 44.
Mark XII. 36. Luke. XX. 42. Saint Peter from this verse proves Christ's
Ascension into heaven, Acts II. 34. Saint Paul relates to it in the point of
Christ reign over all enemies, 1 Cor. XV. 25. Denying that the words of this
verse were used, or could be used to any of the Angels, Heb. I. 13. And
therefore they cannot be appliable to David himself, or to any mere man.

The Lord] Heb. Jehovah. See the Annotations of learned Master Gataker on Esaias
I. 2. and XXVI. 4. See also my Observations on Psalm LXXXIII. 18. and on LXXI.
5. and on LXVIII. 4. This Name of Essence never admits any affix in the Hebrew
tongue. And it may lawfully be pronounced; though the ancient Jews refrained
from doing so, to gain thereby the more reverence to it. And this Name is
common to the three Persons; yet according to the sense and circumstances of
diverse texts and places, Personaly. And so here for God the Father. As
likewise, Psalm. II. 7.

said] In his eternal Decree, predestinating his Son to be the Messiah, to
execute in time the Office of Mediatorship.

unto my Lord] David's Lord, as well as his Son.

sit thou] This, and other phrases here, are not proper, but figurative: to be
understood, not corporealy, but spiritualy. Christ is said in Scripture
promiscuously, both to stand, and to sit at the right hand of God, Heb. I. 3.
Acts VII. 55, 56. 1 Pet. III. 22.

at my right hand] The right hand signifies power and strength, Psalm. CXVIII.
16. Exodus XV. 6. Psalm. CXLIV. 8. Power to help, verse 5. Psalm. XVI. 8. and
CXLII. 4. Eccles. X. 2. To be or sit there, imports dignity and honor, 1 Kings
II. 19. Matthew. XX. 21. And such is the meaning here. And this dignity here
expressed by this phrase is ascribed to Christ; not in relation to his Deity,
for so he and the Father are one. Herein he is, and always was of equal
dignity with the Father: But in regard of his Humanity whereby the Father was
greater then he: And wherein formerly he had emptied and humbled himself, and
suffered, even to death; and so was made a little lower then the Angels. But
now hereby he is crowned with glory and honor. Yet this dignity here is not
ascribed to his Humanity singly in it self considered, but in supposito, as it
hypostaticaly subsists in the Person of the Son of God. And this Dignity is
not an elevation and exaltation of the Humanity of our Savior into the Majesty
and essential properties and prerogatives of the Divine-nature; and so to have
a parity of Dignity with it, an equality in all points; realy communicated to
the Humanity in it self, as the Ubiquitaries contend and plead for, and which
they refer, not to the Person only; but to the very Humane nature also in the
Person of the Son of God. But this Dignity of Christ's Humanity is that which
is next in degree under God and the Father, above that of the Angels, and all
creatures, Heb. I. 3, 4. Ephesians. I. 20, 21, 22, 23. given to him in time, after
his Ascension, as a consequent and reward of his exinanition and passion, Phil.
II. ult. Heb. II. 9. Luke XXIV. 26. This Dignity Saint Paul declares, 1 Cor.
XV. 25. and Saint Peter, Acts V. 31. and X. 42. John V. 27. In sum then, as
Christ emptied himself, and subjected himself to the Father, not in regard of
his Divine nature, but in regard of his Person God-man, and that only out of
his Voluntary dispensation; So out of the same his voluntary dispensation it
is, that he exercises this office of Mediation in both natures, And here after
his Ascension; not before; in the Personal Union of both Natures; he receives
this Dignity of sitting on the Fathers right hand; his Person reigning so in
both natures. It is not then the Humanity in it self singly taken that sits on
the right hand of God; but the Humanity of that Person that sits at the right
hand of God: as in the Incarnation it came to pass, not that the Humanity
became God, but that the Humanity became then the Humanity of God. And Christ
now sitting at the right hand of God does reign every where* even as Man also;
though his Humanity be not every where: as a King does in his Kingdom, though
his body be not every where* as the Head in the Body, though the Head be not
every where as the Sun in the firmament enlightens, heats, cherishes,
quickens things below, though the Sun remain in its own place above.

until] 1 Cor. XV. 14, 25, 28. Not yet that the Son shall then leave off all
Rule and Reign, and be subject to the Father simply: But that then he shall
leave off his Office of Mediation, having then overcome his enemies, and fully
gathered his Church; he shall not thenceforth use those means, and actings
which formerly he did; the whole work being then finished; then shall he leave
off the administration of that delegation which he had formerly freely
undertaken, there being then no more need of it. But thenceforth shall he
reign together with the Father to all eternity; Dan. VII. 14. Luke I. 23. In a
sense not unlike is this particle until used, Psalm. CXXIII. 2. Matthew. ult.
ult. Genesis XXVIII. 15. what is affirmed of the time past, is not denied for the
time to come.

I make] I God the Father. Not excluding God the Son. For the same action is
attributed to him, 1 Cor. XV. 25. John XVI. 33, Opera Trinitatis ad extra sunt
indivisa.

thine enemies] The Devil, John XIV. 30. 1 Cor. XV. 24. The World; John XVI.
33. and XV. 18. Antichrist; and all wicked men; Luke XIX. 27. Not, but that
these are the enemies of God, and the Father also; John V. 23. And so both are
joined together, Psalm. II. 2. yet more immediately and directly enemies to
Christ the Son, who came into the world to destroy the works of the Devil, 1
John II. 8. enemies to his Kingdom, and his inheritance, Matthew. XXI. 38.

thy footstool.] All utterly subdued, and put under thy feet, 1 Cor. XV. 14.
As Judge. I. 7. Psalm. XLVII. 3. and Psalm. XVIII. 39, 40. 1 Kings V. 3. Josh. X.
24. 25. Thus did Sapor the Persian King; Tamerlane the Scythian; and Pope
Alexander the fourth to the Emperor Frederick the first. This Conquest was
made by Christ's Resurrection and Ascension, Col. II. 15. Ephesians. IV. 8. John
XII. 3. and chap. XVI. 11. 33. They touch not Christ's person now, as they did
when he was upon earth. They have not power over his mystical body; and true
members, to domineer over them, subdue them, or deadly destroy them: yet they
have power to bite and bruise their heel; and so to persecute Christ in his
members, Acts IX. 4. and chapter XXII. 7.

Zech. II. 8. And so the victory is not yet fully complete, Romans XVI. 20. And
this makes for Christ's greater glory, and his childrens good. But at the last
day, in the end of the world, all the enemies shall be altogether utterly
subdued, and destroyed, and punished everlastingly, 1 Cor. XV. 25, -- 28.
Matthew. XXV. 41, etc.

The Lord shall send] The Prophet David here turns his speech to his Lord and
Son; and speaks here of Jehovah, what he shall do to, and for him.

the rod of thy strength] Thy royal Scepter, or Shepherds staff; thy Kingdom,
and the Dominion thereof, Ier. XLVIII. 17. Ezekiel. XIX. 4, 11. thy royal power;
which shall be strong, to overpower all the strength of the world opposing it,
Romans I. 16. And this is his Word and Gospel; not any temporal arms or power.

out of Zion] There began the promulgation, and thence sprang the Propagation
of the Gospel, and of Christ's Kingdom; which wondrously subdued all the world,
Ps. II. 6, 8. Esaias II. 2, 3. Mich. IV. 2.

rule thou in the midst of thine enemies] Here is the success of Christ's
Kingdom, even among his enemies. He, and his Church Militant in this world
shall still have enemies, Matthew. X. 6. Yet he shall rule and reign in the
midst of them, in despite of them; and that with all confidence and boldness

Thy people] As by right of Creation; so chiefly here,

shall be willing] Their first property; to be prompt, ready, devout,
cheerfully obedient, 1 Pet. II. 9. freely led thereto by Gods free Spirit,
Psalm. LI. 12. Romans VIII. 14. Psalm. LIVE. 6. 2 Cor. IX. 7. As Judge. V. 9. Nehem.
XI. 2. Acts II. 41. Made such by Christ, of unwilling, to be so willing; John
VI. 44. Psalm. CXIX. 10, 11. 108. and in many other places of that Psalm, Esaias
ELIX. 18. and LV. 5. and LX. 4.

in the day of thy power] When by the powerful preaching of thy Gospel, thou
shall rule in the midst of thine enemies; and powerfully convert thy people to
so willing an obedience unto thee. The word here translated Power, signifies
also an army; and may relate to Christ's mustering of his people, as armies, in
the days of their solemn assemblies for his worship and service.

in the beauties of holinesse] Or in the comely honors of the Sanctuary;
meaning either the comely or honorable places of holiness, the Sanctuary, or
Church; or rather, in the beautiful ornaments of holiness, that is, holy
graces and virtues, which with admirable variety adorn the faithful, and
their inner man.

from the womb] The second property or condition of the subjects of Christ's
Kingdom, to be very numerous: as willing; so numerous: as the dew from the
womb of the morning, 2 Samuel XVII. 12. by a sudden, unusual and wonderful
increase and multiplication, Esaias LIVE. 1. Micah V. 7. Esaias LXVI. 9. so numerous
shall his youth be; his newborn people; John I. 13. and III. 3. Gal, IV. 19.
Heb. II. 14. 1 Pet. II. 2. See Esaias LIII. 10. So that these words are not to be
understood of the temporal Nativity of Christ from the Virgin, or his eternal
generation from the Father as some do; but of his active spiritual generation
of his children, the subjects of his Kingdom.

The Lord has sworne] The Vocation of Christ to his Office of Priesthood.
Jehovah is the Author of it.

has sworne] Jehovah swears, to confirm matters of greatest moment: when, and
where his wisdom pleases. And upon this point here of Christ's eternal
Priesthood man's salvation depends. He swears by himself; though that is not
here expressed; because he has no greater to swear by; Heb. VI. 13, 16. Genesis
XXII 16. And so by his life, Esaias XLIX. 18. by his soul, Jer. LI. 24. by his
righthand, and the arm of his strength, Esaias LXII. 8. The result of all which
is the same with himself. And implying thereby thus much, Let me not be
accounted what I am, namely God, the living God, the omnipotent God, if that
which I speak be not true, or my promises or threatenings do fail of
performance. Of Oaths, See the Observations on Jer. LI. 14. and my Annotations
on Hos. IV. 15.

and will not repent] Will not change or retract what he has sworn, Number.
XXIII. 19. James I. 17. Repenting is sometimes ascribed to God; as Genesis VI. 6,
7. Psalm. CVI. 45. 1 Samuel XV. 11. 35. Not that there is any change of mind of
will in God; as there is in man's repenting: But the change is in the work; God
eternally and unchangably decreeing both, as to do the thing, so again to
change it upon man's repentance, or disobedience; Jer. XXVI. 3, 13, 19. Of this
see more in the Observations on Jer. XV. 6. In all this God condescends to man's
weakness, Heb. VI. 17, 18. Shows the greatness, and excellency of the thing
here avowed; that the Lord Christ was lawfully Called and Ordained to be an
eternal Priest for us, and our salvation; for our greater confirmation, and
consolation herein.

Thou art] The Lord Christ well knew this, and could not doubt of the will of
the Father herein. What then needed this Oath to be made unto him? Answ. It was
made to him, for the use of his Church; that his Church might know and be
assured of it. As that John XI. 42.

art] God saying, is as much as doing.

a Preist] So Genesis XIV. 18. Heb. VII. 1. Melchizedec in type; Christ in truth,
the Antitype. The Priests office was to Teach, Pray, and Sacrifice. The High
Priest among the Jews once a year entered into the most Holy place. Yet he in
all things was not an absolute and sufficient Type of our High Priest Christ
the Lord. For he is an eternal High Priest; and both King and Priest; and his
Sacrifice of another nature; and himself of another Tribe.

for ever] Not so the Priests after the order of Aaron, Heb. VII. 23. 34 and
chap. IX. 12.

after the order] Or similitude, Heb. V. 6. and chap. VII. 15.

of Melchizedec] Much question who this Melchizedec was. He was not the Son
of God himself, our Lord and Christ. Very many take him to be Sem the Son of
Noah, who saw both worlds, before, and after the Flood; and lived to the one
hundred and fiftieth year of the age of Abraham. Yet because Sems genealogy is
exactly set down in Scripture; and that the Levitical Priests themselves came
from him after sundry descents: and the Land of Canaan seems not to be Sems
habitation, which took its name from his younger brother Cham, or from Chams
son Canaan: Neither would Abraham so long have forborne his due respects and
visitation of Sem in Canaan, if Sem had lived there: Therefore diverse learned
men take this Melchizedec to be rather some eminent man in Canaan, raised up by
God in those corrupt times, both good and godly, both King and Priest, living
in Salem, after called Jerusalem; whose King in Joshuahs time was called
Adoni-Zedeck, that is, Lord of righteousness, Josh. X. 1. As this man here is
called Melchizedec, that is, King of righteousness. By which place, or near to
it, Abraham in his return from this war and victory, was to pass.

Of this Melchizedec, and his Priesthood, and the difference of it from Aarons
Priesthood, the Apostle to the Hebrews, chap, VII entreats at large, and
observes diverse things; his Name and Title; his greatness in that he blessed
Abraham, and received Tithes of Abraham; his being mentioned in Scripture
without any Pedigree, without father without mother, without descent, having
neither beginning of days, nor end of life. All these he had; as our Savior
himself had them; but none of them recorded or registered in the Scripture; that
he might so become a Type of the eternity of Christ's Person, and Priesthood;
verse 3. The Apostle further observes his Offices, that he was both King and
Priest; and that our Savior was made such, with an oath of God the Father; and
a Priest of a better Priesthood, Covenant, and Commandment; and that he was
made, not after the Law of a carnal commandment, having carnal successors in
his Priesthood; but after the power of an endless life, consecrated for
evermore, having an eternal Priesthood, and unchangeable, continuing ever, and
living ever to make intercession, and by his one, offering up himself once for
all, saving them to the uttermost that come to God by him. In all which there
are manifold resemblances between Christ and Melchizedec; and manifold
differences between theirs and the Aaronical Priesthood. As for those fond and
forced dreams of the Papist, That Melchizedec offered up to God the sacrifice
of bread and wine; And therein was a Type and Figure of their sacrifice of the
Mass; And that thereupon Christ our Lord is said to be a Priest after the
order of Melchizedec; These may well befall to them, who for want of the love of
the truth, are given up to believe lies; but are too weak, poor, and silly, for
us to trouble our selves withal.

The Lord at thy right hand] The prophecy of Christ the Lord his
administration of his Kingly Office, verse.

The Lord, God, the Father, who will make thine enemies thy footstool, He at
thy right hand, ready to assist thee. O Christ; as Psalm. XVI. 8. and CIX. 31.
Shall strike through Kings, Psalm. II. 2, 4, 5. even the highest Powers and
Potentates that oppose Christ and his Kingdom, 2 Cor. X. 5. In the day of his
wrath, the time appointed in Gods wisdom, the time of his just will so to
punish them with plagues temporal, eternal, in this life, in that to come, 1
These. I. 9, 10. Not that Christ the Lord shall be exempted from this powerful
conquest, and overthrow of his enemies; the Son being in all things coequal,
consubstantial with the Father; And so the Act coming from the Father, by the
Son; But in this speech relation is had to Christ, as (...), God and Man, as
the King Mediator, and receiving his Office from the Father.

He shall judge] The Lord at thy right hand shall execute judgments and
punishments.

among the heathen] Psalm. II. 1. Acts IV. 27. all his enemies whatsoever.

he shall fill the places with the dead bodies] All places with the carkases of
the slain. See Jer. XVI. 4. A figurative and poetical expression of an huge
slaughter; such as was that of the Jews at the final destruction of Jerusalem,
after the death of our Savior.

he shall wound the head in many countries] Wound, or strike through. Head for
heads collectively, Psalm. LXVIII. 21. in many or great countries. See that
Apoc. XX. 9, 10.

He] Christ the Lord.

shall drink of the brook in the way] In pursuing the victory over his enemies;
he shall do, as Gideons soldiers did, Judge. VII. 7. admit of no delays; which
occasioned that interdict, adjuration, and curse of Saul, 1 Samuel XIV. 24. Or
rather, these words seem to have relation to Christ's state of Humiliation; and
the rather because of that opposition thereunto in the words following. And so
here we have Christ's exinanition, and exaltation; his passion, and
resurrection; whereby he was brought to sit at the right hand of the Father,
verse 1.

drink] In passing through this valley of tears, in this world, he shall drink
deeply of the cup of sorrows: the waters, floods, and torrents of afflictions
and miseries should overtake and encompasse him, if not overwhelme and drown
him, Psalm. LXXXVIII. 7. 17. See Jer. XXV. 15, 16. and chap. XLIX. 12. Matthew.
XX. 22. John XVIII. 11. Matthew. XXVI. 39.

in the way] Of this life; the way of doing his fathers will for the work of
man's redemption, Phil. II. 7, 8. He hid for the time the luster and beams of
his Divine Majesty; that it might not hinder the sufferings and death of his
Humanity, 1 Cor. II. 8. Matthew. XVII. 9.

therefore] Thus Christ came from his humiliation to his exaltation, from his
Priesthood, to his Kingdom. Therefore here notes not a Merit preceding in
Christ, meriting for himself this exaltation; or his glory either in body, or
soul, his life eternal; All necessarily followed upon that hypostatical Union,
which he could not merit to himself. All Christ did, was to merit for us. The
particle here notes the consequence or sequel, and order, the means and manner
how he came to this exaltation.

shall he lift up the head] Be exalted; sit at Gods right hand. See for the
phrase, Psalm. III. 3. and XXVII. 6. Jer. LII. 31. Lam. II. 10. sublimi feriet
sydera vertice.

Praise] This is one of the Alphabetical Psalms. Psalm. Thereby to help
memory, and to mark out the excellency of these Psalms. See the Observations
on the beginning of the Book of Psalms.

wonderful works] In Egypt.

meat] Manna and Quails.

Covenant] Though they by their sins often and grievously provoked him.

heathen] Canaanites.

Praise] Psalm.

wealth] See the Observations on Psalm. XXXVII. 1.

light in darknesse] Esaias LVIII. 10. Job XI. 17. Psalm. XXXVII. 6.

of evil tydings] Prove. I. 33. Otherwise is it with the wicked, Jer. XLIX. 23.

gnash with his teeth] See that Luke XIII.

who humbles himself to behold] Psalm. etc. Job XXXIV. 21, 22. Prove. V. 21.
Jer. XVI. 17. contrary to that, Psalm. LXXIII. 11. and LXIV. 6. and XCIV. 7, --
10. Job XXII. 12, 13.

He raiseth] 1 Samuel II. 8.

mountains skipped] Sinai, Horeb, quaked and shaked, Exodus XIX. 18. Hab. III.
6, 10. Psalm LXVIII. 8.

Their idols are] Not like unto our God, verse 3.

are like unto them] As much without sense and reason,

their help] Theirs that trust in him: or one person,

has he given] To their use,

The dead praise not] Psalm. Esaias XXXVIII. 18.

I love] This may seem to be David's Psalm,

Therefore] The experience of Gods hearing our prayers,

Pains of hell] The sorrows and straits of death, Psalm. XVIII. 5, 6.

Gratious] The issue and effect of Prayer.

thy rest] Thy quiet comfortable estate in God without trouble of conscience,

I beleeved] 2 Cor.

I was greatly afflicted] The Hebrew word here has an Active form, but in a
Passive signification. As sometimes an Hebrew word in a Passive form, is of an
Active signification. See Esaias XXI. 10. and chap. XXV. 9. and LIII. 7. and Ezekiel
XIV. 4, 7.

haste, All men are liers] Even the Prophets, as Samuel that promised to me the
Kingdom. Yea, all men, in comparison of God; unable to help in time of need,
Romans III. 4.

cup of salvations] Used in the Israelites Peace Offerings of Thanksgivings,
Chron. XVI. 1, 2, 3 whence that seems to be, Luke XXII. 17.

vowes] Made in mine adversity. Annotations on Jonah I. 16.

Pretious] Psalm. LXXII.

Praise] The Apostle alleges this to prove Gods mercy to the Gentiles,

O give thanks] This may seem to be David's Psalm; Sam. XII. 29.

on my side] Heb.

All nations] David had to deal with all the neighboring nations round about
him.

Thou] Speaking to the enemy.

Open to me] The gates of the Sanctuary,

of righteousnesse] For the righteous and clean only were to enter in thereat,
2 Chronicles. XXIII. 19. See Esaias XXVI. 2. Apoc. XXI. 27.

The stone] David Typicaly; Mat. XXI. 42. Ephesians. II. 20.

builders refused] The Rulers refused David in the reigns of Saul, and
Ishbosheth. The Priests and Elders refused Christ, Mark XII. 2, 10. Luke XIX.
14. 1* Pet. II. 7.

the head stone] Acts IV. 11. Luke XX. 17. Of this stone see more, Esaias XXVIII.
16. Dan. II. 34, 35, 45. Zech. III. 9. Romans IX. 33.

the day] A chief and choice day of God showing his mercy.

Save now^beseech thee] Heb. Hoshiah^ na, Hosanna; wherewith Christ is welcomed
to Jerusalem, and the Temple; Mat. XXI. 9, 15. Luke XIX. 37, 38.

we have blessed you] These seem to be the Priests words, Number. VI. 23.

light] Prosperity, David, and Christ.

even unto the horns of the Altar] Likely the horns of the Altar Exodus XXVII.
2. intended for that use. Or, sacrifices abundantly all the Court over till you
come to the horns of the Altar, Levit. IV. 7.

Blessed] Of this Psalm see the Observations on the beginning of the Book of
Psalms. David probably is the penman of it. The style is plain, fitted for
all capacities. And the Alphabetical order was used for help of memory. It is
full of the ardent pious affections of a religious soul. Petitions for saving
knowledge, and gracious assistance from God, and Promises of all holy sincere
obedience thereupon, are in every Octonarie; with wondrous art and variety of
sense; yet running much upon the same words, without any tautologie.

Before I was afflicted] So verse 71. Junius; unless we understand it thus,
Before I cried out by reason of affliction.

my soul is continualy in my hand] i. e. Judge. XII. 3. 1 Samuel XIX. 5. and chap.
XXVIII. 21. Many read this text in thy hand, or hands, understanding Gods hand,
which imports, not danger, but safety and security, as Psalm. XXXI. 5. Luke
XXIII. 46. 1 Pet. IV. 19. And is indeed a wrong reading; and breeds sundry
senses, not consonant, or consisting with the tenor of this verse.

any iniquity] either in me, subjective; or of others against me, objective.
And so the later way may be understood that Gal. II. 7, 90 Ephesians. VI. 12. Heb.
XII. 4. Psalm. XLIX. 5. and XL. 12. and LXV. 3. and XXXIX. 8.

A song of degrees] or ascensions, Psalms following, have this Title prefixed.
The meaning whereof is variously conjectured; As thus, That they were to be
sung with a loud voice, as 1 Chronicles. XV. 16. Or, upon the steps and degrees of
the stairs ascending to the Court of the people, or to that of the Priests,
which, they say, were fifteen in number, according to these number of these
Psalms. Or, in the coming of the Ark into the Temple. Or in their return out
of Babylon. Or to be sung in their return into their own land in the time of
the Messiah. Others have other conjectures; yet without any certain
determination; neither is it much material. Of these, four bear David's title,
and some of the rest not unlikely were penned by him.

I] David likely.

from lying lips] Of such as falsely accused him to Saul. Sam. XXIV. 9. and
chap. XXVI. 19.

what shall be given] What good or profit shall thou get or gain by it.

sharp arrowes] Such is a false tongue:

Woe is me] Laments, Mesech, the son of Japhet, Genesis X. 2. and of Kedar, the
son of Ishmael, Genesis XXV. 13. or rather, with men of like evil cruel
conditions to them.

hills] Moriah, Zion; where God dwells. But most to God himself, verse 2.

The Sunne] By its parching heat; Jonah IV. 8. Nor the Moon, by its cold
vapors. Genesis XXXI. 40. nor any discommodity shall be able to annoy thee, Psalm.
XCI. 5.

I] David having brought the Ark of the testimony to Jerusalem, Psalm of joy
and gladness therefore: Praising the City; and praying for the prosperity of
it.

testimonie] The Ark. Observations on. Ex. 25. 16.

thrones of judgement] Both Ecclesiastical, Deuteronomy. XVII. 8, etc.

the captivity of Zion] Out of Babylon:

that dreame] So incredible it was, and the joy of it, that we half doubted
whether it were true, or but a dream. As Peter did, Acts XII. 9, 11. See Esaias
XXIX. 7, 8. And the like speech we read of in Abdolominus when he was taken
from manuring the earth, to possess a Kingdom: and in Isaacus Angelus, when
he was suddenly lifted up to the Empire: and in that famous John Chrysostom,
when he was first chosen into the Presbytery.

Turn again] Prays that the deliverance begun, Ezra, and Nehemiah.

They that sow in tears] That went mournfuly into captivity,

for Solomon] Seems to be inspired and penned for Solomon, David, a little
before his death, Psalm. LXXII. title

Except the Lord] This is true generaly: Solomon, and the safe keeping of the
City Jerusalem: or rather to the building of Solomon's house and posterity.

so] By building,

he giveth] Or surely will give, or rightly does give.

his beloved] Whom he loves, and who in assurance of his love commits himself
to him and his care. The Hebrew word Iedid seems to allude to Solomon's name
Iedidiah, 2 Samuel XII. 25. his darling.

sleep] Or quiet rest, without carking care and sorrow. The Hebrew word is
written with (...) a quiet dumb letter, otherwise then usual, to denote the
more quietness. And this rest, not your care and toil, but Gods blessing, will
bring unto you, Prove. X. 22.

Blessed] The Blessings that ordinarily follow them that Fear the Lord* Psalm.
LXXIII.

eat the labour] As on the other side it is true of the wicked, Prove. I. 31.

the cords] Wherewith they drew their Plough;

his bosome] Or arms; Esaias XLIX. 22.

The blessing] As Ruth II.

Out of the depths] Psalm.

forgiveness with thee; that thou may be feared] Hos III. his mercy, and our
plenteous redemption, is the true cause of our fearing of him, and hoping in
him, verse 7. If without this, God did strictly mark our iniquities, our hope
in him, and reverential fear and worship of him, would utterly fail and perish.

shall redeem] Psalm.

not haughty] In aspiring to the Kingdom; Saul's ruin and destruction.

as a weaned childe] That is,

Let Israel] By my example.

A Song] This seems to be David's, Jerusalem. Some say, Solomon's; acting what
his father purposed and ordered, 2 Samuel VII. 8. with 2 Chronicles. VI. 41.

his afflictions] In coming to the crown; verses following.

surely] If I enter.

my house] Newly built, and mentioned, 1 Chronicles. XV. 1.

sleep] In that house.

we heard of it] We Bethleemites heard of the Ark.

at Ephratha] That it was, or had been at Shiloh in the tribe of Ephraim: or
much rather, we at Bethlehem Ephratha, in our own country, heard of it, Micah
V. 2. Genesis XXXV. 16, 19. 1 Samuel I. 1. See the Annotations on Micah V. 2.

we found it in the fields of the wood] Or Jaar; in Kiriath-jearim, a City
seated in the woods, as the name imports. And of Kiriath-jearim, See the
Observations on 1 Samuel VII. 1.

Arise] 2 Chronicles. Number. X. 35. Psalm. LXVIII. 1.

thy rest] Ver. 13, 14. still flitting and wandering before.

cloathed] As with their sacred garments. Apoc. XIX. 8. Ephesians. IV. 24. Col. III.
10, 12, 14. Gal. III. 27. Romans XIII. 14.

For thy servant David's sake] Verse 1. Kings 8. 25. Psalm. LXXXIX. 20. Esaias
XXXVII. 35. And for Christ's sake, called David, Hos. III. 5. See the
Annotations upon that text.

of thine anointed] Me, thine anointed King.

of thy body] This relates to Christ, Acts II. 30.

If thy children] Thus conditional to David's posterity, Sam. VII. 14. Psalm.
LXXXIX. 30 -- 33.

for evermore] Verified only in Christ, the Son of David.

the horn of David to bud] Psalm. LXXXIX. 24. Luke I. 69.

a lamp] 1 Kings XI. 36. and XV. 4. 2 Kings VIII. 19.

Hermon] See the Observations on Deuteronomy. Hermon and Zion here are far distant
mountains. And so the dew of Hermon descends not upon the mountains of Zion;
but the similitude is twice repeated, of the dew falling upon those two several
distinct and distant mountains.

commanded] Psalm. XLII. 8. and XLIV. 4. and LXVIII. 28. and LXXI. 3. Deuteronomy.
XXVIII. 8.

by night] 1 Chronicles. Psalm. XCII. 3. and CXIX. 147. Luke I^. 37. 1 Samuel III. 3.
Some think that this, and the next Psalm, were made for the use of such
worshippers by night.

for the raine] Or,

repent] Even in the judging of his people;

Rivers] May comprehend here Euphrates, Tigris, or Eulaeus or Chabor, being
then all under the Babylonish Empire.

of Babylon] In the seventy years captivity. Of Babylon, see the Observations
on Dan. IV. 30.

of Edom] Obadiah, verse 10, -- 16. Ezekiel XXV. 12. Jer. XLIX. 7. Lament. IV. 2.

thy little ones] Sin enough in Babylon, Shinar, Zech. V. 8, 11. Sin enough
in these little ones: as in the little ones of the old world drowned with Noah's
flood: as in the little ones of Sodom, burned with brimstone: etc.

thy Word above all thy name] Or,

with strength.] Ephesians.

in the ways of the Lord] Or, Psalm. CIII. 7. when they shall be converted.

will perfect] Phil. I. 6. Psalm. LVII. 2.

my bed in hell] In the grave.

in the lowest parts of the earth] His mothers womb, Eccles. XI. 5. So Ephesians.
IV. 9. may be understood of Christ's Incarnation. Sometimes this phrase is meant
of the Grave; as Psalm. LXIII. 9.

when I awake I am still with thee] Still meditating of thee, verse 17. the
next morning I am where I was, I am but at the beginning still; the more I
think of them, the more wonderful they appear to me still.

Surely] This may be rendered here as a Wish.

violent man] Saul,

O God] Jehovih. Observations on Esaias XXVI. 4. and on Psalm. LXXI. 5.

the strength of my salvation] Ephesians. VI. 17.

of David] This may seem inspired and composed by David when he was in the
Wilderness of En-gedi, 1 Samuel XXIV. about the same time when the next Psalm,
and Psalm LVII. were composed.

doore] In the Hebrew dal is contracted here for deleth: Chaji, 2. Sam. XXIII.
23. for Chajil, 1 Chronicles. XI. 22.

incline not] By Satan, James I. 13, 14. So Matthew. VI. 13.

not eat of their dainties] Lest by their prosperity I should be allured to be
wicked, as they are.

for yet my prayer] I will requite them with my best prayers,

when their Judges] The Chieftains and Senators of mine adversaries.

in stony places] Where they persecute, and pursue me.

they shall hear my words] Then; that they are sweet, pleasing, and inoffensive
to mine adversaries.

Our bones] David's,

when he was in the cave] Psalm LVII. 1 Samuel XXIV. 4. The later part of this
prayer seems, Jonah II.

prison] This Cave,

faithfulnesse]

righteousnesse] To maintain and defend a righteous cause.

Enter not] Though my cause be just; Romans III. 20. So Job XXII. 4. and XIV. 3.
Gal. II. 16.

no man living] Heb. not all living, i. e. not any living. As Mat. XXIV. 22. 1
John II. 21. 2 Pet. I. 20. Psalm. LXXVI. 5.

is desolate] Or wondrously amazed,

cause me] The work is Gods. verse 10.

good; lead me] Or,

of David] It seems composed after he came to the crown, Sam. V. and VIII.

what is man] Psalm. VIII. 5. Job VII. 17. Heb. II. 6.

Bow the heavens] Show thy self present on earth, Sam. XXII. 10.

a right hand of falshood] Though they shake hands,

whose God is the Lord] This is opposed to all the other worldly wealth;

of praise] His Hymn. Psalm. Only the letter Nun is wanting. See the
Observations on Psalm. XXV. 1. and on the beginning of the book of Psalms.

over all his works] Or,

upholdeth all that fall] Psalm. knows are to be upholden; without whom, and his
goodness none are upholden. But some fall, and never rise.

wait upon thee] Psalm CIV.

in truth] This in Prayer requires sincerity,

the desire] Or will. We pray that Gods will may be done, Matthew. VI. 10 Here he
does his servants will. So he honors them that honor him, 1 Samuel II. 30.
And their will agrees with his, 1 John V. 14.

Praise ye the Lord] Heb. Halelu-jah. And thus do begin, and end likewise, the
rest of the Psalms that follow. In the Greek, it is Alleluia Apoc. XIX. 1.
Halelu-jah, is in Psalm. CIV. and CVI. and CXXXV. and in many others.

which executes judgement] Who succors and relieves all,

out-casts] Deuteronomy.

tells the number] Esaias XL. Ier. XXXIII. 22. at least in common opinion, and
of him indeed cannot be all seen. The number of the stars is counted by
ancient Astronomers; And all within, and without their several Constellations,
in their several magnitudes, are reduced by all, much under the number of two
thousand. Yet their number, in Scripturephrase, is marshaled with the sands of
the sea, as innumerable. Which is spoken according to vulgar opinions and
apprehensions; as that of the Sun, and Moon Genesis I 16. And diverse other
things are in Scripture in like sort spoken of. And yet the innumerable
multitude of them appears the more, in our times; Wherein Galileus, and others
after him by their new instruments and Tubi Optici, have made such strange
discoveries of many many numbers of them, never seen before.

young ravens] Job XXXVIII.

fat of wheat] Psalm.

runneth] Psalm. XXXIII. 9.

snow like wooll] accordingly the phrase is, fleeces of snow.

his ice like morsels] Frost, or frozen hailstones.

his word unto Jacob] This is singular mercy, and peculiar to his Church:
far beyond all those formerly mentioned: for which his Church is so bound to
praise him.

stars of light] Job XXXVIII.

havens of heavens] The heaven of heavens is the highest heaven; Cor. 2. XII.
The sky where the stars are, is the second heaven. And the air under it, and
next us, is the first heaven: In the upper part whereof are the waters here
mentioned. For this Text, and Genesis I, 6, 7. yield not a sure foundation whereon
to build an Orb of supercelestial waters, above the starry heavens; nor from
the windows of that Orb came the waters in Noah's flood. But from the lowest
region of the air, called Heaven, and the firmament of Heaven, wherein the
winds, clouds, and fowls do fly; and do divide between the sea-waters, and
the watery clouds which moysten the earth, and make it bring forth fruit for
the sustenance of man, and beast. See Genesis I. 20. Jer. LI. 16. Dan. VII. 2, 13.
Psalm. LXXVIII. 23. Mal. III. 10.

a decree] Statute, Job XIV. 5. and XXVI. 10. and XXXVIII, 33. Jer. XXXI. 35.
and XXXIII. 25.

the horn of his people] Psalm. Luke I. 69.

him that made him] Heb. his makers. Likely relating to the Trinity of persons,
as Genesis I. 26. and III. 22. and XI. 7. Job. XXXV. 10. Eccles. XII. 1. Esaias VI.
8. LIVE. 5.

King] Christ, of whom King David was a Type. As Mat. XXI. 5. Cant. I. 4,

upon their beds] Night and day, Psalm. LXIII. 6. Job XXXV. 10.

and a two-edged sword] Heb. Ephesians. VI. 17. Heb. IV. 12. Apoc. I. 16. which is
the Word of God, coming out of Christ's mouth.

To execute vengeance upon the heathen] Chiefly in and by the power and
preaching of the Gospel, Cor. X. 4, 5, 6, 8. See Esaias XLI. 15, 16. John XVI. 8,
9.

To binder their Kings] Psalm. Esaias XLV. 14. Mark VI. 20. Acts XXIV. 25. Apoc.
XXI 24. Matthew. XVI. 19.

the judgment written] This may have reference to that Law, Deuteronomy. VII. 1, 2.
Or, to the exact rule of Gods Word, without any addition, or diminution. Deuteronomy.
XII. 32. Apoc. XXII. 18.

This honour] Deuteronomy. IV. 6, 7, 8.

Sanctuary] His holy place.

firmament of his power] His power seen in the firmament, in the stretching
out and spreading abroad of it, Psalm. XIX. 2. Dan. XII. 3.

that has breath] Apoc. V. 13.

Proverbs.
THE Book of Proverbs contains the chief of those three thousand Proverbs which
Solomon spoke, 1 Kings IV. 32.

They are Proverbs and instructions of Piety, and Wisdom; and the Praises of
it; with Exhortations to it, and Dehortations from the chief avocations and
impediments of it, in the nine first chapters. All which serve well, as a large
Preface and preceding Introduction. And then do follow Proverbs, or choice
sentences, (...), or wise Apothegines, Solomon's Ethics, our Digesta, and
Pandects; All of Morality, and prudential Civility, in the rest of the Book.

Wherein coherence of Sentences is not much minded: A Repetition of the same
things, by reason of the several Collections of them, is found sometimes: And
the verity of some of them, is not like that of Mathematical Theoremes; but
consists in such a generality of truth, as stands good, and is so (...), for
the most part; And yet admits of alteration by variety of circumstances, and
other incident occasions.

Throughout the Book, Solomon speaks, one while in his Own name; Another while
in his Fathers; Then in Wisdoms; Elsewhere, in his Mothers; and sometimes in
Gods name.

It may seem thus; That he speaks in his Own name, Chapters I, II, III. He
sets down the sum of his Father David's Instructions, Chapters IV, V, VI, VII.
Then brings in Wisdom speaking, Chapters VIII. IX. After he sets down those
Proverbs of his Own, which he had set in order in his Lifetime, Chapters X,
-- XXIV. Then others are added that were gathered by the Servants of King
Hezekiah, Chapters XXV, -- XXIX. Then follows the Prophecy of Agur, Chap. XXX.
And lastly, the Instruction which Solomon's mother taught him, Chap, XXXI. So
that the Collection was made by sundry; and at sundry times. For explanations,
where most need shall be, I shall give some short touches; And therein
willingly make choice to use such expressions as I can best judge in other
Authors helpful this way: And by way of collection and contraction pick out the
pith of them.

of Solomon] Of his wisdom, Kings III. 12. and IV. 29, 30, 31. and X. 23, 24.
Eccles. XII. 9, 10.

to give subtiltie] Sacred sagacitie, Cor. II. 10. 2 Cor. III. 18.

The fear of the Lord] It is Wisdom it self, Job XXVIII. 28. He sets it here
in the Beginning; and he makes it the End of all, yea, the All of man, Eccles.
XII. 13.

wisdome] The wisdom of God; Col. II. 3. 1 Cor. I. 30.

wisdom crieth] John VII. 37. The Hebrew is, Wisdoms cries. The plural
number is here used, by way of excellency, to denote the singular eminency of
the thing so spoken of. And so Behemoth, signifying beasts, for that singular
beast, Job XL. 15. And so, If I be masters, in the Hebrew, Mal. I. 6. And so
likewise Elohim pluraly is used for one only God. Unless, by way of Ellipsis,
we will take the meaning thus; the wisdom of wisdoms; the beast of beasts;
the master of masters; the God of Gods. In like sense the plural is used, Lam.
III. 22. Psalm. LI 17. 2 Samuel XXII. 1.

and ye refused] This is a step toward the sin unpardonable.

I also will laugh] Psalm. II. 4. Then man has cause to weep. The poison of
sin thus working upon God, and Christ. Esaias I. 24.

Then shall they call] Prove. Sam. XXVIII. 6. Psalm. XVIII. 41.

the prosperity of fools shall destroy them.]

quiet from fear of evil] Psalm. XLVI. 2,

if thou criest] Hos.

and searchest for her] Till ye get all those dimensions of Knowledge, Ephesians.
III. 18. Romans XV. 14.

who rejoice to do evil] Who cannot be merry, Ier. XI. 15.

none] For the most part,

Length of dayes] If a short life be not a blessing, Kings XIV. 13. Esaias LVII.
1. when there is a fire in an house or a town, men carry out their jewels. But
then God makes them up in his Cabinet, Malachi III. 17.

Be not wise] Bis desipit qui sibi sapit. chapter XXVI. 12.

the chastening] Is cited, Heb. XII. 5, 6. Schola crucis, schola lucis.
Adversity is the best University.

she is a tree of life] Alluding to Genesis

and happy is] The retainers of her. So in the Hebrew. And the meaning is well
rendered in our English, every one that retains her. The like phrase and use
of the plural, joined with a singular, and in a distributive sense, in the
Hebrew, is found, chap. XIV. 1. Genesis XLIX. 22. Exodus XVII. 12. and XXXI. 14.
Josh. II. 4. Job XII. 7. Psalm. LXXIII. 7. Joel I. 20. 2 Kings V. 13.

The Lord by wisdome] By his essential wisdom, chap. VIII. 30. Apoc. III. 14.
Heb. I. 2. Col. I. 16.

go,

surely he scorneth the scorners* but he gives grace to the lowly] Jam. Pet.
V. 5. Those scorners are such through pride. And the grace here given is not
meant of inward sanctifying grace, but of external favor, repute, and
estimation with men. And so chap. I. 9. and IV. 9. Eccles. VII. 1. and chap.
IX. 11. Luke II. 52. Acts II. 47. And so also may be understood, Luke I. 28.
and Ephesians. 1. 6.

scorneth] Psalm, I. 1. chap. I. 22. and IX. 7, 8. See the Observations there.
As also chap. IX. 12. and XIII. 1. Esaias XXVIII. 14. and chap. XXIX. 20. Hos.
VII. 5. 2 Pet. III. 3. Jude 18.

Only] Not borne; Bathshebah. His Father loved also other of his sons but too
well.

He taught me] The substance of his Father David's doctrine, Solomon does
briefly set down to the tenth verse. And then proceeds in his own words.

Forsake her not] Falling Stars were never but Meteors.

with all thy getting] With any pains,

For they sleep not] Et si non aliqua nocuisset, mortuus esset.

thy heart] This is the chief Monarch in this Isle of man, c. XXIII. 26

Let thine eyes look right on] On right objects. If thine eye offend thee, pull
it out of the old Adam, and set it in the New man: Else better to pull it out
indeed.

Ponder] By the weight of the Sanctuary.

feet] Affections. For by these maids, Satan wooes the Mistress.

a strange woman] Verse 3, -- 23. chap. VI. 29. and chap. XXII. 14. and chap.
XXIII. 27. and chap. XXIX. 3. Luke XV. 13.

Lest] She by her ways labors to prevent this.

Lest strangers] Chap. VI.

own cisterne] Cant. IV. 12.

let thy fountains] Thy children by lawful marriage: or the good use of thy
goods and wealth.

only thine own] Sow there where thou may reap,

if thou be surety] Of suretiship, Prove. XI. 15. and chap. XVII. 18. and chap.
XXII. 26. and XX. 16. and chap. XXVII. 13.

sluggard] Solomon is often upon him in the Proverbs. Once for all take it thus;
He paints him out in this wise; Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little
folding of the hands to sleep, chap. VI 10. and chap. XIX. 15. and chap. XXIV.
33. whereupon he bespeaks him thus, How long will thou sleep O sluggard? when
will thou arise out of thy sleep? chap. VI. 9. and chap. XIX. 15. As the door
turns upon his hinges, so does a slothful man upon his bed, for all its
turnings it hangs there still, chap, XXVI. 14. He hides his hand in his
bosom, and it grieveth him* he is weary, he will not so much as bring it to
his mouth again, chap. XIX. 24. and chap. XXVI. 15. and chap. XII. 27. His way
is an hedge of thorns, chap. XV. 19. He says, A lion is in the way, a lion is
in the streets, chapter XXVI. 13. I shall be slain in the streets, chap. XXII. 13.
a lion without, and a lazy lozel within. I went, says Solomon, by the field
of the slothful, and by the Vineyard of the man void of understanding. And lo,
it was all grown over with thorns, and nettles had covered the face thereof,
and the stone-wall thereof was broken down, chap. XXIV. 30, 31. He will not
plough by reason of the cold, chap. XX. 4. He rosteth not that which he took in
hunting, chap. XII. 27. As vinegar to the teeth, and as smoke to the eyes, so
is the sluggard to them that send him, chap. X. 26. His soul desires, and has
nothing, chap. XIII. 4. his desire kills him, for his hands refuse to labor,
chap. XXI. 25. And so he is brother to him that is a great waster, chap. XVIII.
9. whereupon his poverty comes as one that travelleth, and his want as an armed
man, chap. VI. 11. and chapter X. 4. and chapter XIX. 15. and chapter XX. 13. and XXIII.
21. and XXIV. 34. that he shall beg in harvest, and have nothing, chap. XX. 4.
but be under tribute, XII. 24. and be clothed in rags. And yet this sluggard is
wiser in his own conceit, then seven men that can render a reason, then the
seven wise men of Greece, c. XXVI. 16. Howbeit the wise man here sends him to
the Ant, to consider her ways, and be wise. See Mat. XXV. 26.

no guide] As in the Bees is an umbrage of Monarchy,

He winketh] Does twinkle with his eyes,

without remedie] A dreadful and dismal doom,

thou wakest] Psalm. CXXXIX.

to keep thee] To be as an amulet to that end.

her beauty] Helen without, but Hecuba within.

not be innocent] flagitium and flagellum, sicut acus and filum. Culpam Paena
premit comes, says Horace. Abraham might see Sodom burning; but Lot must not
look that way.

sevenfold] Often restore, Psalm XII. 7. But is not punished with death, as
the adulterer is. We read in the Law, of double, of fourfold, and fivefold
restitution, in several cases of theft, Exodus XXII. 1, 4. 2 Samuel XII. 6. Here
by sevenfold is meant manifold, as Psalm. XII. 6. a plentiful restitution.

the apple of thine eye] The least moat offends the eye;

I have peace-offerings] Pretends religion to her filthy practices.

with me] For thee; as she likely pretended.

my vowes] She is a Votarie too; such as many Popish Nuns are.

the day appointed] Rather so,

al plaine] In things necessary to salvation;

witty inventions] Not toylsome toys, which are but laborious loss of time,
of no use or worth. But to be wise as Serpents; as Ephesians. V. 15, 16, 17. Deuteronomy.
IV. 6.

By me Kings reign] Romans

I love them that love me] Here is not love lost, John XIV. 21, 23. Ephesians. VI.
24. and Christ is wholly lovely, Cant. V. 16. Hag. II. 7. 1 Cor. XVI. 22.

I lead in the way of righteousnesse] I meddle not with the Mammon of iniquity;

possessed me] i. e. Aquila, Symmachus, and Theodotion, (...), accordingly: not
(...), created me; as the LXX. read, and the Arrian would have it; denying
thereby the eternal Deity of Christ. And yet that Col. I. 15. the firstborn
of every creature, stands well in an Orthodox exposition, with the Catholic
Doctrine of Christ's eternal Deity. And the words in the verses following, do
agree unto Christ; compared with Psalm. II. 6. and XC. 2. Matthew. III. 17. John
I. 14. As moreover the words in the beginning of the next Chapter do agree to
him likewise, who is the wisdom of the Father, Col. III. 2. And that Christ is
God, see among other places, Heb. I. 3. John I. 3. Col. I. 16, 17.

foundations of the earth] Yet hangs in the air, ver. 30. John I. 1.

and my delights were] With his Church especially.

finds life] John XIV. chap. X. 28. and chap. I. 12.

Wisdome] Hebr. wisdoms; the most excellent wisdom. See chapter VIII 1. and the
Observations on chap. I. 20.

seven pillars] So many polished pillars as might be sufficient to uphold and
adorn her.

mingled her wine] This usual in those hot countries, verse 5. In relation to
the Gospel, see that Matthew. XXII. 4.

come eat of my bread] As the Virgin Mary is not meant by wisdom, verse 1. so
neither the Eucharist by this Bread and Wine here; as some Papists would poorly
seek to persuade us.

Reprove not a scorner] Chap. chap. XXIV. 9. and XXVI. 4. Matthew. VII. 6. The
basest can mock: As the abjects did David, Psalm. XXXV. 15.

thy days shall be multiplied] Chap. Exod^s XX. 12. if short life would not
prove a blessing to thee, 1 Kings XIV. 13. Esaias LVII. 1, 2. as it was to Enoch,
to Josiah, and others; who did live long in a little time here, and then lived
for ever in heaven.

clamorous] The most lewd,

stolen waters] Those pleasures where the Devil is a play-fellow. But such
morsels of sin are murdering morsels, not nourishing.

The Proverbs] Here the name of Solomon is prefixed again; Proverbs; wherein
the Opposition of Contraries in the same verse is very much used; and the first
part often serves much to usher in the second.

from death] The second death;

The Lord will not suffer] Though he refuse to enrich himself by evil arts,
Psalm. XXXVII. 25. and XXXIV. 9.

Blessings] Chap. Genesis XXVII. 33. a confluence of all, and of all kinds, of
Blessings.

The memorie] Their name is heir to their life; Chap. XXII. 1. and chap. XV.
30. Eccles. VII. 1. 3 John verse 12.

but the name of the wicked shall rot] A frequent phrase and speech with the
Hebrews; which they abbreviate, and write thus, (...).

shall receive commandment] Be subject to Gods holy word,

winketh] Winketh wiles.

sorrow] Sin, and sorrow, to himself, and others.

a well of life] Flowing as an ever-flowing fountain. Psalm. XXXVII. 30, 31.
Matthew. XII. 35. Heb. VIII. 10.

love covereth] 1 Cor. XIII.

as choice silver] Prove. XXV. 11.

feed many] Luke XIX. 48. 2 Cor. VI. 10. They are empty Vines that bear fruit
to themselves only, Hos. X. 1.

no sorrow with it] Wealth without woe,

a sport] These dance to hell.

has wisdom] For his sport and delight, Romans VII. 22. Job XXIII. 12.

The fear] Job XV. chapter XXIX. 25.

shall be granted] If they fail not in the matter, manner, intention, or
duration of their desires and prayers; being content either to wait, or to want
the thing desired, being heartily willing that God should be glorified, though
themselves be not glorified.

Whirlwind] Job XXVII. 20, -- 23.

shortned] Eccles. VII.

The hope] Psalm. CXXX. 5. Prove. XIV. 32. Heb. VI. 18, 19.

Pride] Where pride is in the saddle,

the hope] His hope made a bridge of his own shadow; and thinking to go over
it, he falls into the water: he as a child grasps at a shadow on the wall.

in his stead] As it befell Haman, Daniels enemies in the den of lions, and
others, 2 These. I. 6, 7.

holds his peace] From despising words,

concealeth] Tacitus to him is the best historian.

own flesh] As Baals Priests,

sure reward] Only he must have patience, and not look to sow and reap all in
one day, James V. 7.

pursues evil] As Asahel followed Abner. Ephesians. IV. 19. adding drunkenness to
thirst, with both hands; Hell gapeth for him.

a froward heart] A man may die by inward bleeding, Jer. IV. 14. The Heart
appears in the life; as the candle in the lantern.

only good] Romans Heb. XIII. 18. Yet when the flesh gets the wind, and hill of
the Spirit, it sometimes over-bears: as a gust of wind forces the ferry-man
backward.

is wrath] Proves such, Romans II. 8, 9.

that scattereth] The five loaves in the Gospel were multiplied by division,

trusteth] Riches were never true to any that trusted in them, Luke XII. 15.
Psalm. LII. 6, 7. exoriuntur ut exurantur; as the grass.

wins souls] James V. Dan. XII. 3. One soul more worth then all the world;
as he tells us who only went to the price of it, Mat. XVI. 26.

recompensed] Chastened.

in the earth] Which is their house of correction: not in hell.

much more] Totaly and finaly, Nahum. I. 9. as 1 Samuel XXVI. 8. 1 Pet. IV. 17,
18.

not be established]

not be moved] Chap. X. 25. Psalm. LXII. 2, 6.

a crown] A choice and chief ornament.

but the mouth] Hence are those many Apologies of the Christians, in all times,

according to his wisdome] James III. X. 18. Romans I. 22, 23. 1 Cor. II. 4, -- 8.

the net of evil men] Such a net as that Hab. forteresse against evils; but all
in vain; or, the fortress of evil men, to be secured and defended by them,
and their strength. Thus various may be the reading and sense of these words.

is snared] The venom of his heart blisters his tongue,

A fools wrath] He has no power over his own passions. chapter XXIX. 11.

covers shame] 1 Samuel X. 27. Passes by an offense, covers an injury.

no evil] Esaias XXVII.

filled] He that makes a match with mischief, shall have his belly full of it.
chap. I. 31. and XIV. 14.

deal truly] Psalm. Esaias LXIII. 8. Ephesians. IV. 15. 1 John I. 6. 8.

concealeth] Loves not to out-lash. Yet is not niggard where there is need,
chap. XV. 7.

proclaimeth] In it is, and out it must, what ever come of it.

a good word] As cordials of comfort,

more excellent] As a Prince of God among them; Abraham among the Hittites,
Genesis XXIII. 6. Psalm. XVI. 3.

no death] No sting in it.

hears not] But jears at it.

Keeps his mouth] God has set a double guard of lips, Psalm. CXLI. 3. and
CXXVII. 1. See chap. XII. 13. and chap. XVIII. 21. and chap. XXI. 23.

diligent] Affection without endeavor is like Rachel, Cor. VIII. do, as well
as desire; perform as well as promise.

loathsome] Stinks as it were above ground.

The ransome] Jer. XLI. 8.

hears not rebuke] As a man not worth the chiding,

the lamp of the wicked] As a candle, Job XVIII. 5, 6. and ends in a snuff,
Eccles. VII. 6.

wisdome] Meekness of wisdom, James III. 13, 17.

Hope deferred] Many lie long languishing at Hopes Hospital; Bethesda.

The Law] Chap. XIV.

good understanding.] Both gains favor, as in Joseph, Daniel, and others.
And favor or grace gains a good understanding or good success, chap. III.
4. Psalm. CXI. 10.

is hard] Harsh, rough; 2 Timothy III. 3, 4. Tit. III. 3.

prudent man] Observes seasons, Amos V. 13.

his folly] By his headstrong,

a wicked messinger] Chap. XXVI. 6.

is sweet] Specialy in spiritual things.

abomination] To be pulled from their evil lusts and sinful courses.

walketh] Converseth,

companion] 1 Cor. XV. 33. which Saint Paul takes out of Menander the Poet.

pursueth] Hard at heels.

repayed] By God a liberal paymaster.

to his child] Personal goodness is profitable to posterity, Kings XV. 4.
Exodus XXXIV. 7. where the Hebrew word N^tser, keeps, has a great N. to note
likely the greatness of Gods mercy to the good man's posterity.

Wealth] As Nabals was for David; Hamans for Mordecai; the Canaanites for the
Israelites. Job XXVII. 16, 17. Though this be not so always, and universaly,
Psalm. XVII. 14.

want of judgement] In tillage;

hates his sonne] As it proves in the issue. Eli to his sons: and in David
to his Absalom, and Adonijah. See chap. XXIII. 13. and XIX. 18. And thus we are
said to will and do many things, which properly and directly we do not so; but
because we do such things whereupon the other will follow. So chap. VIII. 36.
and chap. XVII. 19. Matthew. XXVI. 12. John XII. 7. Luke XI. 48. Ezekiel. XVIII. 31.
and XXXIII. 11. Psalm. CVI. 24.

satisfying] With contentation,

seeketh] As a coward seeks his adversary;

is easie] Chap. I. 20. and chap. VIII. 1, 17.

a mock at sinne] These dance with the Devil. Chap. X. 23. 2 These. II. 12. 2
Pet. II. 13.

favour] From God: or a complacencie in their righteous dealing: or gains them
favor among themselves.

not intermeddle] 1 Pet. Phil. IV. 7. 2 Cor. V. 4. It is an hansel of heaven.
The cock on the dunghill knows not the worth of this jewel.

seemeth] Chap. Exodus I. 10. And thereupon we willingly deceive our own hearts,
James I. 26. as Micah, Judge. XVII. 13. and Ier. VII. 4. And self-delusion is an
epidemical disease, and deadly.

even in laughter] Some frothy and flashy mirth the wicked may have; Cor. V.
12. Esth. V. 13

heavinesse] Job XXI. 12, 13. Luke 6. 25. Eccles. II. 2.

filled with his own wayes] have made a match with mischief,

from himself] 1 Timothy VI. 6. Heb. X. 34. Psalm. XIX. 11. Goodness is its own
reward, in hand, and in hope.

The simple beleeveth] As Jeroboam that old baby.

looks well] Looks before he leaps; tries before he trusts. 1 John IV. 1.
Ephesians. V. 15.

fears, and departeth] Fears the judgments whiles they hang in the
threatenings: counts them, not words so much, as thunderbolts, Hab. III. 16.

The evil bow] The worst cannot but think well of them;

his neighbour] Poor neighbor,

that devise evil? That plot and plough it,

labour] That is honest,

talk of the lips] Great talkers, are commonly do-littles.

is their riches] For God gives them wisdom to use them well.

fools] Rich fools. Riches to them is as a sword put into a mad man's hand.

strong confidence] Dan. III. XVIII. 5.

multitude of people] Which wars waste and consume. See 2 Samuel XXIV.

slow to anger] Anger may rush into a wise man's bosom; Eccles. VII. 9. James
I. 19, 20.

exalteth] Proclaims it aloud;

A sound heart] Well freed from passions and perturbations holds out long.

envie] A corroding disease it is: an hel-hag that feeds upon its own marrow,
bones, and strongest parts: it is as rust is to iron; as the viper: It both
sins, and is punished together, so quick and speedy justice accompanies it,
Job V. 2.

his maker] 1 Samuel Luke VIII. 43.

honors him] That is, honors God. God so takes it; chap. III. 8. And God
honors him; Matthew. XXV. 34. etc.

driven away] Being arrested by the Sergeant death,

has hope] Death to them is as the valley of Achor. Iustus etiam dum exspirat
sperat.

in the heart] Is not vainglorious, a sunning, to be seen and cried up.

in the midst of fools] Their zeal must be seen; 2 Kings X. 16. Their piety
must be shored up with popularitie.

a reproach] Sins are the snuffs of our candlesticks, Deuteronomy. XXVIII. 37. Ier.
XXV. 9. Ezekiel. V. 14, 15.

a wise servant] So to Joseph by Pharaoh; Daniel by Darius. And much more is
the favor of the King of Kings to his servants; Matthew. XXIV. 45, 46, 47. and
XXV. 21, 23.

his wrath] So to Haman, Shebna, and others.

A soft answer] Chap. Gideons to the Ephraimites, Judge. VIII. And Abigaels
apology to David, 1 Samuel XXV. 32, 33. Yet roughnes and hard language in some
cases, and circumstances, is necessary.

The tongue] Which David styles his glory;

The eyes of the Lord] As a well-drawn picture viewes all that come into the
room. Job XXXIV. 21, 22.

tree of life] Genesis II. 9. Ezekiel. XLVII. 12. Apoc. XXII. 2.

breach] A sting and a stain, in the conscience, and spirit: yea, and grieves
the spirit of God.

is prudent] Wise he is, Psalm. XIV. 5.

much treasure] The righteous man is always rich; capite, in Christ, he is no
usurper of them, 1 Cor. III. 22. Romans VIII. 32.

trouble] In getting, keeping, and fears of losing: together with sting of
conscience, Job XX. 15.

disperse knowledge] As Stars diffuse their light Phil.

The sacrifice] As good words uttered with a stinking breath, quoad fontem, and
quoad finem; not proceeding from a right principle; nor tending to the right
end, which is Gods glory, that should consume all other ends, as the Sun puts
out the light of the fire. See chap. XXI. 27. Amos V. 22. Esaias I. 11. and LXVI.
3. Jer. VI. 20. and VII. 22.

but the prayer] Esaias XLV. 11. command ye me.

The way] Prove.

follows after] With might and maine; as ravenous creatures have in chase
their prey. Phil. III. 11, -- 14. resurrection of the dead that is, that height
of holiness that accompanies the resurrection.

Correction is grievous] Being in love with his own ruin.

hates reproof] Being imbittered, not bettered by it.

Hell] Job XXVI. Psalm. CXXXIX. 12. Heb. IV. 13. (...); though invisible to us.

loves not] Yea hates, Amos V. 10.

neither will he go] As he should. Dan. XII. 4. 2 Kings IV. 23. Psalm. LXXXIV.
7. Esaias LXVI. 20. He says, as Jeroboam, 1 Kings XII. 28.

A merry heart] Acts VI. Cant. II. 4. This chiefly is true spiritualy.

broken] Is as a limb out of joint. A dejected spirit takes off as it were the
wheels of the soul.

seeks knowledge] As an hungry man seeks meat;

feedeth] As swine do on swill.

a continual feast] This is eminently true in a good, Cor. I. 9, 12.

a little] It is not the great cage makes the bird sing: chap. XVI. 8. and
XVII. 1, 15. Psalm. XXXVII. 16. 1 Timothy IV. 8. and VI. 6.

appeaseth strife] Is busy to stint it, chap. XXII. 24.

is made plaine] By much practice having gotten an habit, Esaias XL. 31. Christ's
yoke is no more burdensome to him, then the wing is to the bird.

is above] In heaven; Phil. III. 20. Col. III. 1. He deals in low and earthly
things, as a wise man may sport with children: but that is not his business.

hell beneath] That when the cold grave shall have his body, hot hell may not
hold his soul.

widow] That has none to stick to her, Sarepta, and of the poor Prophet, 2
King, IV.

The thoughts] Thoughts are not free, Jer. VI. 19.

pleasant words.] Mal. III. 16. chap. X. 20. and XXV. 11.

troubleth] Fires his own nest,

studieth] His tongue runs not before his wit.

hears the prayer] Psalm. Pet. III. 12. the breathing, Lam. III. 56. the mind
of the spirit, Romans VIII. 26, 27. Baal hears not, though they call on him never
so long, never so loud, 1 Kings XVIII. See 2 Chronicles. XXXIII. 13.

The light] Light and sight are comfortable, Eccl. XI. 7.

reproof] Better the Vine should bleed,

before honor is humility] The lower the ebb* the higher the tide.

The preparations] Or disposings, verse 9. and chap. XVI. 9. and chap. XIX. 21.
and chap. XX. 24. Ier. X. 23.

is from the Lord] By the obstetrication of his assistance; and by his secret
influence, and disposing providence, beyond man's own imagination Acts XVII. 28.
Esaias X. 7.

in his own eyes] Chap. Luke XVI. 15. Romans II. 29. Judge. XVII. 13. we set up a
counter for a thousand pounds.

weighs the spirits] Chap. V. 21. the inside; and there discovers a Newfound
world of wickedness.

Commit] Luke XII. 29. Cast thy burden upon the Lord, Psalm. LV. 22. as it were,
Pet. V. 7. Psalm. XXXVII. 5.

established] Till then it flickers up and down, as Noah's Dove, till it return
to the Ark.

for himself] His own glory, Romans XI. 36.

for the day of evil] Job XXI. 30. as they are wicked men; and as such looked
upon by God: though he created them good; and he be the absolute Sovereign Lord
of all his creatures, and his will be both recta and regula. He justly keeps,
orders, and ordains such for the day of their deserved punishment, Romans IX. 17.
21, 22.

though hand] Chap. XI. 21. Heb. X. 31.

By mercy and truth] Of God; Chap. XIV. 22. there iniquity is purged. Piety,
and grace, and the fear of God, are a sure token of remission of sins.

even his enemies] Sin is the makebate. Esaias XXVII. 4, 5. and all his
creatures are at his beck and check. God made Laban, and Esau, at peace with
Jacob; Genesis XXXI. and XXXIII. Chapters.

A divine sentence] Is, Solomon, 1 Kings III. 24. in David, 2 Samuel XIV. 17, 20.
a discerning power and sagacitie was in them, which God gave them.

his work] His Ordinance. Deuteronomy. XXV. 13.

to Kings] For they are more obliged to God then other men: Magnates are
Magnetes.

throne] Ier. XXII. 13, -- 20.

love him] Chap.

pacify it] As Abigael did David's; Benhadads servants did Ahabs. No other way
is to be taken.

of the later raine] Deuteronomy. XI. James V. 7. Amos IV. 7. See my Annotations on
Joel. II. 23. and on Zech. X. 1.

The high way] This is his road, Psalm. CXXXIX. 24. Acts XXIV. 16.

Pride] Swelling is dangerous in a wall, Esaias XXX. 13. dangerous in man's body;
so is the swelling of pride. Examples many of the fall of such.

Better] to be spoiled,

wisely] With due deliberation and circumspection.

trusts in the Lord] Not in his own wisdom. God can crack the strongest
sinew in all the arm of flesh, Esaias XXII. 11.

sweetness of the lips] Eloquence gives an addition of weight to learning.

teacheth] Seasoneth it with salt of grace;

pleasant words] Such as those, Eccles. XII. 10.

lips] James III.

He shuts his eyes] With more freedom of mind to beat his brains,

moving his lips] Mumbling and muttering to himself.

then he that takes a Citie] Fortior est qui se,

The Lot] Gods Providence extends to things in our account merely contingent
and casual. Matthew. X. 29. See Josh. XIV. 2. 1 Samuel X. 20. Acts I. 24, 25, 26.
See my Annotations on Jonah I. 7.

sacrifices] Good cheer used at Sacrifices, chap. VII. 14. alluded to James V.
5. See chap. IX. 2.

trieth] Zech. XIII. 9. Mal. III. 2. 3. God tries us, that we may know what is
in our selves: and by his trying to refine us, 1 Pet. I. 7, or to punish us,
Ier. XVII. 9, 10. See chap. XXVII. 21.

gives heed] Is apt to believe scandalous reports.

poor] chap. XIV. 31.

childrens] If they,

it prospereth] Chap. XIX. 6. Give ye.

covereth] For even in friendship faults will fall out, chap. X. 12. 1 Cor.
XIII. 4.

repeateth] Rips up, and rakes into his friends frailties.

A reproof] A word to the wise.

an hundred stripes] Beaten he is, but not bent or bowed thereby to goodness;
amerced he is, but not amended. Gods spirit did not set it on. Chap. XXVII. 22.

only rebellion] Against God, and Man.

a cruel messenger] Gods executioners, all, and every of his creatures; Hab.
II. 11. And man's executioners, the hangman, and officers.

Whelps] Which she licketh into form,

evil for good] This ingratitude is a monster in nature. Ier. XVIII. 20, 21.
Psalm CIX. 4, 5.

The beginning] Therefore stop it betime; James III. 5. It is hard to be
disingaged from contentious quarrels when one is once in. 1 These. IV. 11.

justifieth] These frame mischief by a Law, Psalm. XCIV. 20. and sin cum
privilegio. Neither must Judge do thus: nor private men in their Censures. They
must not hold him, or handle him as a just man.

a price] Principaly appliable to those that neglect so great salvation, Heb.
II. 3. and let slip the opportunities put into their hands for heaven; and so
trifle and fool away their time, and eternal happiness. The vulgar Latin and
LXX. make another translation, and sense; not rightly.

A friend] A true friend, chap. XVIII. 24. and XXVII. 17. not such as those
Psalm. XXXVIII. 11. and chap. XIX. 7.

Scilicet ut fulvum spectatur in ignibus aurum,
Tempore sic duro est experienda fides.
strife] Chap. James III. 16. Psalm. XXXVII. 8. It opens the gap to many
mischiefs.

gate] High and broad gates break men many times. Or rather, sets open a
wide door to strife and contentions, lets in many destructive mischiefs; though
not in his intention, yet in issue.

begets a fool] Solomon's own case, chap. X. 1. and chap. XV. 20. and chap.
XIX. 13. Better were a miscarrying womb, and dry breasts.

A merry heart] Chap. XV. 13. and XII. 25. Eccles. IX. 7, 8, 9.

a broken spirit] Chap. XVIII. 14. Psalm. XXXII. 3. and CII. 3, 4, 5 and CXIX.
83.

A wicked man] A Judge in taking, chap. XXIX. 4. chap. XV. 27. and chap. XXI.
14 Psalm. XV. 5. and XXVI. 10. Job. XV. 34. Deuteronomy. XVI. 19. and chap. XXVII. 25.

before him] Easy to him, chap. XIV. 6. and chap. VIII. 9. Or, in his face and
eye, appears there; chap. IV. 25. Eccles. II. 14 But the fools eyes up and
down, wandering; and he as one that has lost his way, nor knows where he is,
or which way to turn, is besides himself.

to punish] They should be cherished.

nor to strike Princes for equity] Rulers, for doing right in their offices.
Or, Princes should not strike well-doers. Or, to strike Princes and worthy men,
besides and against right and equity.

spareth] James. I 19. X. 19.

Even a fool] Job XIII.

counted] Not that he is so. Or is wise in being silent. Whence is that,
Loquere ^tte videam.

separated himself] From the world,

A fool] It wilful to follow his own humor, chap. XIV. 33. Or phantastickly
affects singularity, to be cross to all men.

Then comes contempt] It comes into the world with him, Col. II. 18. and
contemning others. Job XI. 12. And as he contemnes God, and good men; so
contempt from God and good men comes upon him, chap. III. 34. they are paid in
their own coin; they are with ignomie repaid reproach.

deep waters] Which can never be drawn dry, chap. X. 11. and chapter XIII. 14. and
XIV. 27. and XX. 5. John VII. 38.

brook] That the simplest may understand. The holy Scripture indeed is both
text and gloss.

It is not good] But very bad, chapter XXIV. 23. and XXVIII 21. Levit. XIX. 15.
Deuteronomy. XV. 7. and chapter XVI. 19. and I. 17. James II. 1, -- 4.

stroaks] By his desire upon others; verse.

A fools mouth] Chap. X. 14. and XII. 13. and XIII. 3.

Tale-bearer] Chap. XII. 18. 1 Timothy III. 8.

is brother] Is alike.

The Name] His Attributes.

a strong tower] Esaias XXVI. 4. and XXXIII. 16.

and is safe] And set aloft. All other refuges will fail.

wealth] Hard to be rich, Mark X. 23, 24. 1 Timothy VI. 17. Yet this his trust is
not like that in the former verse: This shall fail; this trust is but only in
conceit.

haughtie] Chap. chap. XVI. 18. and chap. XV. 33.

who can bear?] Many are the examples thereof;

Gift] Chap. Jacob knew well, Genesis XXXIII. 11.

He that is first] Therefore Judges, Tertullus pleaded fairly till Paul came to
answer. And so Ziba against Mephibosheth. A man is not easily to be believed in
his own tale against another.

The lot] Josh. I. 26. See my Annotations on Jonah I. 7.

A brother offended] A brother natural, LXX. read, and render otherwise.

tongue] That best and worst member of the body. James III. 2, -- 11. Mark XII.
37.

a wife] A good wife. Eccles. VII. 1. He obtains favor of the Lord; chap. XIX.
14. and XXXI. 10.

The poor] Speaks supplications.

has friends] Love is the whetstone,

a friend] Chap. XVII. 17. as ones own soul, Deuteronomy. XIII. 6.

Better] Chap.

perverse in his lips] Speaks wickedly, roughly, and roboustiously.

without knowledge] An ignorant man is in the dark; Proverbs.

hasteth] Rashly, without premeditation and forecast. Such is blind zeal; as
mettle in a blind horse.

perverteth his way] And God walks contrary to him, Levit. XVI. 24.

frets] As 2 Kings VI. 33.

wealth] Chap.

neighbour] Who turns strange to him, or enemy against him.

unpunished] By God. And when known, by man also. verse 9. and chap. XXI. 28.
and chapter XXV. 18. Exodus XXIII. 1 Deuteronomy. XIX. 16, -- 21.

Prince] For their own commodity.

Poor] Chapter

Delight] But stripes rather. Chapter X. 13 Chapter XXX. 22.

a servant] As Abimelech the bramble, Judge. IX. 15. As Pontifex Romanus, the
bridgmaker of Rome; who writes Servus servorum, chap. XXX. 22. Eccles. X. 7.

deferreth] Chapter Absalom did toward Ammon.

pass by] As winking at it, or forgiving it, or overcoming it with goodness.

Kings wrath] Chap. Eccles. VIII. 2, 3, 4. 2 Timothy IV. 17.

A foolish sonne] Chap. chap. XV. 20. and XVII. 21, 25.

contentions of a wife] Chap. XXI. 9. and XXVII. 15, 16. This is like a tempest
in the haven.

inheritance] More immediately.

from the Lord] Chap. XVIII. 22. By his peculiar providence, Tobias VI. 22.

Keepeth] Evangelicaly: Psalm. CIII. 18. 2 Cor. VIII. 12. Esaias XXVI. 12. Let us
ask him to give, what he commands us to have.

his wayes] Gods ways; or, his own ways, living loosely, and carelessely, and
lawlessely.

lendeth] Matthew. chap. XXV. 40. 2 Cor. IX. 6, 7. Ephesians. IV. 28. Psalm. XLI. 1. 1 Timothy VI. 17, 18, 19. Heb. XIII. 16. 1 John III. 17. He lends it to the Lord
upon usury; as the vulgar Latin renders it.

Chasten] Chap. chapter XXIX. 15, 17.

of great wrath] Choleric and wrathful men;

Hear] This may be the fathers lessoning his child whom he has lashed.

many devises] Chap. Job. XXIII. 13. Psalm. XXXIII. 10, 11. and XLVI. 10.

The desire] A man's will is to be accepted for the deed,

a poor man] Having a giving affection, is better then such a braging liar.

The fear] Chap. chap. XIV. 27. and I. 7. and VIII. 13.

Smite a scorner] Though not he, yet the simple will beware by it, chap. XXI.
11.

devoureth] Job XV. IV. 19.

wine] Chap. Hos. VII. 5. Esaias XXVIII. 1. Genesis IX. 21. 1 Samuel XXV. 36.

not wise] When the wine is in, the wit is out.

of a King] Chap. chap. XIX. 12.

to cease from strife] Genesis Cor. XIII. 4, 5, 7. Brawling becomes not a man of a
magnanimous spirit.

Counsel] Verse 27. chap. XVIII. 4. draw it out;

his own goodnesse] So all Heretics; Matthew. VI. 1. V. 16. But few faithfuly
perform what they proudly proclaim.

his children] Personal piety is profitable to posterity, Kings X. 30. Exodus
XX. 6. Psalm. CXII. 2.

scattereth] Verse 26. Psalm.

my heart clean] The Pharisee, Paul, Romans VII. 15. 1 Cor. IV. 4 nor Job, chap.
IX. 30, 31. and XIV. 4. nor David, Psalm. CXXX. 3. and LI. 5 Eccles. VII. 20. 1
John I. 8.

a childe] Is, or should be known by his doings:

eare] Exodus IV. 11. Psalm. XCIV. 9. Therefore he sees, hypocrites, and all, and
will punish. Yea, he makes, and opens the spiritual ear, and eye, 1 Cor. II.
9, 10.

sleep] Chap.

open] Be vigilant, and diligent, chap. XII. 11. and XXVIII. 19.

the lips of knowledge] Chap. V. 2. Psalm. XLV. 3. Cant. V. 1. John VII. 46.

is sweet] Chap. IX. 17.

but afterwards] Job XX. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of heaven.

Every purpose] Deliberate often ere thou resolve once. Esaias XXX. 1. Psalm. CXIX.
24. See chap. XV. 22. and XXIV. 6.

warre] Chap. XXIV. 6. be neither timorous, nor temerarious. Ahab, or
Jehoshaphat rather in this might have been a good president to Josiah, 1 Kings
XXII. 5. 2 Chronicles. XXXV. 22.

tale-bearer] Chap.

Curseth] Chap. XXX. 17. Exodus XXI. 17. Levit. XX. 9. Matthew. XV. 4.

lamp] Chap. XXIV. 20.

gotten hastily] Chap.

I will recompence] Chap. Deuteronomy. XXXII. 35. Romans XII. 17, 19. 1 These. V. 15. 1
Pet. III. 9.

Wait] It belongs to him. This is the way to be even with him that wrongs thee;
yea, to be above him.

diverse weights] Verse 10.

not good] (...).

Man's goings] Chap. chap. III. 6. Psalm. XXXVII. 23. Jer. X. 23.

a snare] As the fish that swallows the hook. Acts XIX. 37. Romans II. 22. Let
Princes, and all look to this.

make inquirie] How the vow may be made void.

candle] The mind and conscience is such, Matthew. VI. 23. 1 Cor. II. 11. It is
Gods Spy, and Man's overseer; a kind of middle thing betwixt God and Man; Our
God, as well as Moses was Pharaohs God, and Aarons God, Exodus IV. 16. and VII.
1.

the King] Chap. Psalm. CI. 1. Yet this rule is not without all exception; as in
our late King of blessed and bleeding memory: and in many others.

gray head] Chap. XVI. 31.

clenseth] Corrections beat out corruptions. nocumenta documenta, chap. X. 13.

The Kings heart] Jer. Ezekiel. XXI. 19, 20, 21. Though never so absolute, is
ruled yet, and overruled by him who is higher then the highest. Yea, to do his
will, though unwitting to the King.

then Sacrifice] To obey is better then sacrifice. Heathens could see, and say
so much. See Esaias I. 11. Hos. VI. 6. Micah VI. 7.

the plowing] Whether they plot, Tit. I. 15. As a plaguesore will render the
richest robe infectious. Even their Prayer is sin.

diligent] Chap. and chap. XII. 24.

hastie] Rashly, make more have then good speed to be rich.

treasures] Chap. chap. XI. 4. and chap. XIII. 11. and chap. XX. 21. So in
Achan. Joshuah that could stay the Sun in his course, could not stay him from
fingering those accursed treasures.

The robberie] Robbing and spoiling others,

a brawling woman] Verse 19. XXV. 24. and chap. XIX. 13. and XXVII. 15.

desires evil] Evil to all,

finds no favour] Whether he sink or swim, is no part of his care. Psalm. LXIX.
26. 2 Timothy III. 3.

wisely considereth] That it shall be overthrown; Esaias XXVI. 11. 1 Cor. X. 11.
Psalm. LII. 6.

not be heard] Of God; or man, Matthew. XVIII. 30. Esaias LVIII. 7, 9.

A gift] Chap. XVII. 8. and chap. XVIII. 16. and XIX. 6. This Abigael knew
well, 1 Samuel XXV.

It is joy] Psalm. CIX. VII. 22.

workers] Jer IX. 5. Psalm. VII. 14. Esaias V. 18.

wandereth] He cannot wander so far as to miss of hell, Prove. II. 18. Esaias
L. 11. in that Congregation-house of Gehenna-gyants; where is punishment
without pity, misery without mercy, sorrow without succor, crying without
comfort, mischief without measure.

loves pleasure] Luke XVI.

a ransome] Chap.

spends it up] Foolishly lavisheth it. Pet. IV. 3, 4. Whereas it should be
husbanded thriftily, for necessity, and honest affluence, and comfortable
livelihood.

follows after] Though not overtake it: si faciat, etiamsi non perficiat;
though he cannot open the door, yet if he lift at the latch; be an active
apprentise, though not yet his crafts-master.

A wise man scaleth] Prudence is better then Puissance, Eccles. VII. 19. and
IX. 15, 16. Prove. XXIV. 5. 2 Samuel XX. 16, 21, 22.

Proud] Chap. chap. XV. 25.

giveth] Chap. XI. 25. and chap. XXII. 9. Esaias LVIII. 7. Psalm. CXII. 9. 2. Cor.
IX. 9. Deuteronomy. XV. 10. Matthew. XIX. 21, 22. Romans XII. S. Eccles. XI. 2. Ephesians. IV.
28. See on Prove. XIX. 17.

heareth] What he witnesses.

against the Lord] The arm of humane policy (as Jeroboams) in that case
shrinks up presently.

The horse] Though so serviceable; Job XXXIX. 19, -- 25. Yet avails not. Psalm.
XXXIII. 17.

A good name] Eccles. See the Observations there. Omnia si perdas, famam
servare memento.

meet together] Chap. Deuteronomy. XV. 11. Matthew. XXVI. 11. And meet many times, as
travelers in the midway; by an alteration and exchange of their conditions,
Luke I. 53.

foreseeth] Eccles.

passes on] Pusheth on without fear or wit, desperately into danger, chap.
XIV. 16. and XXVII. 12. These after-wits, and post-masters may prove prudent,
but too late.

far from them] From those thorns and snares;

Train up a childe] Young Saints,

is servant] As it were a servant.

rod of his anger] Wherewith he whipped others,

scorner] Psalm.

loveth] Affects,

strange women] Chap. chap. XXIII. 27, 28. Eccles. VII. 26.

of a childe] Chap.

gives to the rich] With a mind to get more then he gave; escape with them: by
such briberie he shall not thrive.

Bow down] Here seems to begin some alteration of style and method; Chapters;
and much like that in the nine first. Wherein the several documents and
instructions are prosecuted in more verses then one.

a pleasant thing] Psalm. XIX. 11.

fitted] Whereby to get a singular dexterity and volubility in holy language,
Matthew. XII. 24.

thy trust] Ephesians. I. 13.

even to thee.] We must read the Scripture, as men do Statute-books, holding
themselves as much concerned therein, as any others; binding themselves in
every precept, threatening themselves in every threat, blessing themselves in
every promise. For these are verba vivenda, non legenda.

excellent things] Princely things; chap. VIII. 6.

the certaintie] Col. II. 2. IV. 13.

Rob not] By might, Zech. VII. 10.

plead] Without fee, forma pauperis, chap. XXIII. 11. Job XXI. 21.

spoile] Pay them in their kind, chiefly when the cold grave shall hold their
bodies, and hot hell hold their souls.

angry man] Anger is a short madness. chap. XV. 18. and XXVI. 21. and XXIX.
22.

lest] Sin is as a leprosy, and infectious plague.

land-mark] Deuteronomy. XXVII. 17. chap. XIX. 14. and XXIII. 10.

diligent] Chap. XXVII. 23. Ezra. VI. 13. and VII. 26. Genesis XLI. 39, 40, 46.
and chap. XLVII. 6. 1 Kings XI. 28.

to eate] feed not without fear. Jude verse 12.

a knife] Bridle thy appetite. Luke XXI. 34.

deceitful] An hook under that bait.

to be rich] 1 Timothy VI. 9, 10. III. 15. 1 John II. 15, 16, 17.

wilt thou] Cast a leering eye after such vanities?

is not] Has no solid subsistence; though we call riches substance, 1 Cor.
VII. 31. Earth is hanged upon nothing, as Job speaks. And so all earthly
things, Amos VI. 13. Esaias XXVIII. 15.

eat thou not] A miserly fordid muckworme.

thinketh] Grudgeth at his guests: as one willing to starve even his own genius.

sweet words] Which he has spoak to thee;

speak not] Chap. IX. 7, 8.

land mark] Chap. XXII. 28. XIX. 14. and XXVII. 17. Ovidius ad Deum Terminum,
Omnis erit sine te litigiosus ager.

Plead] Chap. XXII. 23. and XXVI. 14. Psalm. XC. 11. Eccles. VI. 10. God is the
great Master of the wards.

apply] Busy them about the best things.

withhold not correction] Chap. XIII. 24. and Chap. XIX. 18. and chap. XXII. 25.

and shall deliver] This a means for it.

shall rejoyce] Chap. X. 1. and chap. XV. 20. 3 John. 4. 1 These. III. 9.

envy sinners] Chap. XXIV. 1, 19. chap. III. 31. Psalm. XXXVII. 1. and LXXIII.
3.

feare] This cures one of the fret.

all the day long] Waking, walking, and lying down in his fear; in continual
communion with him, and conformity to him, chapter XXVIII. 14. 1 Pet. I. 17. Phil.
II. 12. 2 Cor. VII. 11.

an end] Chap. X. 28. Job VIII. 13, 14. and chap. XI. 20. and XVIII. 14. Psalm.
CXII. 10. And an end and reward to those that fear God, Psalm. XXXVII. 37, 38.
and LVIII. 11.

Wine-bibbers] Verse 29, -- 35. XIII. 13. Ephesians. V. 18. Mat. XXIV. 49.

Buy the truth] Tit. I. 9. Phil. I. 27. Jude 3. Either live with it, or die for
it.

The father] Chap. X. 1. and chap. XV. 20.

thy heart] This the seat of our affections, Mark VII. 21. Matthew. XII. 34, 35.
And therefore that care and caveat is given of it, Prove, IV. 23. And God so
craveth, and wishes it, Deuteronomy. V. 29. and complains of the want of it, Matthew.
XV. 8. yea, and deals, as Joseph with his brethren concerning Benjamin, Genesis
XLIII. 3. no seeing his face without it.

thine eyes] Look well to this pattern and copy, get a full prospect, and fix
and feed thine eyes hereupon.

a whore] Chap. XXII. 14. See chap. V. 15.

who has woe?] Chap. XX. 1.

mixed wine] Chap. IX. 2. Psalm. LXXV. 8.

moveth] Sparkleth;

strange women] Drunckennesse ushers in whordome. Venus; and strange things and
sights, disturbing the brain. Et geminum Solemn, and duplices consurgere Thebas.

midst of the Sea] Thy brains shall turn round; Psalm. CVII. 27. Or, thy
brains swim, as if at Sea; and so drunckenly dream as if thou were at Sea. Or,
be so stupid and senseless in this drunken lethargy, as to be fearlesse and
careless in the greatest danger whatsoever; and not refuse or forbear to sleep
on the top of ma^^.

not sick] A drunken man,

I will seek it yet again] Though they be sick with it, yet after their
recoverie, and that fit past, they will to it again. For drunckennesse
inflaming, increases thirst, Deuteronomy. XXIX. 19. and thirst drunckennesse; and so
the drunckard irrecoverable!

to be with them] In their state, David befools, and bebeasts himself, Psalm.
LXXIII. 10, 22.

studieth] Great students,

lips] It blistereth out at their tongues end.

Through wisdome] Chap. III. 13, 19.

is strong] Chap. XXI. 22.

warre] Chap. XX. 18. chap. XV. 22. and chap. XI. 14.

too high] Chap. XIV. 6. chap. VIII. verse 9. and chap. IX. 1. Yet the highest
and saving wisdom is too high for the wisest natural man, 1 Cor. II 14.

opens not] He were two fools if he did.

deviseth] Is an Artist at any evil.

The thought] Chap. XIV. 22. chap. VI. 18. and chap. XII. 5. and chap. XV. 26.
Esaias LIX. 7. Jer. IV. 14.

If thou faint] Genesis XLIX. 23, 24.

If thou forbear] Psalm. LXXXII. 4. Esaias LVIII. 6, 7. It being in thy power to
deliver such innocent persons, Mark III. 4. Job XXIX. 17. and XXXI. 8, 9.

If thou sayest] Sins are not to seek for excuses. Psalm. XI. 4. Job XXXIV.
22. Ier. XVII. 9, 10.

When thou have found it] Experimental knowledge is the only true knowledge,
Heb. X. 34. Josh. XXIII. 14. A literal notion of the brain comes short of it.

a reward] Psalm XIX. 10, 11. and CXIX. 103. chap. XXIII. 18.

falleth] Into trouble. Micah VII. 8.

and riseth] Job V. 19. Psalm. XXXIV. 19, 20. and XXXVII. 24. and XCI. 3. James.
I. 2.

the wicked fall] As Nahum I. 9. into an Only evil, Ezekiel. VII. 5. Esther VI.
13. Job V. 12. Amos VIII. 14. Jer. XXV. 27. Esaias XXIV. 20.

Rejoice not] Chap. XVII. 5. XXXI. 29. Psalm. XXXV. 12, -- 16. Obad. 12. 2 Samuel
I. 11, 12. Matthew. V. 44. Romans XII. 19.

thine enemie] But only so far as Gods glory is concerned in it. And still
pity his person, Psalm. LVIII. 10.

from him] To thee.

no reward] The pain of Loss.

fear] Who would not fear thee O King of Nations, Ier. X. 7. And the King must
be feared, 1 Pet. II. 1^. Romans XIII. 3. under God, Acts IV. 19.

suddenly] When it comes; though delayed awhile,

of them both] That fear not the Lord, and the King.

These things also belong to the wise] Concern wise men to look unto. Solomon,
and before the time of Ezechiah.

not good] Very bad, (...). The like is chap. X. 2. and chap. XX. 23. Psalm. V.
5. 1 Cor. XVI. 22. Exodus XX. 7.

respect of persons] Chap. XVIII. 5. chap. XXVIII. 21. Levi. XIX. 25. Deuteronomy. I.
17. and XVI. 19.

Thou art righteous] Chap. XVII. 15. V. 23. Exodus XXIII. 7.

that rebuke him] Job XXIX. 11, -- 17.

a good blessing] Of every good man.

Kisse] Genesis XLI. 40. Psalm. II, 11.

afterward build thine house] First be sure of the means how to compass it,
Luke XIV. 28, -- 33. Do things of necessity first; after, of accommodation.

without cause] Without a calling;

deceive not] To bolster out a bad cause, or outface a good; or, ot entise
another, to suborne him to be a false witness.

Say not] Chap. XX. 22. Romans XII. 17. 1 These. V. 15. 1 Pet. III. 9. Matthew. V.
39. Romans XII. 17. This is to wring the sword out of Gods had, Romans XII. 19.

sloathful] See on Chap. VI. 6.

received instruction] A Be can suck honey out of a flower, redeeming the time
because the days are evil.

yet a little sleep] Little,

povertie] The beggar shall catch him by the back,

These] Here begins a new Collection of Proverbs, Solomon's time; which some
choice men of King Hezekiah; likely by his appointment, Copied out of some of
Solomon's writtings then extant; or out of public Records, Registers, and
Commentaries, wherein for their worth and wisdom they were inserted. And in
these Solomon most-what entreats of higher matters, of State business, of
Regal and Civil administrations.

to conceal] Such as are, Romans XI. 33. Deuteronomy. XXIX. 29.

to search out] Chap. XVI. 10. Job XXIX. 16. 1 Kings III. 24, 27.

unsearchable.] Jer. XXXI. 37. profundum sine fundo Jer. XVII. 9. 1 King. IV.
29. Much more unsearchable are the deep and hidden ways of God; Romans XI. 33,
34. we must adore them, when we cannot comprehend them. Neither must the
subject think to attain to the depth of all the secret reasons and doings of a
King, even when he is upright, and does his duty.

wicked from] Chap. XX. 8. Human, Doeg, Rehoboams young Counselors, Psalm. CI.
4.

Put not forth] This is for modesty, Psalm. LXXV. 5, -- 8.

better it is] Luke XIV. 10.

hastily] Hasty men never want woe, Eccles. V. 2. chap. XXIX. 20. He soon
shoots his fools bolt.

Debate thy cause] Matthew. V. 25. and XVIII. 15.

discover not] Specialy out of a revengeful mind; no nor thy friends secret.
All wise men will abhor such a one, as not to be trusted, but to be deemed as
a tale bearer, or backbiter rather.

fitly spoken] Chap. XV. 23. Esaias L. 4. Job VI. 25. Eccles. XII. 10. as apples
of gold put in cases of silver cut-work, with curious inlayings and
interlacings.

a wise reprover] Chap. IX. 9. Exodus II. 14. Prove. XIII. 18. But an obedient
ear deserves such earings of gold, as diamonds in a diadem; as well as the
wise reprover, that rightly orders and circumstantiates his words.

messenger] Verse 25. chap. XIII. 17. His speed and trustiness revives and
refreshes the longing and languishing minds of them that sent him, Job XXXIII.
23.

of a false gift] As the Devil, excelsa in excelsis, mountains on a mountain,
Matthew. IV. 9. Such are like clouds, etc. Jude verse 12.

By long forbearing] Chap. XV. 1. chap. XVI. 14. Genesis XXXII. 4. 1 Samuel XXV. 24.
Judge. VIII. 1, 2, 3. And thus not ministering occasion to provoke him further.
Though it self be flesh, yet thus it breaks the bone.

sufficieut] Philosophandum, sed paueis.

and vomit it] By excess the sweetest comforts will be dissweetned, grow sower
and loathsome, 1 Cor. VII. 29. We must hang loose, and be weanedly affected
toward all creature comforts.

withdraw] Let thy foot be rare, Sam. III. 1, overlay not thy neighbor, nor
abuse his courtesy; take not too much of a free horse. Nulli te facias nimis
sodalem.

false witnesse] Chap. XIX. 5. Psalm. XLII. 10. and LVII. 4. A sin of a deep
die, of a crimson color.

Confidence in an unfaithful man] As was Achitophel to David. Jobs miserable
comforters, Job VI. 16, 17. There is faith to be kept with dogs, say the Turks;
with Heretics, say the Papists. David durst not trust Saul, 1 Samuel XXVII. 1.
notwithstanding his fair speeches and promises, chap. XXVI. 17, 21. 25.
Therefore try well before we trust.

songs to an heavy heart.] Ecclus. XXII. 6. Dan. VI. 18. Or, as some render
and sense the words, music drives away sorrow, 1 Samuel XVI. 24. 2 Kings III. 15.

Enemy be hungrie] Exodus XXIII. 4. V. 44. Romans XII. 20.

heap coals of fire] This seems to be related to, Romans XII. 19, 20. And the
words are commonly expounded and understood of heaping vengeance on thy enemies
head, and blessing on thine own, Psalm. CXL. 10. But this seems a very
uncharitable Exposition; but so savor of a vindictive policy; and not to suit
with Solomon's, or Paul's main scope, and charitable intention. And contrary to
that, chap. XX. 22. and chap. XXIV. 9. and to the tendencie of the text; And
therefore these coals of fire thus heaped on the enemies head, may better be
understood of his hearty repentance, kindled and burning in his head and heart,
whereby his malice is melted, and himself grieved with burning and scalding
sighs, that he has been thine enemy, who have been, and art so good as to
desire and do him good, whiles he did thee evil: And thus the fire of love and
charity is kindled in his heart, and his evil overcome with thy goodness: as
is in the Apostles Precept, and Exhortation annexed, Romans XII. 21.

reward thee] Though he should not; nor be overcome by thy kindness and
goodness.

a backbiting tongue] Brow-beat it. Apoc. XXII. 15.

good newes] The more unexpected,

falling down] By infirmity,

their own glorie] It is not glory, Gal. V. 26. John V. 44. and chap. XII. 43.
Gloria fugientem sequitur.

no rule over] Chap. XVI. 32.

so honour] Dignity should wait upon desert. Psalm. XII. 8. The contrary is of
very evil consequences many ways.

the curse causelesse] As the Popes Excommunications, Psalm. CIX. 28. Such
Cursers are cursed; the curse will fall upon the Cursers head.

for the fools back.] Verse 4, -- 12. Chap. X. 13. chap. VII. 22. Psalm. XXXII.
9. Much, and often is spoken of fools in this Book of Solomon's wise Proverbs:
to mark them out as rocks at Sea, that we might avoid shipwreck thereon.
Shortly thus; That the Fool feeds on foolishness; it is joy to him; he is
full of words: delights that his heart may discover it self: utters all his
mind; lays open his folly: says to every one that he is a fool: whereas, if
he held his peace, he might be counted wise: his instruction is folly:
Excellent speech becomes him not: honor is not seemly for him: The legs of
the lame are not equal; and so is a parable in the mouth of fools. His eyes are
in the ends of the earth; his heart at his left hand; he will be meddling: he
enters into contention, and his mouth calls for strokes, Job V. 2. A stone is
heavy, and the sand weighty, yet his wrath is heavier then them both. And as a
whip is for the horse, a bridle for the Ass, so a rod for the fools back: yet
he trusts in his own heart: that though thou should bray him in a Mortar
among wheat with a pestle, yet will not his foolishness depart from him: But
as a dog returns to his vomit, so a fool to his folly. He has no delight in
understanding; it is too high for him: though a price be put in his hand, to
get wisdom, yet he has no heart; he does despise, does hate knowledge and
reproof: yea the thought of foolishness is sin. He makes a mock of sin; it
is a sport to him to do mischief: And therefore says Solomon, meddle not with
him, or his company. Answer him not according to his folly; unless it be
shortly, to convince him; leave him, and go from his presence; for shame shall
be his promotion; and destruction is near at hand, to wait upon him.

Answer not] Say nothing, Esaias XXXVI. 21. Jer. XXVIII. 11. John XIX. 9, 10.
Luke XXIII. 9. Mark XV. 2, 3, 4, 5.

like him] As hot and as headlong as he: and so at length there will be never a
wiser of the two, but both fools.

Not foolishly] As he speaks;

Answer] Cast in somewhat that may sting him,

lest] He took upon himself as a conqueror; clap his wings, and crow.

These seeming contradictions and contrarieties, by due distinction of times,
and other incident circumstances, and considerations, are easily reconciled. So
Matthew. XII. 30.

fool] See on verse 3.

binds a stone in a sling] Whereby the undiscreet and foolish slinger may do
hurt to others; putting, as it were, a sword in a mad man's hand. Or, as others,
As he that puts a (precious) stone in an heap of stones; so, etc. Some make
these heaps to be such, as into which every traveller passing by, out of
superstition did cast a stone.

As a dog] 2 Pet. II. 22.

The sloathful man] See on chap. VI. 6.

with strife] As Jehoshaphat; Ahaziah, in Ahabs, and his son Jehoram's case at
Ramoth Gilead: and Josiah with Pharaoh-Necho, 1 These. IV. 11. 1 Timothy V. 13. Yet
to be a Peacemaker is not to be this medler.

is like] Him that takes a Lion by the beard, or a Bear by the tooth, or
thrusts his hand into a Wasps nest.

deceives his neighbour] Under color of jest and sport,

talebearer] Verse 22. chap. XVIII. 8. and chap. XVI 28. chap. XXV. 23. Levit.
XIX. 16. James III. 6.

a contentious man] That loves to live in the fire,

Burning lips] Burning with pretended affection and hot love; verse 24, 25, 26.

believe him not] John II. 24. David did not believe Saul's fair promises. Psalm.
CXX. 2.

seven abominations] Many. As Verse 16. and XXIV. 16.

shewed] Detected sooner or later,

diggeth] Chap. V. 22. Psalm. VII. 15, 16. and IX. 15. and X. 2. Eccles. X. 8.

a stone] As he that rolleth it up an hill.

A lying tongue] False love proves true hatred;

of to morrow] James IV. Luke XII. 19, 20. Psalm. XXX. 6. 9. Judge. V. 28, 29,
30, 31. 1 Kings XX. 10, 20. No man knows what is in the womb of to morrow,
Matthew. VI. 34.

Let another man praise] Against arrogant boasting, Cor. X. 18. Mat. VI. 1.
Luke XVIII. 11, 12. Let our works, not our words, praise us; Prove. XXXI. 31.
Ruth III. 11. 3 John 12. And God will provide that fame and praise shall attend
virtue, as the shadow does the body; yea, in the consciences of their enemies;
as it was with David, in the heart, and mouth of Saul; and with Daniel; in the
mind and affection of Darius, who yet was wrought upon to cast him into the
den of Lions. Nevertheless a man must stand in defense of his own innocence,
as David eftsoons did; and in such like cases may praise himself, 2 Cor. XI.
5, 6, 10, 16, 17, 18 -- 33. and Chap. XII. 1, 11.

a fools wrath] See the Observations on chap. XXVI. 3.

envy?] Chap. XIV. 30. See the Observations there. chap. VI. 34, 35. See Deuteronomy.
XXXII. 21. Genesis XXVI. 14. and XXX. 1. and XXXVII. 11. Gal. V. 21, 26. Job V. 2.
Prove. XIV. 30. Eccl. IV. 4. Matthew. XXVII. 18. Tit. III. 3. James IV. 5. 1 Pet.
II. 1. Acts XIII 45.

Open rebuke] Chap. XVII. 10. chap. XXVIII. 23. Psalm. CXLI. 5. Levit. XIX. 17.
Much better is this then that love of Hira the Adullamite to Judah, Genesis
XXXVIII. 20. or of Jonadab to Ammon, 2 Samuel XIII. 5. This though unpleasing, is
wholesome.

Faithful] They proceed from very faithfulness and friendship to us.

Kisses] As those of Joab, Absalom, Judas, etc. chap. XXVI. 23.

loatheth] But hunger is the best Cook, Number. XI. 6. Matthew. V. 6.

wandereth] From his place and calling;

sweetness of a man's friend] Psalm. XLV. 8. Job XXXIII. 23. Psalm. LV. 14. His
sweet friendship comforts more then a man's own counsel can.

friend] Chap. XVII. 17. chap. XVIII. 24.

brothers house] Thy Carnal kindred will sooner fail thee; when thy old friend
will stick to thee; as Jonathan did to David; Onesiphorus to Paul.

My son be wise] Chap. X. 1. and chap. XV. 20. and chap. XXIII. 24. and XXIX.
3.

foreseeth] Chap. XXII. 3. Explanations there.

rising early] Over-doing it, chap. XXIX. 5.

Iron sharpeneth] Specialy spiritualy. Mal. III. 10, 17. Heb. X. 24. Acts
XVIII. 5. A mutual quickening in dull and dead times, is Christian conference.

fig tree,

Waits on his Master] As Joseph, Daniel, Mordecai, etc. 1 Timothy VI. 1, 2. God
will honor them; though some Masters do not; Col. III. 22, 23, 24.

in water face] A man in himself,

Hell] So the lusts and desires of men are never satisfied, Eccles. I. 8. and
chap. V. 10.

so is a man to his praise] Chap. XVII. 3.

the state of thy flock] Oversee them, Boaz did; Ruth II. 4. and chap. III. 2,
7. 1 Chronicles. XXVII. 25, -- 31. And 1 Kings IV. 6, 7, 27, 28. 2 Chronicles. XXVI. 10.
The profit and commodities of this careful husbandry, and thrift, are set down
in the verses following.

The wicked flee] Being hotly haunted, the bloodhounds, and furies of their
own guilty consciences. So Genesis IV. 14. Levit. XXVI. 17, 36, 37. God caused the
Canaanites to flee, Josh. XXIV. 12. And the Syrians, 2 Kings VII. 7.

bold as a lion] As Noah, mediis tranquillus in undis: si fractus illabatur
orbis, impavidum ferient ruinae. Such is their privie-armour of proof, the
power of the Spirit, and spiritual graces within them, Heb. XI. 33, 34. Ephesians.
VI. 16.

Many are the Princes] Either as Competitors, Israel, and in many others,
frequently appears. See Esaias III. 4. Hos. XIII. 11. 1 Samuel XII. 25.

a man of understanding] Job XXII. 30. 2 Samuel XX. 16. Eccles. IX. 13, 14, 15.
Jer. V. 1.

A poor man] As that merciless fellow servants, Matthew. XVIII. 28. He should
rather pity such, as knowing in himself the misery of poverty, then oppress
them, and rob the Hospital and Spittle.

Praise the wicked] As birds of a feather keep together.

contend with them] Chap. XXIX. 277. Psalm. CXXXIX. 21, 22. and LXIX. 9. and
CXIX. 158. 1 Pet. IV. 4. 2 Chronicles XIX. 2. He hates sin as hell. There is an
antipathy between the forsakes and keepers of the Law.

understand not] Their wits work not that way, John II. 4, 20, 27. 1 Cor. II.
14, 15. Esaias I. 3.

Usurie] See the Annotations on Ezekiel. XVIII. 8. Nehem. V. 7, 10. Ezekiel. XXII.
12. And see that Matthew. XXV. 27.

for him] Chap. XIII. 22. Job XXVII. 17. Eccles. II. 26.

even his Prayer] Chap. XV. 8. Jer. XI. 11. and XIV. 2. Zech. VII. 12, 13. John
9. 31.

to go astray] Chap. XXVI. 27. Matthew. XV. 14. He shall be caught in his own
trap.

upright] 2 Pet. III. 17. and 1 Pet. I. 5.

in his own conceipt] A very small wind will blow up a bubble, Chap. XIV. 12.
and Chap. XVI. 2, 25. and Chap. XXI. 2. See the Explanations on those texts.
This rich man here thanks his wit for his wealth; he sacrifices to his own
net, 1 Timothy VI. 17.

great glorie] Verse 28. Chap. XI. 10. and Chap. XXIX. 2. Their joy carries
public and eminent good in the mouth of it, as the Cause of it: and so
bespeaks a common joy.

hidden] Keeps close, or flees. So Matthew. II. 13. Apoc. XII. 14. And those
worthies, of whom the world was not worthy, Heb. XI. 38.

covers his sinnes] Psalm. XXXII. 5. 1 John I. 9, 10. Job. XXXI. 33. Genesis III.
12, 13. Sin and shifts came into the world together. But if not confession,
sure confusion will follow upon it. In the Court of Heaven, it is best to
plead, Guilty. 2 Samuel XXIV. 10.

and forsaketh] Many Papists use Confession, as drunkards use vomiting; not to
forsake sin, but that they may add drunkenness to thirst.

hardens his heart] Esaias LXIII. 17. Psalm. XCV. 8. Heb. III. 8, 15. and IV. 7.
harder then a rock. God is said to harden the hearts of Pharaoh, and sundry
others: And that whom he will he hardens, Romans IX. 18. But how he does this,
see in the Observations on Esaias VI. 9, 10.

fall] Into ruin, without remedy.

a wicked ruler] As a Lion, Zeph. III. 3. Micah III. 3, 11. Jer. LI. 34.

flee to the pit] Die without mercy, Genesis IX. 6. Exodus XXI. 14. Deuteronomy. XIX. 13.

uprightly] Chap. X. 9. Psalm. XXIII. 4.

perverse] Crooked, and doubling; can shift his sail to every wind, verse 6.
chap. XIX. 1.

tilleth] Chap. XII. 11.

haste to be rich] Verse 22. chap. XX. 21. 1. Tim. VI. 9, 10.

robbeth] As Micah robbed his mother, Judge. XVII. 1, 2. And Absalom did his
father of his crown.

proud heart] Chap. XIII. 10. Esaias II. 11, 12, 13.

trust in the Lord] 1 Timothy VI. 6. That which would break a proud man's heart,
will not break an humble man's sleep.

giveth] Chap. XIX. 17. See there Chap. XXII. 9. and chap. XXIX. 7. 2 Cor. IX.
6, 7. Deuteronomy. XV. 8, 10. Matthew. V. 42. and chap. X. 42. Luke VI. 35. Esaias LVIII.
7. Eccles. XI. 1, 2. Job XXIX. 16. and Chapter XXXI. 16, -- 20.

hardens his neck] Esaias XLVIII. 4. Jer. VII. 26. and chap. XVII. 23. Neh. IX.
16, 17. Acts VII. 51. There is much complaint of it; and exhortation against it.

Without remedie] 2 Chronicles. XXXVI. 13, 16. Remediless sinning brings
remediless destruction. Gods wrath shall shatter into shivers, Esaias XXX. 13,
14. such a sinner as will needs stand and stout it out with him.

a snare] That strangles his joy, chap. V. 22. and XIV. 13. Eccles. VII. 6.
Guilt within makes his heart ache and quake, when his face and forehead faines a
smile.

righteous sing] Righteousness carries joy and comfort in its own mouth, in
the deed-doing; that peace, and joy, Phil. IV. 7. Romans XV. 13. even in
tribulations, chap. V. 3. 2 Cor. VII. 4.

scornful men] Being proud, Job XXII. 30. Psalm. CVI. 23. Exodus XXXII. 10. Genesis
XVIII. 32.

whether he rage or laugh] He, the fool: or he, sense the words: there will be
no quiet; and that through the fools fault; he, as a foul stomach will turn
good nourishment it self into vicious humors, Luke VII. 30.

The blood-thirsty hate] As being enemies to them,

his soul] The soul of the upright; yea, of his enemies.

all his minde] Has no command of himself;

till] Due season, and occasion.

all his servants] They will be fit helves for such hatchets,

wicked are multiplied] 1 Samuel XXIV. 13.

see their fall] Psalm. LVIII. 10, 11. and Psalm. XXXVII. 36. and XCI. 8.

no vision] As 1 Samuel III. 1. Chron. XV. 3. Hos. IV. 6. Psalm. LXXIV. 9. Matthew.
IX. 36. And so in time of Popery, when Preaching failed, and the Scripture was
not read.

Keepeth] Does not only hear, but practice, James I. 22. Luke XI. 28. John
XIII. 17. So on chap. XIX. 16.

A servant will not] Some such there are, Luke XII. 47. Exodus XXI. 20, 21, 26,
27. Ephesians. VI. 5.

son at the length] And turn young master,

An angry man] See on chap. XXII. 24.

pride] Chap. XV. 33. Job XXII. 29. Luke XIV. 11. Matthew. XXIII. 12.

partner] Chap. I. 10, 13, 14. Psalm. L. 18. Apoc. XVIII. 4. Ephesians. V. 7, 11.

fear of man] Apoc. XXI. 8. cowes a man both to sins, Abraham, Peter, and
others.

trusteth] Esaias XXXIII. 15. and chap. XL. 30, 31.

the Rulers favour] Chap. XIX. 6.

from the Lord.] Who rules, chap. XXI. 1. and orders every man's state and
condition of life.

This Chapter is not Solomon's. Agur, some man famous in his time for wisdom;
his words unto his disciples, or friends, Ithiel, and Ucal; Or, here is a
Comportation and Collection of Agurs wise sayings and Sentences: though none of
all their names mentioned in the first verse, are found elsewhere in Scripture.

The words] Not of Solomon.

of Agur] Not mentioned elsewhere in Scripture. But seems a man famous for
wisdom, either in Solomon's, or Hezekiah's time.

Prophesie] Or, instruction; for so largely is the word Prophecy many times
taken. Or, Collectanies; gathered out of wise Agurs sayings, and proverbial
sentences, then extant, or well-known; and here added to Solomon's Proverbs, as
being of like argument, and consorting with them.

Ithiel, and Ucal] Some take these names for Christ, for his goodness, and
power. But with less straining, they rather seem to be the names of Agurs
scholars, or friends, here instructed by him.

more brutish] Agur begins in all humility, Adam; 1 Cor. II. 14. Psalm. VII. 3,
22. Job XXXII. 8. and chap. XI. verse 12. That flesh and blood, in natures
school, could not reveal saving mysteries unto him.

neither learned] Not of himself: but from God, Gal. I. 1. James I. 17.

of the holy] Holy God; and holy Angels, Dan. IV. 13. and VIII. 13. or holy and
heavenly things.

who has ascended] The difficulty great; John III. 13. And the Angels
Ministers to him, John I. 51. No man has seen God at any time: the only
begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him,
John I. 18. and declared heaven, Romans X. 6, 7. Heavenly wisdom by man of
himself is not attainable, Job XXVIII. Chapter. See Esaias XL. 12.

winde] Psalm. CIV. 3. and CXXXV. 7. Matthew. VIII. 26, 27.

waters] Job XXXVIII. 8, -- 11. Psalm. CIV. 3, 6, -- 13. Esaias XL. 12.

earth] I. Job XXXVIII. 4, 5, 6. Esaias XL. 12.

what is his Name] Job XI. 7, 8, 9. Judge. XIII. 17, 18. Exodus III. 13, 14, 15.
Matthew. XI. 27. John VI. 46. Esaias LIII. 8. The Son is like the Father, John
XIV. 7, 8, 9. Heb. I. 3.

if thou cast [ None can.

word of God] Psalm. XII. 6.

sheild] Genesis XV. 1. 2 Samuel XXII. 31.

Add thou not] Deuteronomy. IV. 2. Apoc. XXII. 18, 19.

Two things] Two special ones mentioned in the next verse.

deny me not] With importunity he reinforceth and follows his request, Psalm.
XXVII. 4. Genesis XXXII. 26. Luke XI. 8. Matthew. XV. 23. She came for a cure, and a
cure she would have. And God calls for, and delights in such importunities;
that so he may abound in his bounteous grants unto us, John XVI. 24. He would
have us smite five or six times, 2 Kings XIV. 18, 19. And he as Naaman would
then force two talents upon us; grant above all we ask or think.

vanity and lies.] Those lying vanities of sin:

neither poverty, nor riches] Both are naturaly attended, encumbered, and
burdened with many inconveniences. Yet sanctified both, to the child of God.
Mediocrite, a sufficiency without superfluity, is the estate that is most
easily managed, Matthew. VI. 11. 1 Timothy VI. 8. Tuta me media vehat
Vita decurrens via.


Lest I be full] Deuteronomy. XXXII. 15. 1 Timothy VI. 17. And so, Pharaoh-like, Who is
the Lord? as if they with their Mammon were pettie-gods, of, and within
themselves.

or lest I be poor] Stealth upon necessity, is less then adultery, Prove. VI.
30. Yet a sin always, Exodus XX. 15. Ephesians. IV. 28.

name of my God] This he grieves at more, then his own shame, burning in the
hand, whipping, hanging.

Accuse not] Romans XIV. 4. and II. 1. Matthew. VII. 1. Eccles. VII. 21, 22. Tit.
III. 1, 2, 3.

lest] The harm of the servants ill wishes fall upon thee.

Here begin his Quaternions, of some things Moral, Chapter.

that curses their father] A cursed crew, a bastardly brood, verse 17. and
chap. XX. 20. Levit. XX. 9. Exodus XXI. 17. Matthew. XV. 4. Deuteronomy. XXI. 18, -- 21.

are pure] As the Puritanes, Novatians, Donatists, Matthew. XIX. 20. Hos. XII. 8.
Esaias LXV. 5. Papists that pretend to works of Supererogation; And yet welter in
wickedness.

O how lofty] Chap. VI. 17. and chap. XVI. chap. XXI. 4. Esaias II. 11, 12, 17.
and V. 15. and X. 33. Job XXXIII. 17. Ps. CI. 5.

whose teeth] Psalm. LII. 4. and LVII. 4. Job XXIX. 17.

The horseleach] Has two forks in her tongue,

never satisfied] No more then Pharaoh's lean kine.

with a maid] That yet pretends so to be: verse: and that with impudency
enough. Incerta sunt virginis aut corruptae indicia.

for a servant when] Chap. XIX. 10.

little] Deus est maximus in minimis.

exceeding wise] Job XII. 1.

The Ants] Chap. VI. 6, 7.

Conies] Psalm. CIV. 18.

Locusts] Joel II. 4, 5, 7, 8. Apoc. IX. 11. have their King Abaddon

Comely] A comeliness of carriage belongs to us, Phil. I. 27. So Neh. VI. 7.

No rising up] Eccles. VIII. 2, 4.

in lifting up thy self] Against the King, verse 31. Eccles. VIII. 3. and chap.
X. 20. Exodus XXII. 28. Or, in any evil matter; then stop and silence thy self:
as Job XL. 4, 5. and chap. XLII. 6. and chap. XXI. 5.

so the forcing of wrath] Chap. XV. 1. Reiterated provocations extort strife.
James III. 16. Patientia laesa furor fit.

Here are the words of Bathsheba, Solomon; taught him likely when he was young,
against the time wherein he should be King; And when he was King, recorded
here, and registered by him. He is called here Lemuel, verse 1. And by his
mother Lemoel, verse 4. as tender mothers do often use to make loving changes
in their childrens names. And here she warnes him chiefly against women, though
he made ill use of this warning; And against wine. And from the tenth verse, to
the end, she elegantly describes the virtues of a worthy wife; as a pattern
for his choice; beginning every verse thereof with a several letter of the
Hebrew Alphabet in order.

Lemuel] Verse 4. Lemoel. Sam. VII. 14. and chosen him for King before any of
his elder brethren. His mother thus styles him; as mothers many times do frame
affectionate titles with some small variations, to insinuate with their
children; she breaks off the first letter of his name, and adds in the end the
name of God.

his mother taught him.] Lemuels lesson; taught him by Bathsheba; and if taught
him happily being King; then upon his beginning to warp and wander. He was taught
likewise by his father, chapter IV. 3, 4. Ps. CXXVII. and LXXII. Both which
heighten his after-fall, as well as that 1 Kings XI. 9. These words and
Prophetical documents may seem to be penned down by Lemuel himself afterward.

What my sonne] Passionate,

thy strength to women] Chap. V. 9. Deuteronomy. XVII. 17.

to drink wine] Chap. XXIII. 29, 30. Ephesians. V. 18. Hos. VII. 5. Esaias V. 11.
Hab. II. 15, 16. Eccles. X. 16, 17.

Lest] One, chap. XXIII. 29, -- 35.

and wine to those] Jer. XVI. 7. Mark XV. 23. Whereunto some apply that of Amos
II. 8.

and forget] Judge. IX. 13. Psalm. CIV. 15.

for the dumb] Chap. XXIV. 11, 12. Job XXIX. 15, 16. Ier. XXXVIII. 8, 9.

and plead] Levit. XIX. 15. Deuteronomy. I. 17. Psalm. LXXII. 4.

a virtuous woman] Chap. XII. 4. 1 Cor. XI. 7. Chapter. And that methodicaly,
beginning every verse with a letter of the Hebrew Alphabet, as it stands in
order. Such a woman as this is the female glory, the wonder of woman-kinde;
amiable, and admirable, as the paragon of the world. A fair pattern for
Solomon's choice in a wife. But a lesson ill learned by him, a worse practiced.
In this large Description, the whole Text needs not any Gloss.

Ecclesiastes.
THis is the Book of Solomon's Repentance; written in his old age, as may seem
to be gathered, both out of the Title of the Book, and the Closure of it in the
six last verses; and also out of the whole Body of it; Being written upon a
serious view of the Passages and practices of his life past, and the great and
manifold Experiences he had made and found therein. His maine business is a
curious search after true Felicity and real Contentation. And upon his search,
and experience he does find and pronounce. That in order thereunto, all things
under the Sun were but vanity of vanities, and vexation of spirit: and for
such experimented by him; though the same improved by humane wisdom in him to
the utmost, Chap. II. 3, 9. This he shows in a large manner, in sundry sorts, in
many particular vanities under the Sun; principaly in humane wisdom and
knowledge, humane labors, industries, and endeavors; in Delights and
Pleasures of all kinds; in Honors, Greatness, and Power; in Riches and
Possessions; and in the utter insufficiency that is in all these, to extract
from them, or the quintessence of them, any true happiness, or from any other
sublunarie thing, or creature whatsoever. He seems to speak sometimes in the
person, and according to the carnal reasonings of the Atheist and Epicure, as
reciting their opinions, with their arguments; yet he avers the truth of God
against them; and the just and wise course, though to us secret, hid, and
unsearchable, of his Providence, Administration, and government of all the
events, issues, accidents, and affairs of this life, in relation both to the
just, and to sinners; even in things befalling in common to both of them. He
gives sundry sound remedies to abate and heal the said Vanities. He speaks
much for Wisdom, and against Folly. And prescribes many good Rules for better
things, for procuring tranquillity unto the mind, and peace and comfort to the
life of a man; eftsoons minding and mentioning, among other things, a cheerful
fruition and enjoyment of the outward Blessings and Comforts of this Life, with
gladness, contentation, and thankfulness, as from the hand of God. And
lastly, in the twelfth Chapter he concludes, That in Old age, elegantly
described by him, and at Death, It will appear, That to Fear God, and Keep his
Commandments, is the whole of man, both the whole Duty, and Felicity of Man;
the one, and only thing wherein it consists.

The words] Solomon's Ethics, Sovereign good;

of the Preacher] Or of a preaching soul. The word (...) being Foeminine, has
(...) the soul understood. The penitent convert; gathering himself to the
Church. He again gives himself this title, chap. I. 2, 12. and VII. 27. and
XII. 8, 9, 10. Yet in those places it is construed with a Masculine. And so the
foeminine is sometimes used for the Common gender, which is wanting with the
Hebrews. The Greeks and Latins render it in the Masculine, Ecclesiastes. David
published his Repentance in Psalm. LI.

Vanity of vanities] Psalm. CXLIV. 4. and XXXIX. 5. Adam is all, Abel even at
his best estate, altogether vanity. And all worldly things are so, an heap, a
nest of vanities; vanity in the abstract. This the last issue and result, the
upshot of all his curious critical inquiry, search, and experiments.

what profit] A chief point in the wise man's Compass, cui bono? Who will show
us any good? Thus worldly men look after this, Psalm. IV. 6. Yea, wicked men in
their overtures of Religion, Mal. III. 14. No profit, toward the attainment of
true happiness.

Labor which, etc.] A labor in order to things above the Sun will profit,
Phil. III. 20. Colos. III. 1, 2. John VI. 27. No toilsome labor in earthly
things will do so. Nothing remains or abides with him, nothing more is added
to him by it; it adds nothing of real worth unto him at all. That we shall
find to be truth, which is in Habak. II. 13, 6.

One generation] Ecclesiasticus XIV. 18.

but the earth] Whereon as on a stage, the several Generations act their parts,
and go off, others come on.

abides for ever] Till its time of change, in the end of all, 2 Pet. III. 10.
See my Observations on Deuteronomy. XV. 17. The duration of the earth, opposed to
every man's duration, not the motion or standing of it, is here intended.

The Sunne] Psalm. XIX. 3. Observations on Psalm XIX. 5. See Job XIV. 7, 12. Here
the earth stands, and the Sun moves round about it.

The winde] Thus whirleth,

Rivers] Run thither whence they come through pores and passages of the
earth, way ever we cast our eyes, we every where meet with evidences of
inconstancy and mutability here below, as testimonies of that vanity which
all things under the Sun are subject unto; so that man cannot find
fatisfaction and full content in them.

full of labour] All these things are sweeter in the ambition, Prove. XXVII. 7,
20. After our utmost endeavors for plenarie satisfaction in the things of this
world and this life, we are still to seek, because it is not in them; we do so
but seek for the living among the dead, as Luke XXIV. 5. And they tire us in
the search, and toylesome labor after them; and cloy us in the use.

man cannot utter it] If not Solomon, then surely no man, chap. II. 12. As on
the other side our happiness in God, to our joy, is unutterable, 1 Cor. II. 9.
2 Cor. XII. 4.

The thing] Happiness cannot be extracted out of the creature;

no new thing] Though some kind of new inventions be, as Gunpowder, Printing,
the Mariners Compass, etc. yet but of the old stamp, as to this maine use and
purpose; they come still from defective and insufficient principles of
happiness, chap. III. 15. no new thing out of which man can extract real
content, comfort, and satisfaction, or any principle of true happiness and
blessedness, more then out of old and former things. And indeed Solomon speaks
here of natural things, and their natural actions.

This is new?] Such new things as may so far surpass the discoveries before,

There is no remembrance] If some new things be found out, Ezekiel. XXXVI. 26.
puts a new spirit within us, Ezekiel. XI. 19. and a new name upon us, Esaias LXII. 2.

I the Preacher] None had more abilities, Solomon had. And therefore his
verdict may be credited.

And I gave my heart] Solomon made this point his task; and that in the extent
and utmost employment of his great wisdom, chap. II. 3, 9. chap. IX. 10.

all things] 1 Kings IV. 33. and chap. X. 23, 24. the several kinds of them,
all natural causes and effects; all humane counsel and events.

and vexation of spirit] Active enough hereunto; Chap. XII. 12. chap. I. 18.

That which is crooked] Chap. VII. 13.

I communed] And this without vain boasting, Kings III. 12. and chap. IV. 30.
and X. 7, 23. 2 Kings III. and IV. and V. and X. none can outdo him herein.

and to know madness and folly] Chap. II. 12. chap. XI. 8, 9. 1 Cor. I. 20.

In much wisdom is much grief] Many ways, Verse 14.

I said] The sum of this Chapter is well set down in the Great Annotations.

I will prove thee with mirth] Missing of his expected good from the knowledge
of the creature, he now resolves to search what good may be found in the use
and fruition of it; And first in the sensual pleasure of it: In mirth, here.
Which most men count the only life, to sing all sorrow and care away; and melt
in mirth, jollity, and jovizansses, which emasculates the spirit, and draws
out, and draines away the very vigor and vivacitie of it: when they indulge to
themselves, and give up their heart to it, and make it the business of their
life to pour out themselves in delights, and wallow, and drown themselves in
them. This sort of men after Epicurus was borne, were called Epicureans.

mad] And indeed many mad men are very merry. chap. VII. 6. and has sorrow in
the bottom of it.

wine, yet acquainting] He would try,

till I might see] This the end of his inquiry by this experiment; whether
this voluptuous course of living were best, to sweeten the mortal life of man,
during all his days.

I made me great works] He shows what magnificent and royal provisions he made
in order to his foresaid design. Ester I. 4. These things he had as materials
for his wisdom.

houses] Besides what David had formerly built, 2 Chronicles. II. 3.

Vineyards] Cant. VIII. 11, 12. Besides what David had, 1 Chronicles. XXVII. 27.

gardens and orchards] Cant. VI. 2. and chap. IV. Hortus pensilis, a garden
hanging in the air, made by an Assyrian King for the pleasure of his Queen.

pooles] Chap. IV. 15. and VII. 4. Kings XX. 20. Neh. II. 14.

the wood] Of Forests; and likely in those Gardens and Orchards, which for
their spaciousness might be called woods.

servants, and maidens] See those servants, mentioned, Ezra II. 58. Neh. VII.
60.

cattel] More then David had, 1 Chronicles. XXVII. 29, 30, 31.

silver and gold] In all abundance, Chron. I. 15.

men-singers] See 2 Samuel XIX. 35. he labored to take all pleasure in pleasures.

also my wisdome] Verse 3.

I withheld not] Luke XII. Romans XIII. 14.

Then I looked] In the serious review he finds all to be but a feeding upon
the wind;

And I turned] To his first inquiry,

what can] True, without boasting. None can go beyond him; try who will.

wisdom excels follie] Foolish,

The wise man's eyes] He shows the great difference of worth between these two
contraries;

and I my self perceived] Though the one so far excelling the other; yet both
alike in this; no difference herein; but one event happens to them all; as
two ways meet at the same Inn; and Ships from several Coasts meet at the same
Haven; and Counters after casting sums, are put into the same bag.

And why was I then more wise?] To what purpose,

no remembrance] Chap. Prove. X. 7. Psalm. CXII. 6. and XLIX. 11, 12. Jer. XVII.
13.

and how dieth] As oblivion, so death, equal and common to both, Psalm. XLIX.
10. Ezekiel. XXI. 4. Only piety makes the difference, John XI. 25, 26.

Therefore I hated life] He saw little valuable or desirable in it.

all my labour] As being so vain and vexatious.

leave it] Psalm. XLIX. 10. and XXXIX. 6. And so Luke XII. 17. ere he was a day
elder.

a wise man, How Rehoboam proved, is well known, chap. VI. 2.

therefore I went about] Fetched a compass, Ephraim, Jer. XXXI. 18, 19. and the
Prodigal, Luke XV. 17. as those, 1 Kings VIII. 47. And being wearied in this
round, I was brought to a despondencie of spirit, and a despair of attaining to
my purpose and search, as being fruitless and unseazable; these empty things
only abusing and deluding me.

For there is a man] This particular did so pinch Solomon, Prove. XIII. 22. Yea,
leave it to a stranger, and enemy; as Nabals was to David; Hamans to Mordecai;
the Canaanites to the Israelites.

what has a man, etc?] A mere nothing; a coffin perhaps to his grave. Then
all the world is gone with him, Psalm. XLIX. 17. Eccles. I. 3. and III. 9 and V.
15

are sorrowes] In the abstract. Job V. 7.

not rest in the night] Though he lie upon a bed of down, yet these gnats will
not suffer him sleep; his heart does not rest, in that time of rest, Job IV.
13. as the clock cannot stand still while the plummets hang at it. Grace only
cures these cares, and procures this quiet rest, Phil. IV. 6, 7. Ps CXXVII. 2.

nothing better] Chap. verse 21.

the hand of God] It is not always in our power, Verse 26. Chap. III. 13. and
V. 19. Acts XIV. 17. God is then to be sought to, in whom only felicity is to
be found, Psalm. CXLV. 15, 16. Eccles. IX. 7, 8, 9.

For who can eat? verse 12.

For God giveth] To get these worldly things rightly, Chap. III. 12, 13.

but to the sinner] To scrape, and rape, chap. IV. 8. Hab. II. 6. Psalm. XXXIX.
6. Luke XII. 18.

give to him that is good] Job XXVII. 17. Prove. XIII. 22. and XXVIII. 8.

To every thing there is a season] Or rather a time prefixed, chap. VIII. 6.
And therefore we should quiet and content our selves in the good and
comfortable use of them; as chap. II. 24. And not seek to extract out of such
vain and variable things that good and felicity which is not in them. Yet
again, This may mind us not to neglect the seasons, times, and opportunities
of Grace, which are in Gods hand when he does please to offer and afford them,
Luke XIX. 42. Heb. II. 3.

A time] Chap.

What profit] Concludes that, Chap. I. 3. Matthew. VI. 27. no more then that,
James II. 14, 16. Consider that, Matthew. XVI. 26.

which God has given] God gives it,

beautiful] Though we at all times see it not in every thing; Esaias X. 12. we
being not able to find out the beginning or end of the causes or uses of Gods
works. Yet these seeming confusions God will reduce into an excellent and
beautiful order, and in a beautiful season too. Frost and Snow are as
seasonable in the Winter as heat, and flowers, and fruits are in the Summer.
The world is so much in our hearts, that we mind and mark not Gods dealings
sufficiently: and we are of so short continuance, that though we mind it, yet
we live not to observe a full point in the works of God: Their beginning may be
in one age, and their end in another, Romans XI. 34.

No good in them, but, etc.] To enjoy things present, and to do good here, and
so have good hereafter, Psalm. CXXVIII. 2. 1 Timothy VI. 18, 19.

it shall be for ever] His doing and counsel shall stand. Esaias XLVI. 10, 11.
Jer. 44. 28. And is perfect and holy; unalterable by man. Job XXXVIII. 31, etc.
We should therefore with willingness and contentment submit to him and his
doings, acquiesce in him, and dread, and adore him, though our blear eyes
cannot see the bright Sunshine of his actions. His decrees must not drive us
to despair, or to a neglect of using the means; but from deifying our selves,
and our own wisdom in the use of means, still depending upon his blessing.

And moreover] Having formerly showed the vanity and vexation of Knowledge,

the place of judgement] That should be a Sanctuary and City of Refuge for
wronged Innocence. That wickedness and oppression should be and reign there,
was a great vexation, and a great tentation too against Gods righteous
Providence.

I said] That God shall judge and right all, Acts XVII. 31. Some he judges
here, lest his Providence, but not all, lest his patience and promise of
judgment, might be called into question. Therefore this vanity and vexation
ought not to dismay the innocent, or hearten the oppressors: seeing God will
amend all.

that God might manifest them] Men in place and power, Psalm. XLIX. 20. God must
manifest it to them. And this should humble them, and stain their pride; This
shows, and should cure this vanity, Prove. XXX. 2.

For that which befalleth] Psalm. chap. II. 15, 16. hunger, thirst, diseases,
etc.

all turn to dust againe] Expire alike; Genesis III. 19. Job XXXIV. 15. This
still in relation to the body only.

Who knows the spirit of man] No man can by sense discern the ascent of the
one, Cor. II. 14, 15, 16. See chap. XII. 7. of this book. And Solomon's scope
throughout this Book, is to show the vanity of earthly things, and of humane
actions in order unto things under the Sun, as to satisfy the heart of man
in the acquiring of true felicity. Of his immortal or heavenly condition he
speaks not purposely. But as he makes Piety the Only Remedy against all these
earthly vanities and vexations; and so concludes his Book in the two last
verses. We need not here then to make these passages to be speeches taken up in
the Person of the ^picure or Atheist.

Wherefore I perceive] He resumes his Assertion, verse 13. and chapter II. XXIV.
and V. 18.

after him] What shall become of his goods; how used, and disposed; and by whom.

all the oppressions] More vanities and vexations in the Civil State.

no Comforter] Doubled here. This adds to their misery. This was Jobs case,
chap. VI. 14, 15. and chap. XVI. 2. and chap. XIX. 21. he cries and calls
for this pity and commiseration. It was David's case, Psalm. LXIX. 20. And
Jerusalems, Lam. I. 2, 9, 16. God calls for it toward Jerusalem, Esaias XL. 1, 2.
And himself does it, Esaias LI. 3, 12. See Nahum. III. 7.

praised the dead] He prefers the ease and quietness of death, before the
miseries of such a dying life. See Job, chap. III. throughout, Jonah IV. 3. 1
Kings XIX. 4. He speaks here according to the judgment of men under oppression:
without relation to the wickedness of men, whose state after death is in those
terrors and torments that shall either mend, or end, and they be never able to
abide or avoid, Matthew. XXVI. 24.

not yet been] Job III. and chap. X. 18, 19.

envied] For his eminent worth and works, Persia did Daniel. See Prove. XXVII. 4.

foldeth his hands The foolish sluggard so described, Prove. VI. 6. See the
Explanations there. And chap. XXVI. 15. and chap. XIX. 24.

eats his own flesh] Prove. X. 4. makes many an hungry meal.

Better is an handful] The sluggards plea.

saw vanitie] Another vanity, contrary to the former. Fools whiles they shun
the sands, do rush upon the rocks.

yet no end of all his labour] This matchless miser, Prove. XXX. 15. toiles
without end, Esaias V. 8. Hab. II. 5. and to no end trusts he can draw up Jordan
into his mouth, Job XL. 23. and yet knows he has none to whom he may leave his
goods so toiled for. This is worse then that of Psalm. XXXIX. 6.

neither is his eye satisfied with riches] Indeed the eye only has the use of
riches with such covetous men.

Two are better then one] In a natural, Jer. XLI. 13, 14. 2 Samuel X. 11. And
spiritualy, next to Communion with God is the Communion of Saints, Psalm. XVI.
2. Heb. X. 24.

he comes to reigne] The poor and wise child.

I considered] Another vanity and vexation: if this be not an exemplification
of the old foolish King dethroned, and the poor wise child standing up in his
stead.

all the living] All the present generation of men living under a present
Prince or Government; the multitude, many-headed, given to change, falling off
from the falling Sun, and adoring the rising Sun.

with the second child] The Successor; son, or who ever he be: joining to
him, and following him; as thinking they must live by the living, and not by
the dead; and so expecting protection and preservation by and under him. Such
is the vanity and vexation of Princes, that if they live long, they outlive
their own glory, and are looked upon by their own subjects, as faling,
sinking, bending to the grave: And such is the vanity and levitie of people,
that they are weary of present government, and even sick for a change, prove
the change what it will, 1 Samuel VIII. 5, 18, 19, 20. and XII. 12. 2 Samuel XV.
12, 13. and chap. XX. 2. 1 Kings II. 15. Prove. XXIV. 21.

no end of all the people] Infinitely discontented, another, that they are thus
variously affected toward their Princes in all ages.

shall not rejoice in him] But grow weary of him, whom now they so zealously
affect, and with so much loyalty adhere unto, and shall wish for another.

Surely this] Must needs be a vanity and vexation to people; but to Princes
specialy.

Keep thy foot] Having searched and found, Keep thy foot: Where the letters are
plural, the Points direct to read it in the singular number. That all and every
one should look well to his affections and inward man, that all be composed and
in a right temper when he goes to worship God, Ps. LVII. 7, 8. and CIII 1. See
Exodus III. 5. and chap. XIX. 21. Josh. V. 15.

house of God] The Gate of Heaven, Genesis XXVIII. 17. Psalm. CXVIII. 20. the
beauty of holiness, Psalm. XCVI. 9. This the likeliest place where Felicity is
to be found. But here then our preparation before, and our deportment in this
place, must be, as in the Presence of God, looking him full in the face.

ready to hear] As Acts X. 33. which includes obedience in it, Psalm. LXXXV. 8.
Job XXXIV. 32. 1 Samuel III. 10. Acts IX. 6. James I. 19.

the sacrifice of fooles] Outward services and ceremonies foolish sinners are
apt enough to, to load God with, even to loathing, Esaias I. 11, 14. So as their
heart and inward man, in spirit and truth, may be free to themselves, and far
enough from God, 1 Samuel XV. 22.

that they do evil] In so doing; doubling their iniquity by a seeming
sanctity, Ios. XI. 12. Esaias LXVI. 3.

nor rash] In prayer to God, Romans VIII. 26. nor hasty, precipitate, unadvised.

for God is in heaven] Job XXVI. 14. Esaias LVII. 15. Come thou with all possible
reverence, humility, and self-abasement, Job XLII. 6. Genesis XVIII. 27.

few] Luke XVIII. 13. Matthew. XXVI. 39, 42, 44. Against battologie, Matthew. VI.
7. Prove. X. 19.

For a dream] Multitude of business produces dreams; chap. X. 14.

Vowest] Of vows, Annotations on Jonah I. 16.

Better] It is a voluntary service to vow, Number. XXX. But being lawfully made,
must be performed, Deuteronomy. XXIII. 21, 22, 23.

neither say thou before the Angel] Exodus XXIII. 20, 21. Mal. III. 1. Psalm. II.
12.

For in the multitude of dreams] Verse 3. Prove. X. 19. As in those are many
Vanities, so vain will thy many words and excuses be, in pleading an erroneous
mistake, and extenuating the non-performances of thy vows and promises to God.

but fear thou God] The true remedy against the former vanities, of rash vows
and prayers, and addresses to God. The fear of God is the foundation of all
holy duties.

Marvel not] Be not amazed,

for he that is higher] There lies an appeal to an higher Court. And wherein
they deal proudly he is above them, Exodus XVIII. 11. Psalm. LXXVI. 12.

higher then they] Higher here in the plural number, may relate to the holy
Trinity or to Angels, by whom God does punish Princes, Esaias XXXVII. 36. Acts
XII. 23.

Moreover the profit of the earth] Is for all men,

the King] 1 Chronicles. XXVII. 26. 2 Chronicles. XXVI. 10. Amos VII. 1. The commendation
of tillage, and grasing. And this shows the vanity of earthly felicity, When
the highest stands in need of the lowest, to sustain and support them.

Shall not be satisfied with silver] The loving and desiring does increase with
the having. It is enough; but are like the grave, and barren womb, Prove. XXX.
15, 16.

What good?] Little else;

The sleep] And herein he has advantage over that great rich man.

He resumeth in this, chap. II. 24, 25, 26.

An evil] Another and another,

common] Usual among all sorts of men; an epidemical evil disease.

God has given] In way of Providence:

Wants nothing] That he can justly and reasonably desire; though indeed this
covetous man's desires are bottomless and boundless; And he wants all things,
not having power to make use of any thing.

but a stranger] Hos. VII. 9. Jer. V. 17. Lam. V. 2.

many years] And many children; chap. IV. 8. But filled both with children, and
years; and yet not filled with good, with the comfortable use and fruition of
his blessings and estate; lives beside it, is not master of it, but mastered by
it.

no burial] Deuteronomy. XXVIII. 26. Jer. XXII. 19. through enemies; or greedy heirs
to such covetous caitifs, and niggardly misers.

an untimely birth] An abortive, that comes from birth to burial, from womb to
tomb, Matthew. XXVI. 24.

is better then he] He is in rest; having never had sense or reason, to feel
loss or pa^ne, ver. 4, 5.

A thousand years] Which never man yet did.

yet has he seen no good] Better then to have been without those years;
Prove. XV. 15. Job XIV. 1.

to one place?] The house appointed for all living, Job XXX. 23. Esaias L. 11.
Thus he finds in the end all to be vanity, and vexation of spirit.

For his mouth] For food,

appetite] Yet that is never filled, it is insatiable, chap. V. 16. nor can be
filled with these worldly things, much less his soul can: Riches have no
suitableness with it, no proportion, either in excellency or in duration unto
it.

Wise more then the fool?] Speaking with relation to wealth,

Better is the sight of the eyes] To enjoy quietly and contentedly what a man
has in present possession;

That which has been, the name] And nature of it is known already. That which
is hoped for hereafter, is yet unknown.

That it is man] Man still, earthly Adam, sorry man, be his wealth or
greatness what it will. And God will make him know himself so to be, Psalm. IX.
20. Ezekiel. XXVIII. 6, 9. Esaias II. 22. and XXXI. 3.

Contend with] To enter plea against God, or require a reason of his
judgments, or strive against this stream, thinking to alter or break through
the order and bounds of his Providence or decrees, Esaias XLV. 9. Job IX. 2, 3,
12. and IV. 17. and chap. XXXIV. 23. Jer. L. 44. Romans IX. 20.

Seeing there be many things] A solemn conclusion of all the former
discoveries of vanities in the Creatures; chap. I. 3. which is the maine matter
of this Book.

What is man the better?] In regard of sound and solid happiness, for any, or
for all the former vanities.

For who knoweth] The animal creatures by instinct of nature know what is good
for them, What is best for him in this life, as to the things of this life;
Whether to be rich or poor, etc. Achitophel might have lived longer with less
wisdom: Nabal with less riches: Herod with less pride and praise, etc. God
is pleased to show man the only good, Mic. VI. 8. and Solomon, chap. XII. ver.
13, 14.

vain life] This life it self, a vain shadow, Psalm. CXLIV. 4. and XXXIX. 6.
Job XIV. 2. and chap. VIII. 1 Chronicles. XXIX. 15.

What shall be after him] He cannot promise to himself, when he is gone, any
satisfactorie content, in name, family, and posterity, no more then he could in
his lifetime, to himself, chap. II. 18, 19. Nescis quid serus vesper vehat.

A good name] Solomon in this Chapter proceeds to many other particular means
and remedies for healing the vanities and vexations of this life; and procuring
tranquillity and peace of mind, in the midst of them. Yet here and there he
does intermix some more vanities and vexations. The first means and remedy
here is a Good Name. or Fame. The first letter of the Hebrew word for Good, is
here greater then ordinary; to intimate belike the great and extraordinary
goodness of a good name. Which is better to a man, to his conscience, and
soul, then a precious ointment is to his body. It refreshes, and cheereth, and
comfort the soul and conscience, in the very midst of all wrongs and
sufferings; and specially at the hour of death; and remains fresh after the
body rots in the grave. They leave their names for a blessing, and are had in
everlasting remembrance; whereas the memory of the wicked shall rot, Job XVIII.
17. Prove. X. 17. and they leave their names as a curse, and a stinking snuff
behind them, Esaias LXV. 15. yea, in this life this fattens the bones, Prove. XV.
30. And procures reverence and esteem in the consciences of others. And is
rather to be chosen then all riches, Prove. XXII. 1. Herein the Hebrew is a
Paranomasia of the words (...) and (...) And the same is in Cant. I. 3.

and the day of death] To such a man of a good name: or to any man, relation
being had to the many vanities and vexations of this life, Job XIV. 1. Life
begins with crying: 2 Nondum loquitur infans, and tamen sic prophetat. And
Lawyers define life by crying, without which they are counted still-borne. 3
Now that day that delivers a man from them, is better then that which lets in,
and puts a man in possession of them. Which makes Solomon here prefer his
coffin before his cradle.

to the house of mourning] So wise men do, And fools they are that do the
contrary, verse 4. This is better for the living, as the former for the dead.

for this is the end of all men] Here is the reason, men will so fall into deep
and due consideration of their own dying life, as Job XXX. 33. Psalm. XXXIX. 4,
5. and XC. 12. that life is but to lie a dying, and so be weined from the vain
jollities of this life, and wrought to humiliation, mortification, and
preparation for a better life. From which, Feasting calls us off. See Josh.
XXIII. 14. Heb. IX. 2. And again, Amos VI. 3, -- 6. Deuteronomy. VIII. 12, -- 14.
Esaias XXII. 12, 13, 14. and chap. V. 12.

Sorrow is better] James IV. Luke VI. 21. 25. Matthew. V. 4. yet this is a
Paradox to the world, which is always set upon the merry pin, to be as merry
Greeks: to eat and drink, and laugh, and play, and labors to banish all sorrow
away, as the bane of their life.

sadness of the countenance] In our selves, by grave thoughts, and sad and
serious meditations and considerations: or, of a sower and severe, yet sure
friend.

the heart is made better] The better part is bettered: the inward man is
amended; by abandoning those loose noisome and destructive vanities and
jollities of laughter; and of penitential humiliation, compunction, contrition,
of mortality, death and judgment. These sorrowful tears have much joy in them,
they wash away the filth of sin; and as sweet April showers they bring on
amain the May-flowers of Grace, and Glory. And therefore, where ever the body
is, upon several occasions, yet the heart of the wise is here, he numbereth the
days of his life, and the days of darkness, Psalm. XC. 12. Eccles. XI. 8. And
where ever the body is, yet the heart of fools is on effuse mirth, runs a
madding; the way to rejoice in a thing of naught, Amos VI. 13. is on foolish
follies, in the filth and froth whereof is bred and fed that woeful worm that
never dies, Job XXI. 12, 13. Yet their laughter is indeed but the hypocrisy of
mirth, as the crackling of thorns under a pot, a sudden blaze soon gone, as
sudden lightning, which yet is followed with the rending and roaring of
thunderclaps, Luke VI. 25. Psalm CXVIII. 12.

The rebuke of the wise] Prove. XIII. 18. chap. XV. 31, 32. -- chapter XXVII. 6.
Psalm CXLI. 5. An enemy in this case many times proves a good and useful
Informer, though a bad Judge.

Crackling of thornes] Psalm. LVIII. 9. Prove. XIV. 13.

Surely oppression] Chap. IV. 1. and chap. V. 8. Deuteronomy. XXVIII. 29, 33. Psalm.
CXIX. 134. Jer. VI. 6. and chap. XXII. 17. Ezekiel. XXII. 29.

makes a wise man mad] To see it in the world upon others; to undergo it
himself. No man is so wise, but he is sometimes over-borne with passions and
rage, and indignation.

a gift] Job XV. 34. Psalm. XXVI. 10. Prove. XVII. 23. and the Observations upon
it. Deuteronomy. XVI. 19. Exodus XXIII. 8.

Better is the end] This maxim holds in many things; James V. 11. Psalm.
XXXVII. 37. Many graces run in the race of a Christian course: only
perseverance to the end gains the prize, crowns the enterprise and action,
Matthew. X. 22. Heb. III. 6. Apoc. II. 10, 26. Many seem to set out for heaven
with much eagerness; as Orpah from Moab; but return back; put their hand to
the plough, but after look back, as Lots wife; run well, but after fall off,
Gal. V. 7. leave their first love, Apoc. II. 4. begin in the spirit, and end in
the flesh. But better they had never known the way of righteousness, etc. 2
Pet. II. 20, 21. Heb. X. 26. 27, 38, 39. Some here understand the end of angry
contention. For so the Hebrew word sometimes signifies, as Prove. XVII. 9. And
so the sense ^wil best agree with that which follows.

the pa^ient] Prove. XIV. 29. and XV. 18. 1 These. V. 14. James V. 7, 8, 11. Heb.
XII. 1. And patient therefore under oppression, waiting on God till he bring
both ends together, not looking only on (...) present face of things; but
hoping and expecting that they which sow in reares, may reap in joy, Psalm.
LXXIII. 17, 18. Esaias X. 12, 24, 25, 26. 2 Samuel XVI. 11, 12. Habak. II. v. 3, ^.

the proud in spirit] Exodus V. 2. Prove. XIII. 10.

angry] Psalm. Mark II. 3. Prove. XIV. 17. and XVI. 32.

resteth] It may rush in and be as a passinger, for a while, for a fit; in a
wise man, as in David, 1 Samuel XXV. 21, 22. and in the Disciples, Luke IX. 54,
55. But it rests, remains, lodges, as an inmate abides, domineereth only
in the bosom and breast of fools, is there as in its proper place. Yet in some
cases anger is just, and a duty, Ephesians. IV. 26. Mark III. 5. But the sun
must never go down upon our wrath. We must not then hastily be angry, as to
murmur at Gods Providence, when things go not as we could wish, when we see
Oppression prevailing, Psalm. XXXVII. 1 Prove. XXIII. 17, 18. and XXIV. 19. We
must be slow to anger, James I. 19, 20. Prove. XIX. 11. and chap. XV. 18. Tit.
I. 7.

That the former dayes] And yet this has been a continual complaint in all
days and ages; Matthew. XXIII. 30. And yet the days are the worse because these
men themselves are no better, Acts VII. 51. Truth is, some days and ages are
worse then others: And we should be sensible of, and sorry for the evil of our
days; yet not be unmindful of the good things of our present days that we do
enjoy; much less repine at Gods Providence in the ordering of the times; a
thing we are too prone to, and the thing here checked: but our wisdom should
be to leave Gods work to himself; and for us to serve God in our generation,
and walk with God, as Noah did in the worst of times; every one to amend one,
and so the days would be better, Ephesians. V. 15, 16.

Wisdome] Good without it; Prove. XIV. 24. and such to Gods glory, and the good
of himself and others, Prove. III. 9. Luke XVI. 9. 1 Timothy VI. 11, 18, 19. The
poor man's wisdom is often despised, chap. IX. 15, 16.

A defence] Both, Job XXVIII. 15. Prove. VIII. and XVI. 16.

gives life] Prove. III. 16. and IX. 11. Whereas riches cannot, Psalm. XLIX. 6,
-- 9. but sometimes takes away the life of the owners thereof, Prove. I. 19.

Consider the work of God] See, and the crooked courses and crosses thereof,
look up above the creatures, and all second causes, and acknowledge and
acquiesce in Gods wisdom and justice, infinite above ours, who would not
suffer or permit such things to prevail, if he were not so wise and powerful
as to bring good out of evil, light out of darkness, order out of confusion,
and to make all serve unto his own glory. He can use crooked tools to make
straight work. And we cannot set things straight, or make the man straight that
is borne crooked, we cannot amend things amiss, nor rectify what he has made
crooked, Job XXXIV. 12. His purposes must stand, and cannot be altered or
resisted, Esaias XIV. 24, 27. Job IX. 12. This consideration wrought upon Aaron,
Levit. X. 3. upon Eli, 1 Samuel III. 18. upon David, 2. Sam. XV. 26. John XVIII.
11. See Job IX. 4. we must make our own burden lighter by our patient bearing
it.

In the day of prosperity] Enjoy it,

but in the day of adversity consider] God intermingles both, like
checker-work. As the Physician ministers sometimes Corrasives, sometimes
Cordials, sometimes lets blood, even to swooning, sometimes uses Restoratives.
We should consider this, Lam. III. 28. 33, 40. Heb. XII. 3, -- 12. Mic. VI. 9.
Psalm. XCIV. 12.

has set the one] That we should not either surfeit in prosperity, or despond
in adversity, Lam. III. 38. Esaias XLV. 7.

find nothing after him] What shall after befall him; whether prosperity or
adversity: or nothing better for him, and his advantage, then what God has
ordered and done.

All things have I seene] He confirms the former point of Gods dark and
wonderful Providence, Esaias XLV. 15.

There is a just man] As Abel, Zacharias, Naboth, Stephen, and Martyrs all,
Matthew. V. 10. Hab. I. 13. See 2 Kings XXII. 20. Esaias LVII. 1.

a wicked man] Job XXI. 7. Jer. XII. 1, 2. This is a sore stumbling block even
to good and wise men. But it should teach them, and all, That there is a just
and righteous day of doom to come, Acts XVII. 31. Romans II. 5. And if wicked
men live long, thereby they aggravate their sin; and God so shows his
patience; and makes their judgment the more heavy, and to appear the more
conspicuous.

Be not righteous over-much] Not in it self, Matthew. X. 16. not make our selves
over-wise, to do a thing conscienciously, scrupulously, upon opinion of duty,
when indeed there was no necessity so to do; and so to make sin where God
has made none. And thus all will-worshippers are all over-religious,
over-wise, or overweening, too too well conceited of their own religion,
wisdom and worth. See Rom XI. 20.

destroy thy self] By the former means involve thy self in much unnecessary
trouble and danger; which otherwise thou might and would fairly avoid.

overmuch wicked] Not allowing any degree of wickedness. But cautioning most
against the most excessive rank, the superfluity of naughtiness, James I. 21.
When we run to the excess of riot in sin, 1 Pet. IV. 4. And being past
feeling, give our selves over to it, to work it with greediness, Ephesians. IV.
19. doing wickedly with both hands earnestly, Mic. VII. 3. Jer. VIII. 6.

before thy time] Wasting thy body by such sinning; or exposing thy self to the
stroke of humane justice; or divine extraordinary vengeance upon such
exorbitant outrageous sinners.

Take hold of this] That thou be not overmuch wicked. Psalm. CXXV. 5. as
malefactors to execution. When he that fears God shall come forth of them
all, those dangers all that extremes do usualy bring men to; be freed, or
pulled as a firebrand out of the fire, Zech. III. 2. Psalm. XXXIV. 9, -- 16.

Wisdom strengtheneth] Chap. Prove. III. 21, -- 26. and Chap. XXI. 22. and
XXIV. 5. Thus prudence excels pussance, 2 Samuel XX. 16, -- 22. Cedant arma
togae.

Not a just man] This is reserved for the state of Perfection in Heaven, Heb.
XII. 23. Here we sin, yea even in doing of good; our best actions, even in
holy duties, are stained with imperfections and corruptions, come short of what
God by virtue of our creation, and his most righteous Law does most justly
require at our hands. Our whole hearts and souls now though we give them to
God, yet are not those but much unlike those which God at first gave us.
Pelagians and Papists are proud Justiciaries, Prove. XX. 9. 1 Kings VIII. 46.
James III. 2. 1 John I. 8. Nemo semper sapit.

No heed unto all words] That are spoken of thee, Sam. XXV. 25. and X. 27.
Prove. XIX. 11. 2 Samuel XVI. 10, 11.

lest thou hear] Though they lest should, 1 Pet. II. 18. yet sometimes it falls
out so, Job XXXI. 31. Yea, the abjects teared David's name, and ceased not,
Psalm. XXXV. 15. Yet see Jobs mind and moderation in this case, chap. XXXI. 13,
14, 15.

Thy own heart] The power of conscience, Gal. VI. 1, 2. Tit. III. 2, 3. Matthew.
VII. 1, -- 5.

I will bewise] Solomon had many extraordinary means, of man Job XXVIII. 12, --
21. and chap. XXXVIII. Romans XI. 33, 34.

Exceeding deep] As what not? Pet. I. 12 Job XI. 6, -- 10. Psalm. CXXXIX. 6.
This the cause why he was so far from Wisdom.

And to know the wickedness of folly] The vast, Romans VII. 13. For Contraries
do best set off, and illustrate the one the other. And this he did, that he
might the better anatomize and dissect both wisdom and wickedness to his own
conscience, and to the consciences of others. See 1 Cor. XIV. 24. 25. Ezekiel.
XIV. 5.

The woman whose heart is snares] One instance of his discovery; Prove V. 4.
and II. 16. and VI. 26. IX. 17. This Solomon found most woeful experience; and
here penitently proclaims it.

her bands as bands] So Dalilah to Samson. So Prove. XVII. 22.

escape-from her] As Joseph did; not by his own strength, but the supernatural
power of Gods grace. See Prove. V. 8.

but the sinner] Prove. XXII, 14. II. 19. Her steps take hold of hell, Prove. V.
5. and IX. 11.

This] Mentioned, ver. 26. and 28.

one by one] In his diligent search.

Among all those] Thousand, Kings XI. 3. Yet most evidently, many good women
there have been, and are. But in respect of the discovery of hearts and
natures, whether in good or evil, it is harder to find out thoroughly the
perfect disposition of a woman, and their deep sleights, then of men. For
whoredom takes away the heart of a man, Hos. IV. 11. Prove. V. 6. and chap.
VII. 21, 22.

That God has made man upright] In his creation, IV. 27.

but they] Here he discovers the Original and fountain of all these evils and
follies, not to be from God; but from themselves, and their Fall in Adam. So
that man now is of another make; whole evil is in man, and whole man is in evil.

Sought out] B^

many inventions] Many, and mighty; to be like to Angels, to God, Genesis III. 5,
22 many shifts to palliate their sins, and sinful courses.

Who is as the wise man] None like him, Abraham, Joseph, Job, Moses, Genesis
XXIII. 6. and chap. XLI. 38. Job I. 8. Number. XII. 7. as those excellent ones of
the earth, Psalm. XVI. 3. the Worthies of the world, Heb. XI. 5.

and who knoweth] Such are rare, one of a thousand.

the interpretation of a thing?] Rightly to discern in all affairs, what in
every case is to be done or left undone.

face to shine] As did the face of Moses, of Stephen. The wisdom of Piety is
reverend and venerable. Natural Conscience cannot but stoop and do obeisance to
it. Some thus; A man's wisdom shines in his face.

and the boldnesse] Shall be changed to the better, shall be doubled; as bold
as a Lion, Prove. XXVIII. 1. Dan. III. 16, 17, 18. Psalm. III. 6. and XXVII. 3.
and XLVI. 3. Job XI. 15. Luke XXI. 28. Prove. IV. 18. Some thus, And wisdom
will change the boldness of his face to more modesty.

The Kings commandment] Obedience in the Lord, Acts V. 29.

the oath of God] Whereby thou have sworn allegiance to thy Prince, 1 Pet. II.
13. See Ezekiel. XVII. 15, -- 21. So as this is both a limitation, and an
enforcement of this duty. Papists can slight this oath; And some other too.

to go out of his sight] Turn not thy back to him discontentedly; Prove. XXV.
15. and chap. XXX. 32. If thou have offended him, provoke him not more, by
persisting in it.

What do thou?] Prove. Job XXXIV. 18. Yet he may be admonished, and altered,
as 1 Samuel XIV. 45. as Elias, Micaiah, Nathan, and other Prophets did, he is not
absolute, as God is, Job IX. 12. And as the Pope would be, as the Canonists
make him.

Whatsoever pleases him] Such was their power, specialy in the Eastern Empires.

the Commandment] Of God,

shall feele] Know experimentaly.

no evil] No danger of punishment, ver. 3. But being morigerous, and obedient,
shall find good, and encouragement rather, Romans XIII. 3, 4. Ephesians. VI. 8. 1 Timothy II. 2.

a wise man's heart] Yields not blind obedience; But discernes when; and how,
both the season, and the means and manner of obeying; so to apply himself to
the King, as to prevent his displeasure, to gain his favor; and yet to
preserve his conscience and allegiance to the King of Kings. See 1 Chronicles. XII.
32.

time] A well chosen season, Prove. XV. 23. Amos V. 13. Acts XXII. 25, -- 29.
and chap. XXIII. 6, 7.

misery of man] Is great, for not knowing and observing that point of time,
that proper season to every action; as the next verse expresses.

For he knows not] Jer. Luke XIX. 42, 44. Man cannot foresee, to prevent the
misery. He is in the dark in regard of future events; He cannot so much as
fore-appoint his own actions for the future, much less foresee the
consequences and issues which would follow thereupon. Prove. XXVII. 1. James IV.
14. Therefore his misery is great upon him, not knowing that point of time and
exact season only fit for transacting and dispatching his great affairs, which
way is but one; And he so having a thousand ways to miss the mark, and but
one to hit it. Difficult then is this; though not always altogether
impossible, Prove. XXII. 3. and XXVII. 12.

Power over the spirit] To retain breath and life, Psalm XLIX. 7, -- 10. Heb.
IX. 27. no man, no King can do it. The sith of death mowes down as well the
Lilies of the Crown, as the grass of the field.

no discharge in that warre] No weapon againstit, no dismission from it, no
vacation, or exauctoration. Some apply this verse to the power of a King over
the life of a man; and that there is no power in a man to withstand it and
escape it, Prove. XVI. 14.

neither shall wickednesse] Sinful shifts avoid it; though they turn every
way, move every stone, make a Covenant with death and hell, Esaias XXVIII. 15, 18.

Rules over another to his own hurt] Through his tyrannical rule, Esaias X. 12.
and chap. XIV. 4. 23. 1 Kings XV. 30. Thus he proceeds to another vanity, verse
10.

The wicked buried] Such wicked Rulers buried magnificently.

who had come and gone] In the administration of Government, as the phrase
elsewhere is, to go in and out, Numb. XXVII. 17.

from the place of the holy] Seat of judicature: Where the Holy one sits among
the Judges and Rulers, as Lord Paramount.

were forgotten] Their names perished, even in the places where they had so
domineered, and been flattered, and been buried, Psalm XXXVII. 9, 10, 35, 36.
Prove. X. 7.

Because sentence] Psalm. Psalm. LXXIII. God is patient, willing men should
repent, 2 Pet. II. 9. Romans II. 4. Esaias XLVIII. 2. But men abuse this patience
of God unto presumption, Fsay V. 19. Ier. XVII. 15. 2. Pet. III. 4. Matthew.
XXIV. 48, 49. Ezekiel. XII. 22.

therefore the heart] Therefore wicked Rulers go on more boldly, and other
wicked men abuse this patience of God unto presumption. But yet Gods
forbearance is no acquittance. If he be slow, yet he is sure; the deeper he
draws his arrow, the soarer it wounds; his delay abused doubles the blow
when it comes.

Though a sinner] Yea though he commit the same sin an hundred times over.

and his days be prolonged] In prosperity, and his punishment be delayed.

yet surely I know] Here he answers that Tentation, whereby the godly are
offended, and the wicked hardened.

well with them] Psalm. LXXIII. 1. Esaias III. 10. He inverts the order, to begin
with the remuneration of good men, to strengthen their faith, and comfort them
against this tentation, that they may neither fret nor murmur; but go on to
hold fast their integrity.

not be well with the wicked] But very ill, Esaias III. 11. Number XXXII. 23. Psalm.
XI. 6. Nay even his prosperity shall slay him; and this Sunshine ripen them to
ruin.

Neither shall he prolong his dayes] Unless it be for a curse. And all that
while living, he is truly dead; dead in sin, dead in Law, Mat. VIII. 22. 1 Timothy V. 6. Col. II. 13. Luke XV. 24. Romans VII. 9. Ephesians. II. 5, 7.

That there be just men] This vanity and vexation he does more then once
insist upon. upon the earth; as it is in the words of the Text. The wicked live
in pleasure, and receive their good things here, James V. 5. Luke XVI. 25. And
the godly receive their rods; Physic and Surgery here. Yet this Solomon
speaks, not to censure the Providence of God, in this distribution of things,
but according to judgment of flesh and blood; and thereby to show the vanity of
these earthly things; using an argument against them, like to that argument
used against Idolatry, Deuteronomy. IV. 19.

Then I commended mirth] Some make this a sensual and carnal deduction from the
former passage and observation. chap. II. 24. and III. 12, 13, 22. and V. 18.
That is all that can be reaped from all our labors in earthly things. And that
will make our comforts to be much more comfortable; and our troubles to be
far less troublesome. Whereas the contrary puts us under the reign of
continual unthankfulness, and indisposeth us to all duties of active and
passive obedience, takes off the wheels of the soul, makes it as a limb out of
joint, that can do nothing without pain and deformity.

Dead flies] As one sinner, Neh. VI. 11.

heart is at his right hand] As his eyes are in his head, chap. II. 14. He
orders his affairs with discretion; he acts dexterously and discreetly with
mature advise and judgment; he works by the guidance of his heart, Luke XIV.
28, 31.

But a fools heart] He is left handed in his works and ways; does them rashly,
awkwardly, bunglingly, preposterously, As 1 Kings XII. 8. Esaias XIX. 10, -- 14.

walks by the way] He does palpably discover to others, Prove. VI. 13 and
chap. XII. 23. and XIII. 16. and XVIII. 2. See Prove. XVII. 28.

Leave not thy place] Thy office, chapter VIII. 3. proudly fling not away in
displeasure; much less, stand not to affront him; turn not, rise not up
against him, as 1 Kings XII. 16. seek to pacify him, Prove. XV. 1. and if need
be, go a little aside out of his sight, till his rage, and thy danger be
over-past. See Judges VIII. 1, 2, 3. Genesis XXXII. 13. and XXXIII. 3. 1 Samuel
XXIV. 16. and chap. XXV. 32. Prove. XXV. 15

as an error] Happily by the erring information of others;

and the rich] In worth,

Servants upon horses] Men of a low, Prove. XXX. 22. and how unseemly, see Prove.
XIX. 10. It is a curse of God, Deuteronomy. XXVIII. 43. 44. Genesis IX. 25, 26. Lamented,
Lam. V. 8. Yet the Levellers would be at this, to lay all alike: As in Germany,
in Anno 1525. But the issue of that attempt was to themselves deservedly
miserable.

He that diggeth a pit] This, Malum consilium consultori pessimum, Prove. XXVI.
27. and XXVIII. 10. Psalm. VII. 16. and IX. 15. In application; against such as
overturne the foundations of Laws, and Customs; and alter the long
established and wholesome constitutions of Kingdoms, Nations, and people; and
confound Rule and Subjection, and dissolve the ligaments of Government, Prove.
XXVI. 27.

Who so removes stones, etc.] Besides the general sense of the words,
application of them may be made against those who remove landmarks; or rashly
alter things seriously settled, and duly defined; and so do sow seditions, and
raise factions.

If the iron be blunt] Wisdom directs to whet the edge; chap. IX. 16. It
guides a man's actions without so much toil and labor, and a better end:
without it, and Art and cunning by it, strength, and toil, and eloquence, or
ought else is to small purpose.

The Serpent will bite] If not charmed before.

The words] Ephesians. Col. IV. 6. Prove. X. 32. and XII. 13. and XV. 1, 2. 4, 26.
and XVI. 23, 24. Such were Abigaels to David,

swallow up himself] Prove. XIX. 28. and XII. 13. Romans III. 13. James III. 2, --
12. Psalm. LII. 3. Many men by their tongue have cut their own throats.

is full of words] Multiplyeth boasting discourses,

cannot tell what shall be] No man, much less a fool, can tell this to himself.

wearieth every one] By his wordinesse, and much idle vain babbling without any
solid and sound matter; chap. V. 3, 7. Prove. X. 19. and XVII. 17, 27.

how to go to the citie] He tires himself in trifles, being not able to manage
the least matters, and easy for children; having not wit enough to keep the
high road, to know the beaten path to the City. And yet he will foolishly
labor and weary himself about hard and difficult matters.

Woe to thee O land] Esaias III. Rome after the death of Ancus Martius: and in the
Roman Empire in the times of Arcadius and Honorius. Yet the Land was blessed
and happy under young Solomon, Josiah, Uzziah, our Edward the VI. and others,
for the parts and graces wherewith God endowed them. Or else a child in
understanding and parts, rude and raw, without experience, discretion and
abilities for so weighty an employment, of a childish disposition for wit,
courage, carriage, this, though not a child in years. And such was Rehoboam, 1
Kings XIV. 21. with 2 Chronicles. XIII. 7. In a word, a worthless and wicked King
is a Woe to the whole Land; and a great argument of Gods anger against it, 1 Samuel VIII. 6, -- 18. Job XXXIV. 30. Prove. XXVIII. 2. Esaias XIX. 4.

eat in the morning] Are riotous, and luxurious, unseasonably feasting.

Son of Nobles] Nobly borne, Est in juvencis, est in equis patrum virtus. And
much more when he is nobly bred up, nobly seasoned with principles of true
nobility, wisdom, and holiness, honor and government; without which, nobility
in blood and birth, are but shapes and shadows of true nobleness. Though never
so much noble blood run in the veins, yet worthlesnesse and wickedness
remaining in the heart, rendereth it ignoble.

sloathfulnesse] See the Observations on Prove.

A feast] Feasting and wine have their mirthful use.

Curse not the King] Notwithstanding his errors in government, Exodus XXII. 28.
2 Pet. II. 10.

no not in thy thought] Or conscience, or heart. Thought is not free. Jer. IV.
14. Esaias LIX. 7. Psalm. LXII. 4. It will likely break forth.

for a bird of the aire] The danger if thou mutter it in hugger-mugger, God can
reveal it by brute creatures; birds, and beasts; by inanimate creatures. See
Genesis IV. 11. Esaias XXVI. 21. Hab. II. 11. As Luke XIX. 40. So in this case.
However, Kings themselves have long ears. Yea, we say, walls, and hedges have
ears. See that Ester II. 22. And consider the discovery of our hellish
Powder Plot.

Cast thy bread] It must be thine, Ephesians. IV. 28.

upon the waters] Where it may seem clearly cast away, as if it were thrown
into the Sea: lost, because the poor cannot recompense thee again, Luke XIV.
12, 13, 14. Yet lend in that manner, looking for nothing again, Luke VI. 35.
God will repay it, Prove. XIX. 17. Esaias LVIII. 7. Yet some by water here do
understand moist and fertile soil; well watered, or grounds on the sides of
waters, such as on the banks of Nilus, which yield increase very abundantly:
And, that so plentifully God will reward thy alms to the poor. In the former
Chapter, as the Great Annotations do well observe, Solomon showed the excellent
use of true wisdom, as a means of tranquillity of mind, and Remedy against the
vanity and vexation of outward things, in Ordering our behavior aright toward
Superiors, for prevention of those dangers which their displeasure might
subject us unto. In this Chapter he further discovers the use thereof, unto
the same end of comfortable living; so still pursuing his principal argument
touching tranquillity and comfort of life, in Ordering our behavior toward
Inferiors, those especially that are in want.

shall find it after] Gal. VI. 9. Prove. XI. 25. and XIX. 17. James V. 7. 2
Cor. IX. 6, -- 10. Matthew. XIX. 21. Deuteronomy. XV. 9, 10.

to seven, and also to eight] Micah V. Psalm. CXII. 5. Luke VI. 30. Prove. XXXI.
20.

thou know not what evil] Therefore sow whilst thou have it: work while
the tool is in thy hand, James IV. 14. Prove. XXVII. 1. By bounty evil of
punishments and judgments is prevented: by unmercifulness to the poor, it is
procured.

If the clouds] They empty themselves in showers for the good of the earth.
Psalm. CXII. 9. And the showers fall upon all the ground, this as well as that.
And so should the full and rich, not too solicitously enquire who it is to whom
they give; He is a man, and needy man.

and if the tree fall] Fall it must; and man must die. And as death leaves him,
judgment finds him; and sentence goes upon him, for the right hand, or the
left, according to his carriage toward the poor, Matthew. XXV. 33, -- 46. Or,
This seems a vulgar Proverb touching things of small concerment, care, or
choice. And to imply that our ordinary alms should fall upon any, this or
that poor, and be distributed as it were with a blind hand, or hood-winkt eye,
without any overcurious choice.

He that observes the winde] We must not stand scrupling and casting perils
and objections and pretenses to hinder or delay our Almsgiving; and come with
our Talent tied up in a napkin. Whereas any pertext serves the covetous miser,
not to give.

What is the way of the Spirit] Of the wind, John III. 8. Of the Soul rather
how it comes into the body, and quickens it.

Nor how the bones] Psalm. CXXXIX. 14, 15, 16. Job X. 8, -- 13.

Know not the works of God] The works of his Providence; how he may dispose
of thy life, and state, and ability of doing good: And therefore thou must take
the present season and opportunity, and not delay and defer it lest the Lord
happily will put thee out of all capacity and means to do it. Neither know
thou by what secret and wondrous ways he may recompense thy liberality.

In the morning] At all times, chap. IX. 10. John IX. 4 Begin betimes, and
continue to the end, lose not a day.

Whether shall prosper) Though sometimes thy bounty prove misplaced; and it be
ten to one if any cured Leper return to give thanks; yet thy reward is sure
from God, Heb. VI. 10. Matthew. X. 41, 42. 1 Kings XVII. 13, -- 16.

The light is sweet] The light of life, as appears in the opposition, verse 8.
And specialy a lightsome joyful life is such, Job II. 4. 1 Kings XX. 32. Esther
VII. 3. Life was given as a prey and reward to Ebedmelech and Baruc, Jer.
XXXIX. 18. and XLV. 5. Yet consider it will end in death; days of darkness
will come. Therefore unto complete happiness there is yet more to be done; not
only to gain and secure the comforts of this life, and tranquillity of mind
here amidst all the vanities and vexations of it; In which search and point
Solomon had hitherto labored; But also to get the assurance of a better life
after this; which is the business of Solomon in the remaining part of this
Book.

But if a man live] And sit in the worlds warm Sunshine, Job XXI. 7, -- 13.

yet let him remember] That the light will be turned into darkness, the dark
days will come of old age and death, chap. VI. 4. Job X. 21. Psalm. VIII. 12,
13. and CXLIII. 3. and they so many, as that the lightsome days of life will
seem but a warm gleame, a momentanie glance; which remembrance should cool
our hot desires after the vanites of this life, and lay our lusts a bleeding
and a dying at our feet, 1 Pet. II. 12. All that comes, every man, every thing
that happens, is vanity.

Rejoice O young man] No encouragement; Elias to the Baalites; and many more in
Scripture.

and walk in the wayes] Go on in the choice and chase of thy hearts desires.

But know thou] To thy cost, though such would feign baffle their knowledge,
and blind the eye of their understanding; yet it will not be. As Esaias XXVI.
11. 1 King. XXII. 25. 2 Pet. III. 5.

that for all these things] This mars the mirth; leavens all; is sour sauce to
his sweet meats.

God will bring thee] Whether thou will, or no, when thou shall in vain call
to rocks to hide thee.

into judgement] If not in this life; yet at thy death, thy doomesday; and at
the judgment of the great day, Jude 6. called The terror of the Lord, 2 Cor.
V. 10. Acts XVII 30. See Esaias XXVIII. 17.

Therefore remove sorrow] Sin, Prove. XIV. 13. and the true cause of Gods
indignation. Or, particularly this sin of thy indignation, and all inordinate
passions, thy swelling and storming at the will and ways of God, or at any
serious advice given thee. (...).

Remember] 1. Chron. XXVIII. 9. Prove. XXIII. 17.

thy Creator.] Heb. Job XXXV. 10. The Makers of Israel, Psalm. CXLIX. 1. thy
Makers is thy husbands, Esaias LIVE. 5. Gods created, Genesis I. 1.

youth] Youth is slippery, prone to lusts and sensual pleasures, apt to put off
the evil day far from them, to look on death and judgment as at a great
distance; as evil men use to do, Ezekiel. XII. 27. Amos VI. 3. 2 Pet. III. 3, 4.
Solomon here calls on them to remember themselves better, to mind God in the
Spring of their age, to present the first fruits to God, as young Samuel,
Jeremy, and Timothy did; and not to leave and reserve the dregs and snuffs to
God.

while the evil dayes] Old age is very unfit to begin so great a work in. Old
age will bring evils enough of its own besides.

While the Sunne] Before the sight of thine eyes grow dim. Or,

The darkness of lights about them, as of the Sun, candles, torches, etc.
Whence we need Spectacles.

Returning of the clouds after the rain, alludes to the winterly state of old
age. In summer after rain, the clouds break up, and fair weather comes. Not so
in winter. So in youth -- Not so in old age --

nor the clouds return] One grief comes upon the neck of another, as the
billows of the sea wallow and tumble upon the back one of another. A proverbial
speech, as Psalm. XLII. 7.

the Keepers of the house] The hands and arms.

strong men] Thighs and legs. Here some take in the feet.

Grinders] The teeth. They come not with us into the world. And they commonly
leave old men before they go out of the world.

look out of the windows] The eyes: out of the eyelids.

darkened] A further degree of dimnesse then that, ver. 2.

And the doores] Old men shall shut the street-dooers, shall stay within
doors, because the weakness of their appetite, and digestion, when the sound
of the grinding with the teeth was low, and does cause them to eat little, and
so weakens their bodies, to stir abroad. Others, by streets here understand
those Pipes and passages, which are for the meat to go down to the stomach; and
for the breath and air to go down to the lungs; which passages have doors and
covers, which open, and shut: And these being weakened in old age, breed
weakness of the body, and difficulty of swallowing, and of speaking. Those
which stretch the words to the Hearing; or to the eyelids; or to all the
senses, seem to miss most of the true meaning.

doores] Lips. When for want of teeth, the meat is rolled and ravelled in the
mouth, and has need of shut lips to keep it from falling out of the mouth.

at the voice of the bird] Shall wake out of sleep at every little noise,
through the badnesse of sleeping: and wearines to lie long in bed, by reason of
little ease, and much pain and akings.

daughters of musik] That we can neither sing our selves; nor be delighted with
the musik of others, 2 Samuel XIX. 34, 35.

afraid of that which is high] To go up it,

almond-tree] The gray-hairs; which some call the white flowers of the
Churchyard.

grashoppers] Every light thing shall be a burden to them, who are now already
become a burden to themselves.

and desire shall faile] The lust of the flesh ( libido) As also the lust of
the eye, and the pride of life. In decrepit age all these desires die, though
they reigned and raged in him before.

long home] The grave, his own house, and long home; Nox est perpetua Vna
dormienda, Esaias XIV. 18. never to return hither again, Job VII. 10. But long
to abide there, till the Resurrection-day.

mourners] Jer. IX. 17. Amos V. 16. See Job III. 8.

silver cord] The marrow of the backbone; be loosed, or lessened and
contracted; whence old men grow crooked and bending in the back. Some take this
for the sinews, which are the ligaments of all the members; and are loosened
by cold humors, and palsie-distempers.

golden bowle] The heart, the blood of it, or the pericardion, or the brain
pan, pia-mater, and pericranion. Some understand this of the cista fellis, the
gaul and choler, which easily breaks out in old men. Some of the skull, parted
in the s^tures and seams of it: diseases grow round, as a bowle-golden, for the
color and precious use of it in preserving the brains.

or the pitcher be broken at the fountain] By fountain we may understand those
principal parts, as the Heart, Head, Liver, from whence the vital supplies of
spirit, heat, blood, sense, and motion are drawn into the body. By Cisterne the
same aforesaid; or those places of the body whereinto those vital supplies are
drawn and conveyed. By the pitcher, and wheel, the veins, arteries, and
sinews, which as subservient instruments do conveigh those supplies into the
several parts of the body. Some understand by the pitcher, the bladder; and by
the cisterne, the belly; that neither duly perform their office: by the
fountain or spring, the issuing forth of the water; the retentive faculty of
the muskle at the neck of the bladder being broken, so that water, the urine
issues from him insensibly, without stay.

the wheel broken at the cisterne] The Lungs broken off from their motion of
inspiration and respiration by phlegm from the stomach, stopping and stifling
the Lungs. The Lungs are as the wheel transmitting the air in, and out, up
and down: and when this free course is stopped, then follows rattling in the
throat, and death after. The stomach is the cisterne from all the body.

And the spirit shall returne] Genesis II. 7. Joh XXXIV. 14, 15. Socrates, Plato,
Cicero, Plutarch, Epicharmus, Euripides, Lucretius, Heraclitus, Virgil, and
others.

Vanity of vanities] He resumes and concludes his main Text,

the Preacher was wise] And moreover,

The words of the wise] In this verse Solomon rises higher, Solomon, guided
thereunto, and so given, by and from Zerubbabel.

by these] and by no other; Psalm. XIX. 11. These are sufficient. Some conceit
that Zerubbabel speaks thus to Abihud.

Many books] This most true in this age, if not more then any other. But these
many, in comparison of the Scriputure, may well be called wast-papers. And much
study in them is a weariness of the flesh.

The Conclusion of the whole matter let us hear] The first word of this verse,
Conclusion is written in the Original with an extraordinary big letter; to put
an extraordinary mark of Attention upon it. The meaning of the words of this,
and the last verse, need no Explanation.

THE Song of Solomon.
A Song it is; as the title bears. Not an History, or a Prophecy: which
conceit, while some have fancied to themselves to maintain the same, they have
been driven, in their Expositions, forcibly as it were to ravish the Text, and
to fall into sundry (I might say) ridiculous singularities and absurdities.

It is the Song of Songs, the chiefest of his 1005. Songs, 1 Kings IV. 32. the
most excellent of all others: and that for Expressions, Mysteries, Purity and
Holiness; but most for the Subject and Matter of it, which is sublime, divine,
and Evangelical.

It is all a continued Allegory; full of Obscurities, as is confessed by all;
somewhat the harder to understand by reason of so many diversities of
understandings; somewhat the more difficult, because we meet here with diverse
Hebrew words which are not found in the Scripure besides. It is all mystical;
as many words, almost so many Mysteries: As is likewise said of the Apocalypse.
And the Jews hereupon are said to forbid the reading of this Book among them
till they came to thirty years of age.

Yet it appears to be an Epithalamium, a marriage-Song, a Song of Loves: Penned
by Solomon, it seems in his younger years, and best times, not long after his
marriage with Pharaohs daughter, whereunto he may happily allude in this Song;
and long before his foul falls in his old age. But yet a greater then Solomon
is here.

Here is Christ the true Solomon, the Bridegroom; and his Church, the Spouse.
Here between them is set down all Rhetoric of Love; pathetical Compellations,
affectionate Elogies, Passionate Expressions; all here pure and spiritual in
this Celestial Poem: Here is nothing of Temporal, Carnal, or worldly mixture in
it. The flowers and ornaments of Language in the Praises of Both, are not
applicable to bodily or natural beauties, but to spiritual and supernatural.
Here is hidden Manna; sancta sanctis; Pearls are not for swine. Here Solomon
rips up, and rifles, as it were, all the rarities of Nature, to describe his
sacred and supernatural mysteries. Yea, such is the matchless riches and
sweetness of this Poem, and the subject of it, that though the storehouse of
the whole world from both her spheres contribute to it, yet all is not
sufficient: The richest earthly things are but gross and sensible
illustrations of spiritual Majesty, and glory: They can serve but as mystical
representations, as Emblemes, as Hieroglyphiks, as Manuductions, and
Perspectives to Grace, and Glory. Here between Christ, and his Church are
interchangings of mutual Praises, Gloriations, and Congratulations; of Zealous
spiritual longings, and breathings of Loves, and Vows, and Joys; of
acclamations, attestations and administrations. His divine and glorious
excellencies in himself, and rich bounties and blessings to her; and her
precious heavenly graces, and endowments, ornaments, and privileges by him, in
an high character, in lofty and stately sayings and similies, are portraied and
laid out to the life, by her, and by him. And yet withal, her failings, and
recoveries; and his withdrawings thereupon, and returnings, are not omitted

And lastly, she being never satisfied with his Love, out of the unquenchable
flame of her affection, she does beg still a more intimate Union, and communion
with him, and a perpetual fruition of him, for her self; and for all her
members that yet knew him not: And that he would hasten his last coming, for
the full finishing of all, and her enjoyment of him in Vision Beatifical in the
Life of Glory. In all these Interlocutions betwixt them; she speaking nine
times. He seven times; And both jointly together the same things, as in a
Chorus, two times; In a word, There are such divine raptures as are able to
fire the holy affections of the sons of men

Let him kiss me, etc.] The speech of the Church, the Spouse, to Christ, the
Bridegroom, to the 8. ver. set forth in her wishes of his love, in expressions
of the worth of it; of his sweet smelling graces, and the powerful virtue of
them in her and in others, in his rich and gracious provisions for her; in her
Vindication of her own deformities; and defects against the envious and
uncharitable censures of others concerning her; and in petitioning him for
further counsel and direction.

If thou know not, etc.] Christ his Reply, verses; granting her last request;
with gracious and great commendations of her, and rich promises made unto her.

While the King, etc.] The Church in this, verse returns the fruits of Christ's
love and bounty, magnifying by similies his gracious goodness to her; and
declaring what her cate shall be to keep and indeere him to her.

Behold thou art fair] Christ here in this, verse congratulates his Church;
Praising again, and so cherishing his lovely graces in her: and their joint
flourishing fertility and felicity.

The beams, etc.] Both Christ;

I am the rose, etc.] Christ's speech, in the two first verses; characterizing
both himself, and his Church; who, and what they are.

Sharon] A fertile and pleasant region, lying in the Tribe of Gad, beneath
Mount Lebanon, not far from Bashan, 1 Chronicles. V. 16. There had David his
herds of cattle fed, 1 Chronicles. XXVII. 29. It is coupled for excellency with
Carmel, Esaias XXXV. 2. it is supposed to be the same with Lesharon mentioned,
Josh. XII. 18.

Lillie] Christ here both Rose and Lilly, chapter V. 10. Mat. IX. 29. And in that
Christ here does so commend himself, it is for our sakes; that we might take
notice of his excellencies, and fall in love with him.

thorns] These thorns Christ makes useful to his Church; Judge. VIII. 16.

As the apple tree, etc.] The Churches speech, continued to the end of this
chapter. And in all the next chapter, uttered sometimes of Christ, and sometimes
to Christ. Declaring his praise and preciousnesse in himself, his loving
dealings with her may ways; his speech to her, so sweetly and affectionately
inviting her unto him. And withal expressing her delight in him, and that she
is sick of love toward him: charging others not to distrub him: and joying in
her interest in him, and petitioning him for his speedy approach and presence.
And all this in this second chap.

trees of the wood] Wild, fruitless trees, Col. I. 19. John I. 16. Col. III.
11.

banqueting house] Of inward consolations through peace,

Flagons] Large measures of that wine in Christ's banqueting house, ver. 4.

apples] Such as fall from Christ's apple tree, ver. 3.

sick] Ever and sinking swooning with a love-qualme, through excess of love,
and exuberancie of spiritual joy in Christ, such as she could hardly stand
under, but that the raptures and ravishments thereof, the ecstasies thereby, do
even overwhelme her spirit, Ephesians. I. 18. and III. 19.

His left hand, etc.] Christ himself relieves my sickness,

by the Roes, etc.] By the things most dear and precious to you:

until he please] until he waken of his own accord. Be not overhasty with him,
to disease or displease him; but hold out in faith and patience; Let him take
his own time, who is a God that waits to be gracious, Esaias XXX. 18.

The voice, etc.] She being sick with pangs of love, and listening, hankering,
and harkening after her beloved; and behold here she hears his voice, John X.
3, 4. And sees him coming; so as neither mountains, nor hills; her enormities,
or infirmities; or the worlds oppositions and emnities shall hinder his coming.

behind our wall] He is come so near.

looks forth] Or, looks in. Thus he returns, and comes by degrees. Never
far off, or staying long absent, upon her seeking and longing after him. Yet
the full enjoyment and fruition of him is reserved for the life to come, 1 Cor.
XIII. 12.

in the clefts of the rock] Jer. XLVIII. 28.

in the secret places of the staires] for secrecy and security; or for
conscience of infirmity and modesty.

my Beloved is mine, etc.] She is sure, John IV. 16. 1 Cor. VI. 17.

he feedeth] Though before, and at such a time, she knew not, Chapter I. 7. yet now
she knows, and can tell it to others.

In this Chapter the Church implying Christ's departure from her, occasioned by
her own negligence and security; sets forth her diligent scrutiny, and search
for him; her finding of him; her dutiful care, and behavior toward him, and
holy gloriation in his Majesty, and beauty; which she inciteth others to mind
and magnify.

By night] Even night after night.

I fought] Sought and sought, instantly and earnestly, Jer. XXIX. 13. She
longed, as David did, 1 Chr. XI. 17. Counts all but loss and dung in
comparison of Christ, Hos. V. 15. Psalm LXXVIII. 34. Esaias LXIII. 15.

but I found him not] We are faulty: And yet withal too hasty; we antedate the
promises; and are ready to complain of Christ's delay, though procured by our
selves.

I will rise] An holy,

now] Presently, without losing any opportunity; while the day and time of
grace lasts: Delays are dangerous, Hos. V. 6. Prove. I. 28. John VII. 34. and
VIII. 21. And too many sluggishly use them, as Pro. VI. 10.

the citie] Jerusalem, where the Temple, Priests, and Ordinances were: Jesus
was found there, Luke II. 46. Psalm. CXXII. 4.

a little that I passed from them] From the Watchmen, finding might not be
attributed to the excellency of the means; but unto God, 1 Cor. III. 6, 7.
Romans IX. 16.

I found him] Hos. VI. 3. Mark VII. 24, 25.

would not let him go] As, Genesis XXXII. 26. Job XIII. 15. Romans VIII. 35.

Who is this] Chap. VIII. 5. Observations there. And so possibly it may be
spoken here. Or else spoken by the Church, concerning Christ; as the words
following all along do seem to imply; she continuing her high expressions, and
continual ascensions in her affection to Christ. The words following seem to
me to be straitened by Commentators, and tied to more particular senses and
applications, then in their general meaning they need, or will well bear. The
Church pleases under the Person and Parable of Solomon, and his glory, in his
Bed; in his bed-chamber-warders, or Esquires of his body; in his Charet; in his
Crown in the day of his Espousals; and in their descriptions; to typifie, and
magnify the glorious state of Christ her Bridegroom, in all his braveries.

Christ here in a great part of this Chapter, amplifies the Praises, and the
Graces of his Church, by elegant similies and ornaments of speech, not
applicable to bodily, but to spiritual beauty. And proceeds to admonish and
dehort her from unworthy society and communion which he urges by fresh
praises, and vows of love. To which she makes a brief Reply, by desiring to be
made fit for those Praises and future affections, by the work of his Spirit;
and that he may come to enjoy them in her.

faire] Christ here interchangeably seems, Ezekiel XVI. 14.

no spot in thee] Ephesians. V. 26, 27. Apoc. XIV. 5. Jude ver. 12. and Deuteronomy.
XXXII. 5. no Leopard-spots: none that God will so account; though in many
things we offend all, James III. 2.

Shenir and Hermon] Deuteronomy. III. 9. 1 Chronicles. V. 23. Hermon, see the Observations
on Psalm. LXXXIX. 12.

a fountain sealed] For preservation from pollution, John IV. 14.

a fountain, etc.] Or, Oh fountain, etc. Psalm LXXXVII. 7. John XV. 5. Esaias
XXVI. 12. Hos. XIV. 8. Psalm CXV. 1.

Awake] The Church prays, Cor. IX. 7. He and she, make both one mystical
Christ, 1 Cor. XII. 12.

Christ pleases to grant the request of his Church, and comes, and accepts
her entertainment; yea, and brings his friends with him, and feasteth them,
verse. 1. But this kindness, it seems, is not so well improved by her as it
deserved, but she is surprised by another fit of drowsy negligence, and
tepidity; and so she is brought into a fresh danger of losing him, who after
much patient waiting, knocking, and calling upon her, and her unkind answer
thereunto, becomes angry; and being not received when he tendered himself,
departs displeased, and is hardly reconciled, though she testify much care and
importunity in seeking him, and therein suffers losses, and wounds for his
sake; And charge others to tell him that she is sick of love.

I am come, etc.] Christ so readily answers and grants the Churches Prayer,
Psalm. CXLV. 19. and XX. 4. and XXXII. 5. and XXXIV. 15. Esaias LXV. 24. Dan. IX.
20, -- 23. She seeks not him in vain, Esaias XLV. 19.

eat O friends] The holy Angels; or Saints on earth rather, Esaias XLI. 8. John
XV. 14. James II. 23.

abundantly] Ephesians. V. 16.

I sleep, but, etc.] The Churches infirmity. As, Matthew. XXV. 5. and XXVI. 41.
she lets fall the watch of the Lord; and so sins away her inward peace, as
David did, Psalm. LI.

It is the voice, etc.] She soon hears the first call and knock; as being half
awake; awake in the hidden man of the heart.

Knocketh] Apoc. III. 20. Micah. VI. 9.

my locks with the drops] Thus Christ stands bare-headed, as with cap in hand,
and that in foul weather too, suing, wooing, and begging admittance; and yet
must go look another lodging.

I have put off my coate] Luke XI. Paul does, 1 Cor. IX. 27. And as he advises
others, Romans VI. 12.

how] Why, easily enough: It had been no such great matter. Sin and shifting
came into the world together. Look to that, Heb. XII. 25. and chap. II. 3. Lest
refusing this Call, they hear that Command, Matthew. XXV. 41.

by the hole] Christ herewith is offended and gone, ver. 6. Seems minded, as
Mark XIV. 41. and Ezekiel. III. 27. Yet even then he leaves a sweet remembrance
behind him.

my bowels] She had no rest in her spirit; her bowels earned toward him; her
heart asked and quaked for the unkindnesse she had offered him: she sorrowed
according to God, or as God would have it, 2 Cor. VII. 9.

I rose up] She better bethinks her self,

dropped with myrrh,] Testimonies and tokens of his sweetness left behind
him, where his hand had been; with a secret instinct to attract her, as the
Loadstone does the Needle: that did whet, edge, steel her affections toward
him; and wrought her to that resolution, Hos. II. 7.

I opened] Better late then never.

was gone] She had presumed too much of his patience, and abused it, Micah III.
4. she hoped here, but missed of it.

my soul failed] Psalm. XXX. 7. she suffers now; she may thank her self for it.

I sought him] She goes not to bed again; but seeks him, with all her might:
seeks, and calls, and gives not over. This is the guise of the godly, Esaias
XXVI. 9.

I could not find him] She was so justly dealt withal, Esaias LIX. 1, 2. And
this is the Churches soarest affliction, whereof they bitterly complain, Lam.
III. 8, 44. Job XXX. 20. Hab. I. 2. A spiritual desertion is a kind of Hell it
self to a godly soul. This sense of Loss they count heavier then the sense of
Pain. And indeed the tears of Hell are not sufficient to bewail the Loss of
Heaven.

The Watchmen] Now she will seek him through thick and thin, chap. III. 3.

they smote me] Even these Watchmen, Ezekiel. XXXIII. 2, 6, 7. smote her with the
tongue of just reproof and rebuke, out of Gods Word, for her former fault, and
sloathful neglect of duty.

I charge you] See chap. II. 7. chap. III. 5. But here her charge varies. Tell
him, and what shall ye tell him? as the Hebrew has it. Like that phrase in
Hos. IX. 14

sick of love] Chap. II. 5.

What is thy beloved, etc.] And they double the demand: And that by reason of
her so extraordinary charging them, if not swearing and adjuring of them. Some
singular thing then was in the man, and in the matter. They question likely,
not as utterly ignorant of Christ; but that they might hear the Church what she
had to say to him; and by her discourse they might better their knowledge, 1
Pet. I. 12.

My beloved, etc.] The Churches large character of Christ to them, she
describes him, and his particular praises in his several parts, in sundry
Similies, but no hyperbolies; for Christ admits of no hyperbolie; he is
altogether matchless and incomparable. She describes his color, head, locks,
eyes; cheeks, lips, hands, belly, legs, countenance, mouth; and that he is
altogether lovely. Her Love wants no Rhetoric to display his parts; she thinks
she can never speak enough of him.

Whither] The effect of the Churches speech being so full of affection and
admiration, Jerusalem. And here they double their demand; as they did, chap. V.
9.

thou fairest] Though she acknowledged her self black, chap. I. 6. And was now
in a distress and a desertion.

that we may] They cannot help her, to satisfy her desire; but they will join
to seek him with her. So much good they received by her holy conference with
them. And so God blesses the holy conferences of his people; and the communion
of Saints, Zech. VIII. 21. And surely best it is to seek Christ with the
Church, in her company; she being the pillar and ground of truth, and as that
pillar of fire in the Wilderness, to guide and go before us.

is gone downe] See before chap. V. 6. Cor. XII. 7. Not the pouring out, but
the want of pouring out, dries up the streaming of that oil of Grace, 2 Kings
IV. 6.

into his garden] Chap. IV. 16.

I am my beloveds] Chap. chap. VII. 10. Here her faith reviveth. And come what
will come, she rests upon this resolution.

Thou art beautiful, etc.] The Church having confessed her fault; and seeking
so earnestly to repair the breach, and renew her love and interest in him;
Christ hereupon is so ready to receive her, and afresh so highly to praise and
commend her; as formerly he had done, chapter IV. which shows that he is no
changeling; and makes to her singular comfort, Jer. III. 22.

as Tirza] Josh. XII. 24. 1 Kings XIV. 17. and chap. XV. 33. so beautiful a
City.

as Jerusalem] Lam. I. 1. and chap. II. 15, 16. Psalm. CXXII. 3. and XLVIII. 2.
and LXXXVII. 3. and CXXXII.

terrible] To daunt enemies, and draw hearts unto her, she is admirable,
inexpugnable.

Turn away thine eyes] Chap.

threescore Queenes] This verse is put hypotheticaly,

my Dove] The rendition of the case, Deuteronomy. XXXIII. 29. 2 Samuel VII. 23. Ps.
CXLIV. 15.

Who is she, etc.] Many make this the praise which the Queens and Concubines
give the Church; not hereby doubting, but admiring her. and her excellency.
Yet I see not but they may well be a continuation of Christ's speech in praising
her; not unlike to that in the fourth verse aforegoing.

I went downe] Christ's inspection and care of his Church, Esaias V. 2. Matthew.
XXI. 34. 1 Cor. IX. 7. This phrase speaks not a present ignorance in him; no
more then that phrase, Genesis XVIII. 21.

Or ever I was aware] i. e. Esaias XLVII. 11.

my soul, etc.] This seems to denote the affectionate haste and desire,
wherewith Christ was carried on, in a kind of insensible manner, to revisit his
Church, and restore comforts to her, to present his ardent and longing
affection to behold the flourishings and propagations of his Church.

Amminadab] Likely some swift Charet-driver, some translate it appellatively,
my willing people. Some make the whole verse to be the speech of the Church,
confessing her ignorance that Christ was gone down to that end, as is
expressed in the former verse; But that he was gone away from her in angry
displeasure, for her unworthy and sluggish neglect of him, chap. III. 3. And
therefore she drove on so furiously to find him out again; yea, so furiously,
that she over past him. So obscure is this text, and the meaning so dark and
difficult to determine.

Return, etc.] Various likewise are the Opinions of Interpreters here: I
conceive, The word fairly come of, as the words of Christ to his Church; mainly
and earnestly recalling her to return to him.

O Shulamite] Not Shunamite. Some make it the feminine of Solomon; and so to
denote his wife; the women being usualy called after their husbands names, Esaias
IV. 1. And so his Spouse is the figure of the Church of Christ throughout this
Song.

that we may look upon thee] view and contemplate thee; and thy beauty with
complacency and delight.

What will ye see] Seems best to be Christ's words still; in answer of his own
question.

as it were the company of two armies] As in that joyful day at Mahanaim, and
the Vision there of Jacob, Genesis XXXII. 2. The Spouse here likened to these two
armies. Or, that she is so guarded and safe-guarded, with such armies, as Jacob
there was. Yet some apply this to that intestine war within her, of the flesh
and spirit, fighting as two armies within her, as the twins did in Rebecca's
womb.

Christ here to the tenth verse, continues his Praising of her again, running
over every grace and ornament in her, from the lowest to the highest; together
with his joy and pleasure that he takes in her; And all under new and fresh
Similies and exemplifications. And thereupon, in the tenth verse, and to the
end of this chapter, the Church renewes the joyful profession of her love to
him, and of his desire toward her; inviting him to her Assemblies to see them
how they prosper, and she promises to give and devote all her best fruits
wholly to him, for whom alone she had brought them forth, and by whose blessing
she flourished with all manner and sorts of them, both new and old.

How beautiful] This beautifulness is ascribed,

O Princes daughter] 1 John III. 1. John I. 12. 2 Cor. VI. 18.

the King is held in the galleries] Christ himself. Ps. CXXXVIII. 4, 5. and
XXVII. 4. being so astonished, and never satisfied with the sight of thee, and
thy beauty, and so over-valuing it above his own, and all other earthly glory
whatsoever.

How faire] Such passionate admiration of her, Esaias LXII. 4, 5. and LXV. 19.
Zeph. III. 17. And cannot but procure some suitable reciprocal love to him,
Ezra IX. 13, 14. 2 Cor. V. 14.

Palme-tree] The Emblem and symbol of constancy, Psalm XCII. 12, 13. Apoc.
VII. 9, 10.

go up to the Palme-tree] He will familiarly dwell with his Church;

and the smell of thy nose] Or nostrils; the breath that thence proceeds,
shall be sweet, odoriferous, and grateful: to those at least that have their
inward senses habitualy and spiritualy exercised.

causing the lips] Hyperbolicaly, Acts IV. 20. and II. 4, 11, 14.

I am my Beloveds The Churches renewed speech and profession,

Come] She is emboldened hereupon to these Petitions following; Bar^k was,
Judge. IV. 8.

my loves] The fruition of my graces,

The mandrakes] See the Annotations on Genesis

at our gates, etc.] This may seem to allude to the order of strawing the
wedding-house doors with sweet smelling flowers: or of laying up of fruits in
gate-houses and garners.

for thee] All for Christ. He gives all to them, all his offices and
efficacies; all his merits and graces; what he did, and suffered, was for them:
and they return all to him, all that they are, and have all that they do and
suffer, all their good works and services, as fruits of his own Graces in
them, they ascribe and devote unto him, Psalm. CXV. 1. that he may be Ali in All.

In this last Chapter, the Church proceeds to her dearest wishes for and after
Christ, How she feign would have him, and use him; in the three first verses.
And in the next verse, she again charge others not to disturb or displease
him.

as my brother] That she might have more close conjunction and consociation
with him,

kiss thee] Chap. I. 2. Psalm. II. 12. and publicly profess thee,
notwithstanding any danger.

yet they should not despise me] 2 Samuel VI. 22. not dishearten me from duty and
affection: but she would bravely slight all scorning Michols, all contumelies
and contempts for her conscience sake, and Christ's sake.

(...) mothers house] The universal Church she calls her her mother; in her
universal latitude of al her members; yea, sometimes comprehending in that
notion Christ the head also, as, v. 5. And so again in the New Testament, the
whole Church in all her members with her head Christ, is called Christ, i. e.
mystical Christ, 1 Cor. XII. 12. Thither from without, would she bring him with
solemnity and joy; and there humbly welcome and entertain his presence with
all honor and obedience.

instruct me] The Church would do it instrumentaly and subordinately, from God
primarily and originaly, John VI. 45. Esaias LIVE. 13. Jer. XXXI. 34.

of spiced wine] Prove. IX. 2. This should be her hospitality and kindness to
Christ: nothing too dear for him, as he does the like for her, Esaias LV. 1, 2, 3.

who is this, etc.] Chap. III. 6. Some would have this to be the speech of the
Church; some, of Christ; some, of the Angels.

that comes up] Sure whosoever speaks it, this is meant of the Church; it is
she comes up. There are continual ascensions in the hearts of Gods people*
whiles here; they are ever aspiring to heavenward.

from the wildernesse] Of this world and the tribulations of it, of sin, and
the temptations and miseries of it.

Leaning] For otherwise without him she could not ascend. No more then the Vine
without its supporter; or the Ivy without its Oak. And leanes truly; not as
those, Micah III. 11. And leanes wholly and solely upon him; utterly unbottomed
of her self, and of every creature. All other are but as, Job VI. 17. and,
VIII. 15. and, Esaias XXXVI. 6.

I raised thee up, etc.] Some understand these words as spoken by the Church,
and in answer to Christ's question; That namely, I is she her self, and no
other; even she that raised him up and awoke him from under the apple tree, by
her prayers; as, Psalm. XLIV. 23. Matthew. VIII. 25. Esaias LXII. 7. And there by
acts of faith, and believing on the promise, did after a sort conceive, bear,
and bring him forth. And that it is she also that in the extreme height and
heat of her love and zeal, so prays to him, and so professes, as is in the two
verses following. Others under stand all these words as spoken by Christ to the
Church, whose grace alone did, and does raise up his Church, depressed and
fallen under the tree of offense after the eating of the forbidden fruit, lying
in her blood, as it is, Ezekiel. XVI. 5, 6. then and there he said unto her, and
be the mother of the living, as, Genesis III. 20. And so they make the rest of the
words to be his command to his Church, naturaly following as her duty, from the
consideration of his foresaid benefits to her vouchsafed. But yet, however the
words in the fifth verse be taken, I do rather incline to understand the words
in the six and seven verses to be the Churches; by reason of their masculine
idiome. She so begging Christ's dearest love to her: and so professing her own
love to him, as riding in a Chariot o triumph, victorious over all oppositions,
unconquerable, unquenchable. And such indeed is the Divine mutual love between
Christ and his Church, thus exalted to the highest.

Set me as a seale] Have me in precious esteem: Aaron did the Tribes, Exodus
XXVIII. 11, 12, 20, 21, 29, 30. Thus she begs to be highly remembered,
preserved honored, by Christ; in his heart dearly cherished and valued; by his
arm mightily defended.

strong as death] Death conquers all; is the King of terrors, Job XVIII. 14.
yet Love as strong as death: Jonathan would have died for the love of David;
and David for Absalom. See Romans XVI. 4. Apoc. XII. 11. She would not refuse to
die for him: but shall die, if he grant not her desire. Wherein the
irresistible and undaunted vigor and courage of holy love and desire after
Christ, is exalted to the highest.

as the grave] Which is never satisfied and filled, Prove. XXX. 16.

coals of fire] Luke XII. 49. This was her fever and sickness, in this Song.
She was carried up, as it were, in a Chariot of fire; and consumed, as it were,
in her love toward Christ in the zeal of it, Psalm LIX. 9. and CXIX. 139.
See 2 Cor. V. 13. Not lukewarm she.

Many waters, etc.] As no good can match it, so no evil can overmatch it. Nay,
the floods of afflictions are so far from drowning this Love, that they do
rather inflame and increase it; as the water that is cast upon lime, Romans VIII.
35.

all the substance of his house] To buy this love of me, or to get it from me;
or to bribe and corrupt it. Yea, his house it self, lands, life and all.

utterly oontemned] As, Acts VIII. 20. Phil. III. 8. Matthew. X. 37. Luke XIV.
26. IX. 24.

we have a little sister] Thou Lord and I have such a one;

no breast] Not marriagable yet immature yet. As once the Church of the Jews
also was, Ezekiel. XVI. 7, 8.

What shall we do] Love is laborious, Sichem will do all that can be done for
his beloved Dinah. So Paul for the Jews, Romans IX. 1, 2, 3. True Love is not in
word only, but in deed, John XIV. 15.

when she shall be spoken for] For her good, and advancement; for to have an
husband, Gal. IV. 4. Romans XVI. 25.

If she be a wall] The answer to the foresaid question: between Jew and
Gentile; and then making a new wall, larger, and able to comprehend both Jew
and Gentile.

We will build] We both; yea the whole blessed Trinity, will have an hand in
building the Church of the Gentiles.

a palace of silver] A royal precious Palace; that she may beseem to be the
City of the great King, Psalm. XLVIII. 2.

and if she be a door Or, when she shall be a door: to open to the righteous
Nation, etc. Esaias XXVI. 2. to open to the faithful Ministers, 1 Cor. XVI. 9
that come to build her for an habitation of God through the Spirit, Ephesians. II.
22. to open to the King of glory, Psalm. XXIV. 7. And thus become, as it were,
the gate of heaven; as Genesis XXVIII. 17.

enclose her with boarde of Cedar.] Board her, and beautify her with fair,
sweet, and strong Cedars; Compass her with my everlasting mercies; and
preserve her walls and her gates, that the gates of hell shall not prevail
against her, Esaias XXVI. 1. and LX. 18. Matthew. XVI. 18.

I am a wall] Says this Church of the Gentiles; verse. Or, when I shall so be,
as I desire to be?

and my breasts like towers] Not, as once, without breasts, verse 8. but now,
as, Ezekiel. XVI. 7. yea, beyond those of my elder sister, new like towers, far
greater then those. See Esaias XLIX. 21. and LIVE. 1. and LX. 4, 8. and LXVI. 8.

then was I, etc.] Or, then shall I be, etc. Here is the effect and issue of
her being built up through Christ. For when God shall have united these two
sticks, Ezekiel. XXXVII. 19. And made way for those Kings of the earth, Apoc. XVI.
12. then it shall be said of both, what has God wrought? as, Number. XXIII. 23.
then she shall be near her complete happiness, her heavenly and everlasting
peace. And all this through the free favor, and mere mercy of God in Christ.

Solemon had a vineyard] This, evrses, are the last speech of Christ to and of
his Spouse, in this Song. Wherein he magnifies the price and praise, the
precious fruitfulness and worth of his Church, by the comparison of a
Vineyard, the best of Vineyard, even Solomon's in Baalhamon; a very fruitful
place, a Lord of multitudes of wine; as the word signifies. And yet is that
far short of Christ's Vineyard.

he let out, etc.] Solomon set and let out his to keepers and farmers.

every one] Every Tenant and Keeper, for his share.

a thousand pieces of silver] See Esaias VII. 23 a thousand Vines for a thousand
silverlings. Every keeper then likely had so much ground as would plant a
thousand Vines. And wonderful then was the fruitfulness and increase that
would raise the rent to so high a rate. Of silverlings and shekels, See the
Observations on Exodus XXXVIII. 24.

My vineyard] The Church often called a Vineyard, Esaias V. 1, -- 7. Psalm. LXXX.
8. Here is the other part of the comparison, the difference between Christ's
Vineyard, and that of Solomon's. This superior to that.

which is mine] He ownes it: And it is his by a manifold right of donation,
purchase, conquest, plantation, preservation, fructification, 1 Pet. I. 18. 1
Cor. III. 7.

is before me] Ever in his sight, dear and tender in his eyes. He is always
with his Church, Matthew. XXVIII. 20. He walks among her candlesticks; having
engraven her upon the palms of his hands, and her walls being continualy before
him, Esaias XLIX. 16. and under his constant never-slumbring charge and
protection, chapter XXVII. 3.

Thou, O Solomon] Solomon could not be ever with his Vineyard; nor dress it
himself. But the Keepers and Tenants must have their share of the fruits of it
to themselves, as good reason they should. But I look to my Vineyard my self, 1
Cor. III. 7, 9. Nor suffer I any part of the profits to go from me.

Thou that dwell, etc.] Thou Church here called the inhabitresse of the
gardens, because she is divided and branched into many particular
Congregations, which are no less delightful to him then so many Edens and
Paradises.

the companions] The Angels, say some, Ephesians. III. 10. 1 Cor. XI. 10. 1 Pet. I.
10. Or rather, Those Partakers of the same precious faith and grace with her
self, 2 Pet. I. 1.

hearken to thy voice] Thine obedient children will hearken to their mothers
counsel, Ier. XIII. 15, 16. set to their seals, John III. 33. glorify the
Word, Acts XIII. 48.

cause me to hear it] Chap. II. 14. In holy exercises, preaching, prayer,
conference, etc. uttered by the Spirit of grace and supplication. Or, as some,
cause them to hear me; by thy preaching of me, of my Word of truth, without
mixture of hay or stubble, 1 Cor. III. 12.

Make haste] See chap. II. Israel. Here is the Churches last speech and prayer;
like that Apoc. XXII. 17, 20. She loves, and longs, and looks for his second
Advent, 2 Pet. III. 12. As the espoused Virgin does after the day of marriage.

like to a Roe] In nimblenesse and swiftness. Come with all speed, quickly,
cut off of delays. Yet his coming seems long to us, because we are short; we
set the Sun by our Dyal.

upon the mountain of spices.] Where Christ is, and whence the Church expects
him; and whither she longs to be brought by him. Those high and heavenly, those
sweet and precious pleasures, Ps. XVI. 11. are the issue and upshot of all, and
the end of this spiritual heavenly Song.

THe Great, and Small Prophets, according to the Times wherein they lived, and
prophesied, may seem to stand in this rank and Order; viz. Jonah, Esaias,
Hosea, Joel, Amos, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephanie, Jeremy, Daniel, Ezekiel,
Obadiah, Haggai, Zechariah, Malachi. In the LXX. the Lesser Prophets are placed
before the Greater.

Esaias.
ESAIAS Prophesies of the Destruction of the Kingdoms, of Syria, and Samaria,
shortly to be accomplished by the Assyrian. And of the Kingdom of Judah
afterward, by the Babylonian. And of the Neighboring Kingdoms round about,
by them both. And of the Ruin of the Assyrian Empire, by the Babylonian. And
of the Babylonian by the Mede, and Persian. Intermixing sharp accusations of
sins; severe threatenings of judgments and comfortable Promises; chiefly to the
Jews, and Israelites: And extending his Evangelical Prophecies, and Promises
to Christ, and his glorious, spiritual Kingdom; And the Vocation of the
Gentiles to the Communion of it. And all in a stately style, and lofty
language. The time of his Prophesying must needs be 46. years from the first of
Iotham to the 14th of Hezekiah, Besides the Times that the Prophesied in the
days of Vzziah, and after the 14th. of Hezekiah; which for the number of years
are uncertain. Yet it is recorded that he writ the Acts of Uzziah, first and
last, 2 Chronicles. XXVI. 22. though that Book seem not extant now, as not so
necessary for the use of the Church. As neither that of Iasher, 2 Samuel I. 18.
Nor that of Jeremy, 2 Chronicles. XXXV. 25.

The Times in Esaias may seem to be thus distinguished; viz. In the days of King
Uzziah, Chapter I. -- 5. whose reign is mentioned, chap. I. 1. and his Death,
chap. VI. 1. Wherein some things most Prophetickly be spoken, and understood,
both of sins, and Punishments, which otherwise are fitting rather to the
times of Ahaz.

In the days of Iotham, chap. VI. In the days of Ahaz. Chap. VII. -- XIV.

ver. 28. whose reign is mentioned, chap. VII. 1. And his Death, chap. XIV.
28. And the rest may seem most, if not all, to be in the days of Hezekiah;
wherein there is a special notation of time in chap. XX. mentioning the year
that Tartan (2 Kings XVIII. 17.) came to Ash^od (or Azotus) and took it, when
Sargon, next Predecessor to Sennacharib, or Sennacharib himself King of Assria
sent him, which seems to be about the eighth or ninth year of Hezek. And in the
XXXVI. and XXXVII. chap. mentioning the 14th year of Hezekiah, and the
Histories contained in it. And in chap. XXXVIII, XXXIX. containing Histories
that fell out in the later end of that fourteenth year of Hezekiah; without any
other or further Notation of Times, to the end of all the Book. In this
Prophecy are chiefly contained manifold Evangelical Promises and Prophecies of
Christ, of his Person, and Offices, his Gospel, and Kingdom; more
Particularly, of his Incarnation, and Birth; His Breeding, Calling, Teachings,
Sufferings, Life, Death, Rising again, Glory ensuing, Kingdoms Length and
Extent; That Esaias is well called an Evangelical Prophet, or Prophetical
Evangelist: Concluding with the destruction of Babylon: and the Deliverance of
Gods People thence: the glorious restoration of the Church: and Numerous
Vocation of the Gentiles. And by reason of the Premises it is, That this Book
is so often cited in the New Testament. As in the Table ensuing may appear.

Esaias Alleged, or Alluded to in 1. 9. Romans 9. 29 6. 9, 10 Mat. 13. v 14, 15
Joh. 12. 39, 40, 41 Act. 28. 25, 26, 27 7. 14 Mat. 1. 22, 23 8. 14 Romans 9. 33
15 1 Pet. 2. 8 Mat. 21. 44 17 Luke 20. 18 18 Heb. 2. 13, 14 9. 2 Mat. 4. 14,
15, 16 7 Luke 1. 32, 33 10. 22, 23 Romans 9. 27, 28 11, 1 Mat. 2. 23 10 Romans 15.
12 13. 10 Mat. 24. 29. 21. 9 Apoc. 14. 8 22. 13 1 Cor. 15. 32. 22 Apoc. 3. 7
25. 8 1 Cor. 15. 54. 28. 11 Apoc. 11. 7, 17 1 Cor. 14. 21 16 1 Pet. 2. 6, 7, 8
Romans 9. 33 29. 10 Romans 11. 8 13 Mat. 15. 7, 8, 9 Mar. 7. 6 14 1 Cor. 1. 19 33.
18 1. Cor. 1. 19, 20 34. 4 Apoc. 6. 13, 14 35. 5, 6 in many places 40. 3 Matthew.
3. 3 Mark 1. 3 John 1. 23 3, 4, 5 Luke. 3. 4, 5, 6 6, 7, 8 1 Pet. 1. 24, 25 13
Romans 11. 34 1 Cor. 2. 16 41. 4 Ap. 1. 17 and 22. 13 8 James 2. 23 42. 1, 2, 3,
4 Mat. 12. 17, 18 19, 20 6 Acts 13. 47 43. 19 2 Cor. 5. 17 44. 3 John 7. 38, 39
45. 9 Romans 9. 20 23 Romans 4. 11 Phil. 2. 10, 11 47. 8 Apoc. 18. 7 49. 6 Luke 2.
32 Acts 13. 47 8 2 Cor. 6. 2. 10 Apoc. 7. 16 50. 6 Luke 22. 64 John 18. 22 8
Romans 8. 30, 34 52. 5 Romans 2. 24 7 Romans 10. 15 10 Luke 3. 6 11 2 Cor. 6. 17 15
Romans 15. 21. 53. 1 John 12. 38 Romans 10. 16 3 Mark 9. 12 4 Matthew 8. 17 5 1 Cor.
15. 3 53. 5, 6 1 Pet. 2. 24, 25 7, 8 Mark 15. 3, etc. Acts 8. 32 9 1 Pet 2. 22
12 Mark 15. 28 Lu. 22, 37 and 23, 34 54. 1 Gal. 4. 27 13 John 6. 45 55. 1 John
7. 37 3 Acts 13. 34 Psalm. 89. 35 56. 7 Matthew. 21. 13 Mark 11. 17 Luk 19. 46 59.
7 Romans 3, 15 17 Ephesians. 6. 17 1 These. 5. 8 20 Romans 11. 26 60 3 Apoc. 21. 24. 11
Apoc. 21. 25 19 Ap. 21. 23. and 22. 5 61 1, 2 Lnk 4. 17 -- 21 62. 11 Matthew. 21.
5 63 2, 3 Apoc. 19. 13, 15 64 4 1 Cor. 2. 9. 11 65. 1, 2 Rom, 10. 20, 21 17 2
Pet. 3. 13. 66 1 Acts 7. 48, 49 21 1 Pet. 2. 5, 9 Apoc 1. 6. 24 Mark 9. 44

Chap. VII. ver. 16. has reference to Shear-jashub.

Chap. VIII. ver. 18. has reference to Shear-jashub, and Mahershalah-hash-baz.

Chap. XXXVIII. ver. 5. Ezekiah's tears, among other causes, might chiefly be,
because at that time he had no son; Manasseh being borne after, chap.
XXXVIII. 5. 2 Kings XXI. 1. 2 Chronicles. XXXIII. 1.

As the Sun stood still at Joshuah's Prayer; and the Moon likewise; and
consequently with them the whole frame of the Heavenly Bodies, and their
Motions, about a whole day, Josh. X. 12, 13. So upon Ezekiah's choice, the
Sun went back, and consequently the other Celestial Bodies with it, ten
degrees, in the Heavens, [that the Chaldeans took notice of the wonder, 2 Chronicles. XXXII. 31.] as well as in the Sun-dial of Ahaz, chap. XXXVIII. 8. Making
that miraculous anomalie of time, in obedience to their Creators will.

Esaiah his going naked, without his upper raiment, or Prophetical rough
garment, (as that, 2 Kings I. 8. Zech. XIII. 4. Matthew. III. 4.) and barefoot;
though but three days; (like to that, Ezekiel. IV. 4, 5, 6.) yet was a three
years Prophetic sign, that Egypt and Ethiopia, by that time, should be led
into captivity, naked and bare, by the King of Assyria, chap. XX. 3, 4.

The 185000. were slain by the Angel, in the Camp of Sennacharib, not after
their return from the Ethiopians, but in that very next night after the
message and promise sent from God by Esaias to Hezekiah, Esaias XXXVII. 21, -- 35.
And slain either before Jerusalem in the Camp that Rabshakeh brought thither,
and in his return to the King at Libna left there, Esaias XXXVI. 2. Or in
Sennacharib's Camp before Libna, where himself was, so drawing near to
Jerusalem, chapter XXXVII. 8, 9. 14 33, 36. 2 Kings XIX. 8, 32, 35, 36. 2 Chronicles. XXXII. 9. If not in both Camps.

The Vision]

Of Isaiah] Heb. Jeshajahu. In other places, Jeshajah. In the Greek, Esaias;
whence our English, Esaias, and Esaiah. It signifies Gods salvation.

saw] Hence the Prophets of old called Seers.

Judah and Jerusalem] Chiefly and mainly. Though likely in a relation to them,
he prophesied also concerning and against other neighboring Nations.

Hezekiah] Heb. Jechizkijahu, Micah I. 1. Jechizkijah; sometimes Chizkijahu;
and Chezkijah. Greek, Ezekias. Likely Esaias died in the latter end of his
reign; and was not sawn in sunder in the reign of Manasseh; as commonly, out
of Heb. XI. 37. but groundlessely, it is conceived.

Hear, etc.] His first Sermon, in this first chapter. And if so, Then we must
understand the desolations herein mentioned to be Propheticaly denounced: for
they seem to have relation to Ahaz his time.

O heavens,] See Deuteronomy. XXXII. 1. and XXX. 19. and IV. 26. See Micah VI. 1, 2.

Israel] The common name of Gods people; Judah and Jerusalem.

your country, etc.] Spoken Propheticaly, as was said, if this were his first
Sermon and Prophecy. See chap. IX. 12. 2 Chronicles. XXVIII. 5, 17, 18.

Hear, etc.] Thus wicked they were, likely in King Uzziah's time.

upon thee] Or rather, verse.

as at the first] Fulfilled in the times of Hezekiah, Josiah: and after the
return from the Babylonish captivity, in Zerubbabel, Joshua, Nehemiah, and
others.

oaks] Trees set apart and used for idolatrous services.

gardens] Where they practiced Idolatry, as well as in Groves, and Woods.

strong] Strong Idols, as ye esteem them.

The word, etc.] A second Sermon, to the end of the IV. chap.

in the last dayes] Micah IV.

all Nations] The Gentiles.

He will teach us, etc.] The Messiah will. And so, ver. 4.

Nation shall not, etc.] Such shall be the peaceable meek disposition among
themselves which the Gospel shall bring them to, Acts IV. 32. Though the wicked
will rise up in war, with fire and sword against them, Mat. X. 21, 22. Luke
XII. 49, 53.

O house of Jacob, let us] Provokes the Jews so to do, by the example of those
Gentiles.

Therefore thou have forsaken, etc.] A sad charge against the present people,
for their grievous manifold sins; whereby God is brought to desert them, and
proceed in fierce wrath against them.

boweth down] To their Idols in their Idol-worship. ver. 11.

forgive them not] Spoken by way of imprecation, if not rather as a mere
prediction or denunciation; that God would now at length, without further
delay, proceed most severely to punish them, without sparing.

Enter into, etc.] So foretelling what sorry shifts they should be then driven
to; though to small or no purpose, verse 19. and 21.

Cedars of Lebanon] Not any,

to the moles] His most precious Idols, chap. I. 29.

Cease ye from man] Seeing no humane help, Psalm. CXLVI. 3, 4. Ier. XVII. 5, 6.
Psalm. LXXVI. 7.

For, behold, etc.] God will take away the stay and the staff of man, and of
other creature comforts and supports, one and other.

children] In age,

Oppressed] Which follows of none,

I will not, etc.] Men will refuse public employment, to undertake the care
and cure of the State, and to be Rulers in it, being so full of confusion, so
perplexed and perilous as theirs then should be.

is ruined] And therefore for their extreme obstinacy and impudency;

Say ye] A consolation to the small company of the Godly among them,

As for my people] Proceeds on to declare the confusion and disorders of the
times;

The Lord] He rises up to plead and judge for his people,

Moreover, etc.] Comes from the Men to the Women.

tinckling ornaments] Diverse names following in this wardrobe of Women,

glasses] Looking-glasses; Exodus XXXVIII. 8. Of glass properly so called we
find no certain mention in the Old Testament.

girdle] Girding.

a rent] Or rags.

burning] Sun-burning, tanning.

gates] Cities, Lam. I. 4.

She] The Land of Jury, or the mother-City Jerusalem.

seven women] Chap. chap. XIII. 2. that is uncouth, immodest motion and
solicitation should fall out, and find place with them.

In that day] After these calamities overpast; when the Lord shall have washed,
etc. as it is, ver. 4.

the branch] The Messiah, chap. XI. 1. Zech. III. 8. and VI. 12. Jer. XXIII. 5.
and XXXIII. 15. Yet some understand this here of the Church. And so to the end
of this short Chapter.

of the Lord] The Messiah himself; And likewise the Church, and her beauty, and
holiness, and defense, and shade, and shelter, come and spring all from the
Lord.

and the fruit of the land] Literaly. And may be applied spiritualy.

that remaineth] The remnant that shall escape,

Altar] The brazen Altar in the Court before the door.

the voice of the Lord] Not of the Seraphs.

I send] The Unity of the Deity.

for us] The Trinity of the Persons.

send me] Being so fitted, as formerly, he now promptly offers himself.

make the heart of this people fat] This God does not by infusing any
wickedness or corruption, of any kind, into them: but indirectly, and by
accident, and consequent, thus; By not hindering it, but permitting it; justly,
for their sins, withholding, or withdrawing his Restraining Grace, which
holds them in as a Grayhound is held in from an hare by a slip; Denying his
blessing to the means of Grace, not vouchsafing his special and free grace and
assistance to them; but withdrawing the efficacy of his Spirit, which things he
is not bound to give to any: and justly leaving them so both to all Satan's
tentations, and his instruments; And also to their own vile lusts, the inbred
hardness of their hearts, rebellion of their wills, and the universal
corruption of their natures; which enslaves them to sin, and fires them after
it; yea, the more for any opposition of Gods Commands, Word, or Works, or any
means else used to the contrary; as we see Lime burn with water cast upon it.
Even so the Heathen could say, Nitimur in vetitum, semper cupimusque negata:
according with that of the Apostle, Romans VII. verse 8, -- 13. Yea, God justly
suffering and presenting such objects, and occasioning such things to fall out,
as are not simply evil in themselves, yet through their default will prove
stumbling blocks unto them, as whereupon their own wicked hearts will still
work and improve their own induration, excecation, and irritation to further
sinning. Thus they willingly fall further into sinful actions. The power of
doing which acts, as they are acts, are yet from God alone, in whom we live,
and move, and have our being; but the obliquity, malignity, and evil of them is
from the wicked Agent. And all this God does in a way of justice: It is a just
thing with God, when men wilfully winkand shut their eyes against the light;
And when they harden their hearts, and stop their ears against him, his Word,
and Will, and Works; It is just with him, in manner aforesaid, to let them have
and enjoy what they so love and desire to have and enjoy. And so to punish sin
with sin. For all the premises, see Deuteronomy. XXVIII. 28. and XXIX. 2, 4. Psalm.
LXIX. 23. and LXXVIII. 32. and LXXXI. 12. and CVI. 7. Esaias XXVIII. 13. and
XXIX. 10. and XLIV. 18. Jer. V. 31. Ezekiel. II. 5, 7. and III. 7. and XX. 25.
Zech. VII. 11, 12. Matthew. XIII. 14. John XII. 37. Acts XIV. 16. Romans I. 21, 22,
26, 28. and II. 4, 5. and Chap. VII. ver. 8, 9, 11, 13, 23. and XI. 8. 10. 2
Cor. II. 15, 16. 2 These. II. 10, 11, 12. 2 Timothy III. 13. Heb. VI. 4, 6, 7.
Apoc. XVI. 9, 11. All this I say is just for Him who knows how, and orders
withal, out of the infiniteness of his wisdom and goodness, so as to make
them serve his providence for the producing of good out of evil, the greetest
good out of the greatest sin; as Acts IV. 28. See my Annotations on Ezekiel.
III. 20.

Lord, how long?] Shall this sad condition last?

utterly desolate] Yet there is mention of a Reserve, v. 13.

far away] Into Assyria, Chaldea; yea, some extend this to the last
destruction by Vespasian, and Hadrian, the Roman Emperors.

But yet in it shall be a tenth] God will still in his dreadfulest judgments
preserve a small remnant,

a Teil-tree] Or a Line-tree, of goodly boughs and leaves.

and an oak] So most do render the word.

whose substance is in them when they cast their leaves] As in winter.

so the holy seed] The seed of Saints. The application of the similitude. These
God reserves, by them to propagate his Church, Romans XI. 15.

And it came to passe]

in the days of Ahaz] In the third, or the beginning of the fourth year of
his reign. For within the fourth of his reign was Pekah slain, 2 Kings XV.
30, 33. in the twentieth year of Jotham, reckoning so both the four years of
Jotham in his father Uzziahs lifetime, and the sixteen years of his reign
after the death of his father. Or rather, reckoning from the beginning of
Jothams sixteen. And so this will fall out in the fourth of Ahaz. See my
Observations on 2 King. I. page 103. Of the death of Ahaz, See chap. XIV. 28.

that Rezin] Rezin and Pekah severaly by themselves, had made some attempt
against Judah, in the end of Iothams, or the very beginning of the reign of
Ahaz, and then mightily prevailed, 2 Kings XV. 37. 2 Chronicles. XXVIII. 5, 8. But
now jointly they bend their forces together, to make a full conquest: yet in
this prevail not; And so 2 Kings XVI. 5. One Rezon was the first King of
Syria, 1 Kings XI. 23.

Syria] See the Observations on 2 Samuel VIII. 5.

as the trees] Their hearts quaked and quivered, Assyria, which God sends here
to dissuade them from, 2 Kings XVI. 7, 8.

Shear-jashub] Signifies the remnant shall return. chap. VIII. 3. and those of
Hosheah, chap. I. 4, 6, 9. Here brought with Esaias, because he was to make use
of him in his message to Ahaz, v. 16.

upper poole] The very place where Rabshakeh afterward stood, chapter XXXVI. 2. 2
Kings X. 17. See the Observations on Neh. III. 1. And the Annotations on this
text of Esaias.

fullers field] See the Observations on Neh. III. 1.

the son of Tabeel] Uncertain who.

the forementioned calamities. These a Type of the Elect, Phil. IV. 3. Apoc.
III. 5. and XVII. 8.

and by the spirit of burning] By the fire of Gods zeal, chap. IX. 7. the fire
of his Spirit.

And the Lord will, etc.] A promise of Gods gracious presence among his people,
for their direction, and protection, after they are so washed and purged.

her assemblies] for the solemn services of God, Psalm. XLVI. 5. Zech. II. 5.

a cloud] As the Pillar was to the Israelites, Exed. XIII. 21. a cloud by day,
and a fire by night. Even the same Pillar, Exodus XIV. 19, 20, 24.

all the glorie] All Gods people. Or rather all that glorious estate, that God
would advance his people unto, as aforesaid, should continue firm and steadfast
unto them, under his protection over-spreading every part of it, and preserving
it from all annoiance in any kind.

Now will I sing, His third Sermon.

what could have been done more, etc?] Matthew. chapter XI. 21. more, in regard of
Ordinances and means offered and used: more, as a Vine-dresser, more in this
kind and way, by my Ministers and Laborers, and Husbandmen; more, to leave
them inexcusable. Gods absolute power, and will, are not here questioned. See
Matthew. III. chapter XI. 25, 26. 1 Cor. III. 6, 7. Romans IX. 16.

one bath] See the Observations on Genesis XVIII. 6.

an Homer] See the Observations on Exodus XVI. 36.

the work of the Lord] The judgments,

are gone into captivity] Or, Jer. IX. 1. and John III. 18.

Hell] The grave: or any kind of receptscle of man's dead body, Genesis XXXVII.
35. Jonah II. 1, 2.

Mean man] See the Annotations on Chapter Adam, of base earth.

mighty man] Ish.

in judgement] In his righteous judgments upon them.

Then] After the judgments threatened,

shall the Lambs] Literaly. Or rather the godly poor ones.

after their maner] Freely and quietly, as they had wont to do, before their
disturbance and expulsions by their great oppressors. And this, either in the
time of the captivity, when they were left in the land, and the great ones
carried away; or upon their return, quietly enjoying their own lands and
means again, whence by the injurious dealings of the mightier sort they had
formerly been ejected.

strangers eate] As Chap. I. 7.

Woe] More wild grapes,

draw iniquity] Toil and tire themselves with all their might to draw on
iniquity, to practice it.

Let him make speed] That scoff at his threatenings,

Therefore as the fire] Gods judgments at the heels of sin.

their carcases] 2 Chronicles.

And he will lift up, etc.] More, and greater judgments, should follow after
those; still more.

to the Nations] The Assyrians, in the time of Hezekiah. Some stretch it to the
Chaldeans, in the time of Nebuchadnezzar.

slumber or sleep] Be drowzie and sloathful;

girdle] They shall not lay their arms aside, but be always ready for
journey, and march, and action.

nor the latchets] Nothing should befall them that might retard them in their
march, or hinder their expedition.

roar like young lions] See the Annotations on Job IV.

and if one look] The forlorn and perplexed condition of the Jews, chap.
VIII. 21, 22. in the closing up of this hideous prediction.

year that Uzziah died] And the beginning of Jothams reign. Jotham had ruled
some years in the lifetime of Uzziah. See the Annotations on Hos. I. 1. And
the Observations on 2 Kings I. But this here is after Uzziah's death.

This is the fourth Vision or Sermon of Esaias.

I saw the Lord] One God in Trinity of persons: as the Plural term, ver. 8. go
for us? seems to imply. Esaias saw him, not in his Essence, but in this visible
module of glory here represented.

traine] Of his robes.

filled the Temple] The Throne then, it seems, was in that high Portal of 120
Cubits high; and the train of his robes filled the Temple or the Sanctum.

flie] Verse 6. IX. 21.

one cried to another] As by course singing out the praises of the Lord.

holy] Thrice, to denote the superlative eminency of the Lords holiness: and
likely the holiness of his justice.

And the posts, etc.] The Temple doors and posts shaken; and the body of the
Temple filled with smoke. Signs of Gods anger and indignation, Psalm. XVIII. 8.

at the voice of him that cried] A loud and dreadful voice. See Amos IX. 1.

woe is me] As Hab. v. 7.

within sixty five yeares] From the fourth of Ahaz, Manasseh, wherein he was
carried to Babylon, by Esarhaddon, 2 Chronicles. XXXIII. 11. who withal swept away
the remainder of those that Shalmaneser had left, Ezra IV. 2. are 65. years.

and the head of Samaria is Remaliah's sonne] Pekah. Hoshea. And Rezin by
Shalmaneser; both almost presently after; 2 Kings XV. 30. and chap. XVI. 9. See
my observations on 2 Kings I.

Ask thee a signe] Seeing thou still remainest staggering and doubtful,

I will not ask] Not as loath to tempt God;

O house of David] Speaking as to him,

weary my God] In distrusting him, and me his messenger?

Therefore] Or,

a signe] Such as never any was before it, or since.

a Virgin] This fell out in many ages after. And so things to ensue afterward,
are sometimes given for signs: as chap. XXXVII. 30. Exodus III. 12. Jer. XLIII.
9, 10. and LI. 63. By this sign God shows that he can do a greater thing,
then he promised to Ahaz, to save him by his help against those two Kings. And
this sign indeed is the foundation of all Gods promises, and of the fulfilling
of them; In this Son all the promises of God being Yea and Amen. This here is
applied to the Blessed Virgin Mary, Matthew. I. 18, 23. Luke I. 27, 35.

and bear a Sonne] A Virgin still, in, and after the birth; which continues on
the strangeness of this miraculous sign. Not yet but that otherwise he was
borne in the ordinary manner, by the opening of the womb, Luke II. 22, 23.

Butter and honey] Meats that young children affect.

shall he eate] The Virgins Son.

that he may know] That he may grow up, and attain to years of discretion,
etc. Luke II. 52.

For before the childe] A child: Shear-jashub. For no other use appears of his
being there with his father, but this alone. See chap. VIII. 4.

The Lord shall bring] The Prophet now proceeds to foretell him,

King of Assyria] King or Kings collectively.

flie] Egyptians; King? XXII. 33, 35.

holes of the rocks] As Bees do. rock, Psalm LXXXI. 16. Deuteronomy. XXXII. 13.

that is hired] Ezekiel. XXIX. 18, Kings XVI. 7, 8. So that Ahaz in issue, did but
hire a razor to shave himself, and his estate.

the river] Euphrates.

And it shall, etc.]

a young cow and two sheep] That had numbers of them, before the plundering.

abundance of milke] Through the depopulation,

where there were a thosand vines, etc.] ver. 24.

with arrowes] To defend themselves against wild beasts,

And on all hills] Such places on the hills,

Moreover, etc.] The sixth Sermon, in this, and the four Chapters following.
And that of the same nature, and subject matter for the most part, with that in
the last chapter aforegoing. But as that was to Ahaz; so this to the People.

and write in it] Some think, only the name Maher-shalal-hash-baz. Others
rather, this whole Sermon or Prophecy contained in these five Chapters.

Maher-shalal hash-baz] As in relation to the King of Assyria, make speed to
the spoil, haste to the prey; intimating what he should speedily do to Israel
and Syria.

Witnesses to record] The name given to the child,

Uriah the Priest] The High Priest. Of whom, 2 Kings XVI.

went unto] Or,

bare a Sonne] Or had borne a Son: was newly delivered of a male-childe.

this people] Of Israel and

of Shiloah] The soft rivolet of Jerusalem.

over all his channels] Or rather, with all his channels; or from all his
channels, and his banks; meaning his own; That the King of Ashur should come
with all the forces he could make.

thtough Judah] Having subdued Israel, Judah also.

even to the neck] To Jerusalem; that all Judah should be in danger to be
drowned, by the inundation of this river, the Assyrian and his forces.

Associate your selves] Speaking to the enemies, Assyrians, and all their
people and armies; and that in way of derision.

and ye shall be broken] All shall turn to your ruin.

for God is with us] Even that Immanuel, ver. 8. chapter VII. 14.

spoke thus to me] To comfort, and confirm the godly in Judah, against their
distrusts and fears, in these calamitous times.

a confederacie] Be against that confederacy with the Assyrian.

Bind up the Testimony] God would not have the Prophet to deal further in
this kind,

And I will waite] The Prophets resolution,

Behold, I, and the children] My self, and my children, chap. XX. 2, 3. and,
chap. VII. 16. and, ver. 3, 4. of this chapter. Indeed, Heb. II. 13. These
words are produced, as spoken, either of, or by Christ: As likewise those
words, 2 Samuel VII. 14. are applied to Christ, Heh. I. 5. And the like is again
in that same text, Heb. II. 13. The truth is, Many speeches of the Prophets,
concerning themselves; and many Prophecies concerning Cyrus, and others* who
were types of Christ, are in the New Testament applied unto Christ; being one
way, and in one manner verified of them; and another way, and in another manner
also, many times fulfilled in him.

seek unto them that have familiar spirits] People in times of straits are
prone this way, Sam. XXVIII. 7, 15. 2 Kings I. 2. And so likely at this time.
The Prophet therefore here arms the faithful against this course.

And they shall passe] The evil that shall betide such men:

and curse their King] Who brought them to that miserable distress, and should
rather have saved and preserved them.

And their God] Even God himself, in their murmuring desperation. Or rather,
their Idol-god.

unto the earth] Downward: or abroad into the Land, as, chapter V. 30.

Neverthelesse] This Chapter has dependence upon the Chapter aforegoing,

he lightly afflicted] By Pull, rather then Tiglath-Pileser, 2 Kings XV. 19, 20.

more grievously] By Shalmaneser, 2 Kings XVII. 3, 6. Or, by Tiglath-Pileser
rather, 2 Kings XV. 29.

by the way of the sea] Of Cinnereth, Josh. XIII. 27. called also the sea of
Galilee, the sea of Tiberias, the lake of Genesareth.

beyond Jordan] Or beside Jordan, on the West Side of it. The word signifies
either side.

in Galilee of the Gentiles] The upper Galilee, in the Tribe of Naphthali; much
replenished with the Gentiles, being near the Confines of Tire and Sidon, and
having the Cities in it, made over by Solomon to Hiram, though he refused them.
And our Savior preached much in this Galilee also, Matthew. IV. 2, 13, 18, 24.
The Evangelist cites this text, Matthew. IV. 15, 16. and picks out only so much,
as did concern his present purpose, and applies it thereunto.

The people] In those places, on which the darkness of affliction had first
seized in those times, There the spiritual light of joy and life, had, by our
Saviors preaching, first sprung forth: He includes here the lower Galilee, in
the tribe of Zebulun.

has seene] He speaks in prophetical manner, of things to come, as already
effected.

Thou] Speaking to God.

have multiplied] Wilt multiply. The Prophet runs all along here in a
prophetical strain.

the Nation] The Jewish Nation; in the days of the Messiah, by the confluence
of the Gentiles, of all Nations.

and not increased the joy] Read this interrogatively: and so it makes a strong
affirmative. Or thus, Thou have increased the joy to him, or it; that is, to
the Nation.

They joy before thee] And the greatness of their joy, is amplified by two
similitudes.

For thou have broken] One reason of their joy.

Midian] Chap. X. 26. Judges VII.

For every battle, etc.] Or,

a child is borne] Who it is, Emmanuel, the Vigins Son.

Unto us] And for us.

The Lord sent a word] After these comfortable Promises interlaced,

has lighted] Shall light.

adversaries of Rezin] The Assyrians.

against him] Against Rezin.

his enemies] Isreal's enemies. Under the Assyrian afterward. Or, rather, these
enemies are the Assyrians and Philistines, ver. 12.

Thy Syrians] The Syrians,

cut off] By Shalmanazer.

and rush] 2 Kings XVII. 6, 23, 24.

an hypocrite] Or rather profane.

no man shall spare his brother] But plunder and spoil one another, Jer. XIX.
9.

his own arme] Prey, and devour the substance of those that are nearest unto
them.

Manasse Ephraim] The Israelites one against another.

and they together] Both of them against Judah.

Woe] Here is a further charge, Judah.

What will ye do, As, Matthew. XXIII. 33. Romans II. 3. Job XXXI. 14, 23.

from far] From the Assyrian.

without me, etc.] What will ye do then? or to whom will ye flee for help? ye
shall by no shift be able to escape, either to be taken prisoners, or be put to
the sword.

O Assyrian,] Here might best beseem this Chapter to begin. Observations on 1 Chronicles. V. 26.

Is not Calno, etc.] Cities here mentioned, Euphrates.

As I have done unto Samaria] The success of his predecessors,
Tiglath-Pileser, and Shalman-Eser against Samaria, Sennacherib here takes to
himself.

I will punish] Chap.

eggs that are left] The dam forsaking them for fear.

his fat ones leannesse] Among the chief and choice ones in his armies,

And the light of Israel shall be for a fire] A light to his people; a fire to
his adversaries.

in one day] Chap. XXXVII. 36.

stay upon him that smote them] The Assyrian.

a remnant] As but a remanant only of Sennacheribs army.

thy people Israel] As God speaking to the Prophet; or rather thy people, O
Israel, speaking so to Jacob of his posterity.

yet a remnant] And but a remnant only. Alluding again to Shearjashubs name.
See Romans IX. 27, 29. and XI. 5. That remnant being a type of Gods elect.

the consumption decreed] The reason, why but a remnant.

Therefore] Comforts the few faithful ones.

and as his rod was upon the sea, so shall he lift it up after the manner of
Egypt] As God destroyed the Egyptians then, so he will the Assyrians now.
Allusion is here had to Moses his lifting up his rod over the red sea.

because of the anointing] Christ the anointed.

He is come] The Prophet here describes the Progress of Sennacherib with his
army, Benjamin, whereunto most of the towns here mentioned did appertain, to
and against Jerusalem; as if he plainly beheld it in a prophetical rapture and
vision.

They are gone over the passage] Not of Jordan, Michmash, 1 Samuel XIII. 23. and
XIV. 1, 4, 5.

Gallim] 1 Samuel XXV.

top the bough] The chief and principal in Sennacheribs army.

and Lebanon shall fall] The Assyrian King is called a Cedar of Lebanon, Ezekiel.
XXXI. 3. And Carmel, though a mount of Israel, is in this very argument applied
to him, and his forces, verse 18. These then may resemble other great States,
Persons, and People, as well as those of the Jews. And therefore by the tenure
of the context, Lebanon here is no other then the Assyrian vast host.

by a mighty one] An Angel, chap. XXXVII. 36.

And there shall come] Here, for the anointing, chap. X. 27. Here then in this
Chapter we have Christ the Messiah prophesied of, and described, by his
descent, and mean appearance, and low condition, in our humane nature; the
mean estate his parents were then brought unto; his transcendent excellencies
and endowments, by means whereof he should be enabled to effect and accomplish
such strange and unheard of archievements as are herein mentioned; and
particulatly, the Calling of the Gentiles.

second time] As formerly out of Egypt,

to recover] Into his possession again.

the remnant] A small parcel. See chap. X. 22.

of his people] The Jews; distinguished from those, ver. 10. See Apoc. VII. 4,
-- 9.

from Assyria, etc.] And other foreign places here mentioned, where they were
scattered.

for the Nations] Or, Acts II. 41. and IV. 4. and XXI. 20. Romans XI. 5, 25, 26.
2 Cor. III. 16.

The envy also of Ephraim] That had been between them, Judah, since the rent
of the Kingdoms by Jeroboam the Ephraimite, 1 Kings XII. was to cease, when
united either to other in Christ, Ezekiel. XXXVII. 16. Jer. III. 18.

and the adversaries of Judah shall be cut off] In the time of the Messiah, the
obstinate enemies of the Church of God, shall by Christ be destroyed, see chap.
LX. 12.

But they shall fly, etc.] They shall subdue these inveterate enemies; the
enemies of the spiritual Kingdom of Christ hereby typified.

the tongue of the Egyptian sea] By this tongue there is meant the red sea,
which is like a tongue.

the river] Nilus.

in the seven streames] By which, as by so many mouths, it emptieth it self
into the Sea. To make way for the Jews return from her into their own land.
The meaning is, that no impediment or obstacle should be so great, that might
hinder those, who were to be brought home to Christ, and his Church, out of all
quarters, but it should be removed.

an high way] The same meaning for Assyria, verse, for Egypt.

in that day]

thou shall say] And sing, these or the like Hymns of Praise; composed by the
Prophet, as set forms; or as directories to them; or both. So 1 Chronicles. XVI. 7,
35, 36.

in that day] A preface or passage into a new form,

Babylon] Here begin Prophecies,

And first against Babylon, that should be their principal enemy. The
Inscription of this Sermon is here in the first words. Of Burden, See Jer.
XXIII. 33, 36. Of Babylon, see my Observations on Dan. IV. 30. Of her Fall, see
Jer. L. and LI. And this seems to be the seventh Sermon.

Lift ye up a banner] To summon those that were to be employed against Babylon.

nobles] The great Peers of Babylon.

my sanctified ones] Set apart to this service, ver. 17. Jer. LI. 27, 28.

a far countrey] Media and Persia.

whole land] Of Chaldea.

Howl ye] Babylonians.

their faces shall be as flames] Lam. IV. Ezekiel. XX. Jer. XXX. 5, 6. Joel II. 6.
Nahum II. 10. Yet the Original word seems to incline, to the faces of Lybians,
or tawny-moores.

the stars] All shall be so full of horror and terror,

Ophir] See the Observations on 1 King.

shake the heavens] I will cause them to be in such confusion and distraction,

And it shall be] Babylon.

turn to his own people] Babylon shall be forsaken by her hired forces, and
confederates.

found] Medes and Persians.

Medes] Cyrus and Darius.

overthrew Sodom] Babylon was not at once; but began at the conquest of it by
Cyrus, and in the succeeding ages was consummated.

It shall never be inhabited] Jer. LI. 26,

and her time is near to come] Esaias in vision sees the judgments as if
presently approaching: or, this may be taken as spoken to and for them that
then should be living in the time of the captivity of the LXX. years.

For the Lord] The reason of the hastening of the destruction of Babylon,
Babylons destruction.

strangers shall be joyned] See the like, chapter 5. XLIV. and LVI. 3. and LX. 3.
Esther VIII. 17. Psalm. XLVII. 8, 9. This partly accomplished at their return
from Babylon; but more in the Kingdom of Christ, by the Ministry of the
Gospel.

possess them] These Proselites and Converts.

take them captive, etc.] Partly verified in the time of the Maccabees
literaly: but most of all spiritualy by the means and ministry of the
Apostles, and Preachers, subduing them to the obedience of Christ's Scepter.

this Proverb] Or byword, Babylon.

the King] i. e. the Kingdom.

O Lucifer] Meaning the Babylonian.

the mount of the Congregation] Mount Sion; Moriah, being in the North-side of
Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. III. 1. Psalm. XLVIII. 2.

that opened not the house of his prisoners] But kept them LXX.

Prepare slaughter] Esaias speaks to the Medes and Persians.

for the bitterne] See chap. XIII. 21, 22.

that I will break the Assyrian in my land] Rather as in breaking the Assyrian
in my land. Sennacheribs overthrow, it seems, was before this. And it is
brought in as an argument and example to prove, that as God had done that one,
so he would as certainly do the other, that is, overthrow Babylon in its time.

In the year that King Ahaz died] Here begins another Sermon, Chap. VI. did
bear the date of the death of Uzziah. This, of the death of Ahaz.

Palestina] Meaning here the Western part of Jury that was inhabited by the
Philistines. Annotations on Zech. IX. 6. The Babylonians were the greatest
enemies to the Jews, farthest off. The Philistines were their greatest enemies,
nearest at hand.

because the rod, etc.] This is meant of King Uzziah, who prevailed much in his
wars against them, 2 Chronicles. XXVI. 6, 7. But in Ahaz his reign the state and
strength of the Jews was much weakened: whereat the Philistines did much
rejoice. But Esaias bids them not to be overjoyed; for it should not last long.

a cockatrice] Ezekiah, 2 Kings XVIII. 8.

and his fruit shall be a fiery flying Serpent] The Serpents fruit shoul be a
cockatrice, yea* more then so, a fiery flying Serpent.

And the firstborn of the poore] The extremely poor,

shall feed] Freely, fully, and quietly without fear of the Philistines; when
they should want, and famish.

and he shall slay thy remnant.] A remnant still reserved of Gods people, in
his fearfulest judgments. But not a remnant le^t here by Ezekiah to the
Philistines: or at least a slaughter was among that remnant. For Jeremy,
Ezekiel, and Zephanie, all after Ezekiahs days do again denounce judgments
against them.

thou whole Palestina] As thou whole Palestina did rejoice before, verse 29.
so thy dread and desolation shall be now as general and universal.

from the North] Judea, and Jerusalem, that stood North-East from the
Philistines.

a smoak] Ezekiahs forces.

and none shall be alone in his appointed times] Or, Assemblies, Ezekiah's
forces should come against them in flocks at his set times, and places for
their randezvous. Or, none of the Philistines should care or endure to stay in
their meeting places and strong holds, when Ezekiahs forces should as smoke
break in upon them.

What shall one then answer?] To any messengers in general, Jerusalem.

of Moab] Of Moab, Annotations on Amos II. 1. See Jer. XLVIII, wherein are many
passages found borrowed from hence.

because] Relates the destruction and devastations of some of their chief
Cities, and principal parts of their Country; together with the Moabites
distraction, and vain devotions thereupon, flocking unto their Idols, who
could do them no good.

is laid waste] The usual manner of Prophetical language. And this was done at
several times, by Shalmanezer, Sennacherib, and Nebuchadnezzar. Of which see
more on chap. XVI. 14.

an heifer of three years old] Ier. XLVIII. 34. as an heifer of three years
old, i. e. such shall the criers, or the cry be.

shall they carry away] The enemies shall.

to the brook of the willows] Some place in Moab; Assyria.

Send ye the Lamb] The tribute due.

to the Ruler of the Land] The King of Judah; Ezekiah; of David's race. See 2 Samuel VIII. 2. Moab subdued by David. After the division of the Kingdoms, it
fell to Israel. After the death of Ahab, it rebelled, 2 Kings I 1. and chapter III.
ver. 4, 5. and so denied the tribute, whereupon I^horam, with the assistance of
King Iehoshaphat, and the King of Edom, makes that war against Moab, 1 Kings
III. 7, 9. Here the Prophet seems to admonish Moab what course she should
take, and might have taken, for the prevention of the judgments here denounced
against her; to wit, by paying their due tribute to the King of Judah; And by
performing kind offices unto Gods people, in the times specially of their
distress, verse 3, 4. Wherein failing, they are again menaced with the
judgments before mentioned, verse 7, -- 13. And a certain time set for the
execution of the same, verse 14.

from Sela in the wildernesse] Or, as some, to the wilderness.

unto the account] Where the King had his palace.

at the fords of Arnon] Which bounded their Country on the one side, Number. XXI.
13.

consumed out of the land] Of Judah. Sennacherib was. And therefore the
performance of the kind offices oi the Moabites to the Jews should not last
long, or be over-burdensome.

the throne] Of Judah.

and he shall sit] Ezekiah, the Type, Christ, the Truth.

and hastening justice] Without needless delays.

his lies shall not be so] All his haughty and wrathful thoughts,

his Sanctuarie] The Temple of his chief idol Chemosh, Kings XI. 7. Jer.
XLVIII. 46.

since that time] That this judgment past upon Moab, ver. 14. being added
afterward thereunto.

within three years] Most likely thus; Ezekiah, then it took effect about the
eighteenth or nineteenth year of his reign; and was put in execution by
Ezarhaddon the Assyrian King. Though the utter and final destruction of Moab,
here before denounced, and by Jeremy long after seconded, was to be executed by
Nebuchadnezzar. That which was speedily effected, helping to confirm the truth
of the former denunciation, though that were to take effect long after. Yet
some conceive this to be done by Ezarhaddon in the tenth Of Hezekiah. Others,
by Shalmanezer, in his way as he came to besiege Samaria.

Damascus] of Damascus, Annotations on Amos I. 3, 4. The like burden against
Damascus, see chap. XLIX. 23. Amos I. 2. Zech. IX. 1.

is taken away] This was partly effected by Tiglath-pilezar, 2 King. XVI. 9.
and after by Shalmaneser, and after by Nebuchadnezzar.

the glory of Jacob shall be made thin] Of Israel the ten Tribes.

At that day, etc.]

Which they left for the children of Israel] The enemy left.

plant] Curiously.

but the harvest] For all thy curious planting, and sowing, the harvest shall
be an heap, ruined, spoiled, destroyed.

Woe to the multitude of many people] Those forces that Sennacherib led against
Gods people. chap. XXX. 28. and XXXVI. and XXXVII. that served under him.

and they shall flee far off] So did Sennacherib, chap.

at evenintide trouble] In Jerusalem.

before morning he is not] Most slain by the Angel, and the rest fled.

This is the portion] A sweet Close.

A new Sermon or Prophecy.

Woe] Some sense this, as if it were a Compellation Ho.

Shadowing with wings] Meaning Egypt, say some: Ethiopia, say others.

beyond the rivers of Ethiopia] The rivers and streams of Nilus above in
Ethiopia, South of Egypt; where Meroe a chief Island, say some. Others
understand it of the rivers of Ethiopia, not above, but under Egypt. And they
there do place Meroe, where they conceive the Queen Candace reigned.

That sends Ambassadors] Some say, Tirhakah. Others, the Egyptians send them.

by the Sea] The Red Sea.

Go ye swift] The words of Tirhakah, say some. Of the Egyptians, say others.

a Nation scattered] The Assyrians, say some; Tirhakah so provoking them to
war and battle. The Ethiopians, say others; the Egyptians thus warning them
of their ruin approaching by the Assyrians. And a third sort would understand
by this scattered, peeled, terrible Nation, the Israelites.

a Nation meted out, and trodden down] The Ethiopians were such, and so here to
be entreated and used. But they that understand hereby the Assyrians; or the
Israelites either, render the words a Nation meting out* and treading down;
arrogating so much to themselves, and acting accordingly.

the rivers have spoiled] The forces of the King of Assyria, say some, thus
should spoil the land of the Ethiopians. The others understanding here the
land of the Assyrians, conceive it here to be thus described by the rivers, and
the abundance and violence of them, and their streams in it.

All ye inhabitants] Esaias calls all the world to observe, verses following; the
one, for the Assyrian executing the judgment upon the Ethiopian: the other,
for God executing his judgment upon the Assyrian; asserting to himself the
defense and security of his own people.

In that time] A prophecy of the Conversion of the Ethiopians to Christ, Acts
VIII. 27, -- 39. As most hold.

shall the present be brought] By the Ethiopians, a present of their spiritual
services. Others expound it, a present of the prey of Sennacheribs army, chap.
XXXIII. 23. consecrated to Gods service, and in way of Thanksgiving to him.
Jer. LI. 44.

of Egypt Of Egypt see the Observations on Genesis

Of this burden of Egypt, see likewise Jer. XLIII. 10. and XLIV. 30. and XLVI.
2, 13. Ezekiel. XXIX. and XXX. and XXXI. 2, 18. and XXXII.

swift cloud] Swiftness for expedition: cloud, in an extraordinary manner; for
clouds are not ordinarily seen in Egypt, Psalm. CIV. 3.

a cruel Lord, and a fierce King] Which some understand of Sennacherib,
Nebuchadnezzar; some rather of one of their own Kings; as namely, Psammetichus,
who had been a petty King of one of the two Provinces, into which Egypt had
been divided after the death of Sethon, who had been King of the whole
Country before. But this Psammetichus at last overpowering the rest, made
himself Lord of all Egypt, and was the father of Nechoh, who slew the good
King Josias, 2 Kings XXIII. 29. See Herodotus, lib. 2. Diodor. lib. 1.

And the waters shall fail from the Sea] This may imply the impeaching of
their trade and traffic by Sea.

and the river shall be wasted] Nilus; upon which the wealth and felicity of
Egypt did depend. The miseries which should ensue upon the wasting and drying
up of it, are set down in the five verses following.

of Zoan] See Number. Psalm. LXXVIII. 12.

Land of Judah shall be a terror] Judah's overthrow shall fright Egypt;

In that day five Cities] A gracious prediction of the conversion of Egypt to
God, Jer. XLVI. 26. see the like comfortable closes, chap. VI. 13. and XVII. 7.
and XVIII. 7. and XXIII. 17, 18.

one shall be called the City of destruction] Or, of Here Is. Or, of the Sun.
See the Observations on Josh. XIX. 38.

at the border thereof] Alluding to that, Josh. XXII. 10, 24, 25, 27.

a Savior, and a Great one] Principaly the Lord Jesus.

Egyptians shall serve with the Assyrians] Both serve the Lord. Israel be the
third. All three, serve the Lord, ver. 24, 25.

In the yeare]

that Tartan] One of the three that Sennacherib sent to Ezekiah, 2 Kings XVIII.
17.

came to Ashdod] Of Ashdod, see the Annotations on Amos III. 9.

When Sargon] Of him, see the Observations on 2 Kings XV. 19.

and took it] Some say, in the twelfth year of Ezekiah: some in the fourteenth,
some in the fourth. But most likely, about the eight, or ninth year of Ezekiah
after Shalmanezers decease. And the Egyptians, and Ethiopians coming to the
relief of Ashdod, were by the Assyrians defeated, and carried captives, in such
scornful and despiteful manner; as is described, ver. 4.

the sackcloth] Not here a mourning weed: King. I. 8. Zech. XIII. 4. Mat. III 4.

naked] Not stark naked. But stripped of his Prophetical mantle. As, 1 Samuel XIX.
24. Joh. XXI. 7. Mic. I. 8. Act. XIX. 16. As captives are wont to be led.

three yeares] And well might the siege of Ashdod continue three years,
Samariah; most likely the Prophet went so three days, so forty days, for
forty years, Number. XIV. 33, 34. Ezekiel. IV. 4, 5, 6.

upon Egypt, and upon Ethiopia] Judgments denounced upon them before,
severally; upon Ethiopia, Chap. XVIII. upon Egypt, Chap. XIX. Here now upon
them jointly.

so shall] The explication of the sign. Ashdod.

And they shall be afraid] both the Ashdodites, Jews, that relied so much upon
their aid.

Isle] See the Observations on, Genesis X. 6.

of the desert of the sea] Babylon. And so there are many Sermons against the
Assyrians; and also against the Egyptians; by this Prophet. Babylon and Caldea
is here called the desert of the sea; a desert, because a large desert, or wide
Wilderness lay between Caldea, and Media; or, it self should be made so, by
the judgments ensuing. Or the word here used signifies a Plain, and in a
plain Babylon was built, Genesis XI. 2. And called a sea, because of the great
river Euphrates, on the banks whereof Babylon was built; and because of the
vast lakes made out of the river. And hence is Babylon said to sit upon many
waters, Jer. LI. 13. and ver. 36. I will dry up the sea.

As whirlwindes] such shall the violent irruptions be of the Medes and Persians
breaking into Chaldea.

The treacherous dealer] has now his match; Chaldeans, some to the Medes and
Persians.

and the spoyler spoyleth] Some apply only these words to the Medes and
Persians.

O Elam] The Persian.

all the sighing] Wherewith Babylon made my people sigh.

Therefore loines] Spoken in the person of the Babylonians.

The night of my pleasure] Even in their sestival night was Babylon taken by
Cyrus, Dan.

has he turned] Though it were done about 170. years after. This is an usual
Prophetic phrase.

Prepare the table] Most likely K. Belshazzars words,

arise ye Princes] Cyrus, and Darius.

set a watchman] Gods word to the Prophet. chap. VI. 1. For this seems to be
done, in a Vision; as that 1 Kings XXII. 17, 19, -- 22.

^earkened diligently with much heed] A through watch-master.

A Lion] Viz. leads them. Or rather,

my Lord, I stand] That watchmans words: professing his constant vigilancie.

here cometh] Even now are gone into Babylon,

Babylon is fallen] God himself expounding more fully to the Prophet, what this
apparition all tended to.

O my threshing] My threshed ones,

that which I have heard] Foreseen, and foreshewed, is no dream or relation
of my own devising; but what by revelation I have received from God. As, 1 Cor.
XI. 23.

Dumah] In Arabia say some. Edome say others. Another Prophecy;

He calls to me out of Seir] Seir so called from Seir the Horite, Genesis XXXVI.
20. in whose race it continued, until the Edomites, or posterity of Esau,
thence expelled them, Deuteronomy. II. 12.

Watchman, what of the night?] Either in a scoffing way. Or rather, implying a
distracting and hazardous condition of those by whom they were uttered, unto
whomsoever they were directed. What of the night? or, in the night. Or,
concerning the night, have thou seen, and observed? The night of black
affliction that at the present lay heavy upon them, they seem to enquire of.

The watchman said] As by Divine Oracle.

The morning cometh] either a fair morning; as ye suppose, having shaken off
that yoke wherewith Jacobs issue kept you under, Genesis XXVII. 40. Yet this
fair morning should not last long. In issue, this morning should be such a
morning, as shall afford you no light or comfort at all.

and also the night] Comes. A night of calamity and misery will by the
Assyrians ere long seize upon you; worse then the Israelitish yoke. And this as
sure, as night succeeds day.

If ye will enquire] Not scoffingly, but seriously; do it then with all
earnest, eager, and ardent inquisition.

return, come] Return to God; Come to his People.

upon Arabia] Another Prophecy. Arabia see the Annotations here. They did
wander up and down, and did pitch in tents, chap. XIII. 20. The Arabians were
near the Egyptians, 2 Chronicles XXI. 16. Mount Sinai was in it, Gal. IV. 25. Paul
went into it, Gal. I. 17. Solomon had yearly gold from all the Kings of it, 1
Kings X. 15. They traded with Tire, in Lambs, and Rams, and Goats, Ezekiel. XXVII.
21. They brought Jehoshaphat presents, flocks, 7700. Rams, and 7700. He Goats,
2 Chronicles. XVII. 11. But they rose up against his son Jehoram in battle; and
their camp slew all his eldest sons, save only the youngest, 2 Chronicles. XXI.
16. and XXII. 1. In Uzziah's time, God helped him against them, 2 Chronicles. XXVI.
7. Nebuchadnezzar subdued them, Jer. XXV. 24. Yet afterward in Nehemiah's
time, they eagerly endeavored to hinder him in the building of the walls of
Jerusalem, Neh. II. 19. and IV. 7, 8.

In the forrest] Leaving their abode in the champion, they should be driven to
seek shelter in the Woods. See Jer. XLIX. 28, 29.

O ye traveling companies of Dedanim] A people of Arabia, descended from
Dedan, one of Abraham's sons by Keturah, Genesis XXV. 3. These traveling
companies, are like those, Genesis XXXVII. 25, 28. We now call them Caravans.

Tema] Another people of Arabia: Ismaels race, Genesis XXV. 15. Arabia had in it a
mingled people. See Jer. XXV. 23, 24. Job VI. 19. This intimated unto the
Temanites, what distress their Countrymen of other parts of Arabia should be
brought unto.

For they fled] It was no groundless fear that makes them flee thus.

within a yeare] A shorter time that assigned to the Moabites, chap. XVI. 14.
Or that, to the Egyptians and Ethiopians jointly together, chap. XX. 3. the
Assyrian falling in upon these parts of Arabia, before those other of the other
Countries.

an hireling] Which reckons his year accurately.

Kedar] The son of Ishmael, Genesis XXV. 13. Another people of Arabia. They and
their Princes also occupied with Tire, in Lambs, and Rams, and Goats, Ezekiel.
XXVII. 21. They also dwelled in tents; and therefore called Scenites, which
they were wont to remove from place to place, to procure change of pasture for
their cattle. See Psalm. CXX. 5. Cant. I. 5. Nebuchadnezzar did smite them, Jer.
XLIX. 28. Yet in the days of the Gospel they should be converted unto Christ,
Esaias XLII. 11. and chap. LX. 7.

valley of Vision] Judah, Jerusalem, ver. 4, 8, 10. Jerusalem and Judea, were
full of mountains; and consequently of Valleys. And the Patriarchs, and
Prophets, had therein many Visions from God.

What aileth thee now] In this distress by Sennacherib, in the days of
Ezekiah. Rather then that by Nebuchadnezzar.

house tops] To lament, or look about for help, etc.

not slain with the sword] But,

they are bound by the archers] Or, from the bow. Their hands are so
restrained, and tied up with extremity of fear, that they are not able to
manage and make use of their bows. Or, they are bound and captived by the
archers of the enemies.

of crying to the mountains] So loud,

Elam] Under the Assyrian,

Kir] A City in Media, and under the dominion then of the Assyrian, 2 Kings
XVI. 9. Amos I. 5.

thou did look] About thee,

in that day] When the Country was full of foreign forces.

to the house of the forrest] The name of an armory situate within Jerusalem.
Most likely that which Solomon built, and called the house of the forest of
Lebanon, 1 Kings VII. 2. See the Observations there.

of the lower poole] See the Observations on Neh.

between the two walls] See 2 Chronicles. XXXII. 5. Jer. XXXIX. 4.

for to morrow we shall die] Either desperately:

revealed] The Lord of Hoasts did in my hearing reveal himself,

Shebna] He was a rotten-hearted man, and one that had much abused his power,
ver. 16. and chap. XXXVI. 3. He is called the Scribe, or Secretary, 2 Kings
XVIII. 18. Here, over the house; as high Steward. Wherein Eliakim succeeded. He
was one of the three sent out to Rabshake.

and will surely cover thee] With shame and sorrow. Ester VII. 8. 2 Samuel XV.
30. Job IX. 24. Ezekiel. XII. 6, 12.

Eliakim] Invested, Shebna.

they shall hang upon him] As things are wont to be hanged on a pin.

his fathers house, the offspring and the issue] All his kindred and allies,
as well small, as great shall partake of his honor, one way or other. Or,
there should be nothing in the Kings house but should be under his power, and
have dependence on him.

fastened in a sure place] As Shebna accounted himself to be.

^e cut downe] Meaning Shebna.

Tyre] Of Tire, See the Observations on Josh. XIX. 29. And the Annotations on
Amos I. 9. See the like Prophecies against this Town and State, Ier. XXV. 22.
and XLVII. 4. Ezekiel. XXVI. XXVII. XXVIII. chapters, Amos II. 9. Zech. IX. 2, 4.

Tarshish] Of this see the Observations on 1 Kings X.

from the Land of Chittim it is revealed to them] It is revealed, and the
report is come unto them that formerly traded with Tire, how it fared with her,
that she is sacked; so that now all harbor in Tire, or entrance into it is
denied unto them. Who these of the land of Chittim should be, there are
variable conjectures; but little certainty.

inhabitants of the Isle] Ye,

the seed of Sihor] Tire described here, Egypt; as formerly with Sidon. See
Ezekiel. XXVII. 7. By the great waters of the midland Sea, the grain of Egypt,
and all the trade and commodities of it, of Sihor, that is, Nilus, were brought
to Tire. Of this Sihor, or Shichor; and that it is Nilus, see the large
Annotations upon this Text.

the Sea has spoken] Tire.

The Lord of Hoasts has purposed it] By his Agents to do it. Nebuchadnezzar,
who spent thirteen years in the siege of it, as Josephus against Appion, lib.
1. does testify. And by Alexander the Great long after, in his rage; as
Curtius in his fourth Book, IV. Chapter does witness.

He] The Lord.

Behold the Land of the Chaldeans] This is, Tire may be so.

in that day] Wherein Tyres calamities here foretold shall be accomplished, by
Nebuchadnezzar. Ezekiel.

seventy years] During the same time of the Jews captivity in Babylon.

days of one King] One Kingdom; as, Dan. VII. 17. and VIII. 21. to wit, in
the days and reigns of Nebuchadnezzar, and his son, and his sons son,
Jer. XVII. 7.

sing as an harlot] To renew her lovers; her traders and traffickers.

turn to her hire] Of trading and traffic.

with all the Kingdomes] The amplitude of her commerce and trade, ver. 8.

Holiness to the Lord] The conversion of the Tyrians to God,

it shall not be treasured, nor laid up] Not reserved for any common or
profane use, public or private, for themselves or their posterity.

that dwell before the Lord] The Lords Ministers for their plentiful
maintenance, in food and clothing.

the earth empty] Another Sermon or Prophecy; Chapter XXVII. This is more
General then those going before: And comprehends Judea, and the neighboring
Nations on every side. And the judgments herein denounced, to be executed,
partly by the Assyrians, and partly by the Chaldeans, and afterward also by
others, upon them. See the like, Jer. XXV. 15, -- 38. and XXVII. 2, -- 8.

as with the people, etc.] All estates,

is defiled] The reason of the former denunciations.

The new wine] He proceeds in particular,

The Citie] Taken collectively, as, chap. XXV. 2. and XXVII. 10.

every house is shut up] So as there is no going out, or in.

as the shaking of an Olive-tree] Few shall be left, ver. 14.

from the Sea] The transmarine lands,

God in the fires] In the fires of tribulations,

uttermost] The generality of the joy of this Remnant left.

my leanness, my leannesse] The Prophet breaks off here his relation of the
gladsome joy, and praises of the foresaid Remnant; And falls into a passionate
bemoaning of himself, and regret, for the miseries, that were the mean while,
for their sins, to befall the others.

the windows from on high are opened] Gods vengeance surprising them,

the host of the high ones] Such as the Assyrian,

and after many days shall they be visited] In favor and mercy.

Then the Moon, etc.] Esaias closes this first part,

O Lord, etc.] Esaias falls into a solemn celebration and praising of God, for
his foresaid wonderful works, as well of judgment, as of mercy.

the Citie] Collectively.

of the terrible Nations] That were a terror to others, shall then stand in
awe of thee.

when the blast] Even in times of most need,

And in this mountain] Mount Zion,

unto all people] As well Gentiles, as Jews.

wines on the lees] Pure and strong wines.

The face of the covering] That ignorance and obstinacy,

veil] 2 Cor. III. 14, 16.

death] The second benefit accrewing to the convert Nations;

in victorie] Or, unto victory, i. e. until an utter conquest be made of him.
So the LXX. which the Apostle retains, 1 Cor. XV. 54 because the sense is
good and sound; though it do not exactly render the letter; for the Hebrew is,
for ever.

wipe away] A third benefit accrewing to the godly converted ones: fulfilled
partly in this life, and perfectly in the next.

Shall be said] Their thankful and joyful acknowledgement for those his mercies
and favors.

For] A reason of their rejoicing and triumphing.

in this mountain] Verse 6, 7.

Moab] Put for the enemies of Gods people in general.

And he] The Lord.

Swimmeth] Stretches out his arms with all his might. So shall the Lord in
powerful manner, reach and smite his enemies, on either side, Zech. V. 3.

thy walls] The walls of Moab, ver.

this Song] A large Song of purpose penned in this set form, Esaias, for Gods
people, then to be made use of, what time these foresaid benefits should betide
them.

For in the Lord Jehovah] Heb. Jah Jehovah. See the Observations on Psalm.
LXVIII. 4. Both used distinctly, Psalm. CXXXV. 1. Jehovah the usual name, etc.

the feet of the poore] He sets up his poor formerly afflicted ones,

Thou most upright] Esaias directs his speech unto God;

will learne] Or should learn.

for their envy at the people] Their envious and spightful carriage toward
Gods people.

yea the fire of thine enemies] The fire prepared for thine enemies, the fire
whereof they are the object.

Lord,] Esaias speaks still in the person of Gods people.

all our works] Those gracious protections, and strange deliverances, to God
alone they ascribe them; all our works, not done by us, but for us.

in us] Heb. unto us, to our hand, or for us.

They are dead] Gods dealing with other people and persons,

Thou have increased the Nation] He deals otherwise with his own people, ver.
19. though he variously afflict and chastise them.

we have not wrought any deliverance in the earth] By all their devices,

Thy dead men] In opposition to that, ver. 14. Thus Gods people relate their
faith and confidence in God, even in the midst of their deepest miseries:
Alluding happily herein, to the general resurrection at the last day.

my dead body] In this restitution, and National resurrection of the Jewish
people, no one of them shall fail to have his share in the same.

Come my people] Esaias having ended his Song;

In that day] Justice shall be done upon those,

even Leviathan that crooked Serpent] Collectively taken, not of any one
particular person alone, but of sundry great Tyrants, that had been principal
oppressors of Gods people, chapter XXVI. 13.

In that day] When the potent adversaries of Gods people shall be destroyed;

Fury is not in me] No implacable fury toward mine; Jer. III. 1.

Who would set the briars] Sinners set against me in their strength, should by
me be soon consumed.

Or let him] So much rather let the Sinner do.

He shall cause them] The blessing and benefit upon such as should so make
peace with him.

Has he smitten him, as] Not so.

In measure] Not over-roughly, Jer. XXX. 11. 1 Cor. X. 13. Psalm. LXXVIII. 38.

when he makes all the stones of the Altar] When Jacob,

yet the defenced Citie] But Gods dealing with his enemies shall be as
follows in this, verse, even without mixture of mercy.

in that day] Esaias,

the Lord shall beat off] Sever his dispersed people from the Nations among
whom they remained; to gather them to him, and his worship.

the great trumpet] Cyrus his Proclamation, I. 1, 2.

Woe]

Ephraim] Describes them, as men drunk with pride and prosperity, and drowned
in sensuality. Thus were the ten Tribes, whereof Ephraim was the head.

fat valleys] Under the mountain of Samaria.

and strong one] Salmanezer.

with the hand] By maine might.

unto the residue of his people] To Judah.

to the gate] Of the enemy;

But they] Even they of Judah, Ephraim.

Whom shall he teach] Their sensuality and and riotous excess,

Precept upon precept] Yet all to as little purpose to them,

another tongue] They no more reaped fruit from ought spoken to them, Cor. XIV.
21.

he said] God by his Prophets.

This is the rest] The only means to procure rest and refreshing.

But the word of the Lord] Through their obstinacy,

scornful men] Verse 15. 2 Pet. 2, 3.

are we at agreement] We have made provision for our safety, ver. 18.

come unto us] Or at us.

I lay in Zion] For the stay of the minds and hearts of the faithful ones,

a precious corner stone] Jesus Christ, Psalm. CXVIII. 22. Matthew. XXI. 42. Acts
IV. 11. 1 Pet. I. 4.

shall not make haste] But with patience wait and expect, Romans IX. 33. the
Apostle in his quotation renders it, shall not be abashed or confounded;
regarding not the words, but the matter. Or having an eye to this text, and
that also, chapter XLIX. 23. As in the former part of that quotation he joyneth two
places together, chapter VIII. 14. and XXVIII 16.

lay to the line] God will in an exact and precise way of justice proceed
against those sensual,

For the bed] They should be in such straits and distresses,

as in mount Perazim] 2 Samuel V. 20. See the like, X. 26. and XIII. 19.

Valley of Gibeon] Either, that 2 Samuel V. 25. Or, that Josh. X. 10.

his strange work] His dismal judgment; and that upon his own people; grown
to such an extreme height of sin and obstinacy. Strange, in it self, strange
to God, to deal so with the body of his own people.

lest your bands] Lest God tie them up the shorter for it.

a consumption] Of such of you, as so continue, through the whole land.

Does the ploughman] He does not always insist upon one piece of his work. And
so God will not always, and only be menacing.

Another Sermon seems to begin; and to continue, chapter XXX. and XXXI.

Woe] A sad prophecy against Jerusalem,

to Ariel] The word signifies a Lion of God. Hereby is meant the brazen Altar,
so called, Ezekiel. XLIII. 15, 16. and called Gods furnace or chimney, chapter XXXI. 9.

the Citie] Or of, Or in. Or, and to the City.

add ye year to year] Cause feastival sacrifices still to be slain.

and it shall be unto me as Ariel] The whole City shall be as an Ariel; all on
a light fire,

And I will camp] Bring an enemy to do it, verse 8. my self commanding them, as
in chief. This enemy may be understood both of the Assyrian Sennacherib; and
the Babylonian Nebuchadnezzar.

of thy strangers] All thy help's from abroad,

with thunder] In a most dreadful and direful manner.

As when an hungry man] Sets out the appetite,

and wonder] At the strange stupidity of the body of the people;

the Lord has powred] Verse 14. Observations on chapter VI. 10. See chapter XIX. 14.
And the Apostles allegation of this text, Romans XI. 8.

draw near me with their mouth] Matthew. XV. 3, 8, 9.

deep to hide] Hide deep,

as the potters clay] Lies as open to his eye;

Is it not yet, etc.] This seems rather a Promise, chap. XXXII. 15. That great
should be the fruitfulness of the Land, upon the restitution of their State,
either after the Assyrian devastation; or after the Babylonian deportation.

shall the deaf hear] Esaias here, verse, the joy of the godly, verse 19. the
confusion of those that wronged them, verse 20, 21. the vindication from shame
and fear; and the propagation and enlargement of the Church, by access of many
Proselites, verse 22, 23, 24.

In this, and the next Chapter, Esaias principaly bends himself against those
that sought and trusted to foreign helps and succors; and not to God.

Zoan] This; Hanes, otherwise called Tahapanes, and Tahpanhes, were famous
Cities in Egypt. Thither they sent for help against the Assyrian: and after,
against the Babylonian.

The burden of the beasts of the South] The burden that the beasts of the Jews
were to carry Southward into Egypt,

from whence come the young and the old Lion,] The way thither so dangerous.
And the Egyptians themselves should prove such and so dangerous to the Jews.

write it before them in a table] Or, write this prophecy on a table,

And therefore] Having reference to what follows. Notwithstanding, if it
relate to the premises.

Will the Lord wait] Here is matter of comfort, concerning the deliverance and
restitution of Gods people, ver. 18, -- 26. And the destruction of the
Assyrian, their enemy, ver. 27, -- 33.

and thine eares] Not as before,

Get thee hence] As Matthew. IV. 10. and chapter XVI. 23.

great slaughter] Of Sennacheribs camp.

towers fall] His great ones, and Princes in state and place.

as the light of seven dayes] Put all in one.

burning with his anger] The destruction of Sennacherib, chapter X. 33, 34. and
XIV. 24, 25. and XVII. 12, -- 14. and XXXI. 8, 9. and XXXIII. 13, 14.

the Nations] That served under Sennacherib.

causing them to erre] And wander to and fro, to make what haste they could
into their own Country again.

as in the night] Of their holy Festivals.

goes with a pipe] With music in the way going up to Gods House: to cheer up
themselves; the journey being sometimes long.

scattering, and tempest, and hailstones] It may seem that together with the
Angel smiting,

Assyrian] Sennacherib.

Tophet] See the Observations on 2 Kings XXIII. 10.

for the King] His forces, wherein he suffered; or those Kings that served
under Sennacherib: yea, his Commanders he counted as Kings, chapter X. 8. 33. For
himself, his Temple was his Topheth, chapter XXXVII. ver. 38.

This Chapter is of the same subject with the former.

for help] Against the Assyrians, chap. XXX. 6, 7. and XXXVI. 8. As after in
process of time, against the Chaldeans, Jer. XXXVII. 5. and XLIII. 5, 6, 7.

For thus] Here begins the Comfortable part of this Prophecy.

to fight for mount Zion] Far higher mounts incircled it.

As birds flying] And fluttering about their nests, Jerusalem, and those that
trust in him.

Turn ye unto him] And so should they partake of the promised protection.

children of Israel] Meaning here Judah.

deeply revolted] Hos. V. 2. and IX. 9.

cast away his idols] Wherein they trusted for help, chapter II. 20.

fall with the sword] Not of a man;

flee] As he did, chapter XXXVII. 37.

strong hold] To Nineveh.

afraid of the Ensigne] That God by his Angel had lifted up, in the slaughter
of their fellows.

whose fire is in Zion] Kept on his Altar there ever burning. Or rather, fire
to burn up the enemies of him, his worship, his people.

a King] Ezekiah. David, Ezekiel. XXXIV. 24.

Shall reigne] Hence some suppose this Prophecy to have been delivered in Ahaz
his days. Some in Hezekiahs, concerning his religigious and righteous
government of his people, specialy after the overthrow of Sennacherib; and his
recovery out of his sickness.

Princes] Under Hezekiah.

And a man] Each one under him.

in a weary land] Where men are weary of traveling, through heat, and drought.

not be dim] Or closed, as those, chapter XXIX. 10. and VI. 9. Not look another
way, chap. XXVI. 11.

Shall hearken] Not refuse to hear, as formerly, chap. XXVIII. 9, -- 13. and
XLVIII. 18. but hearkeu diligently, as chap. XXI. 7. and XXIX. 18. and XXX. 21.
and XXXV. 5.

stammerers] That did but stammer before at any good and religious speech,
Canaan, that which may minister grace and edification to the hearers.

no more called liberal] They shall no more call vice,

For the vile person] His description.

Churle] His description.

Liberal] His description. Hezekiah's reign, base-minded, and evil-affected
persons should not be now raised and advanced unto places of honor and
authority, as in his father Ahaz his time too many had been; and too likely
base and wicked Shebna: But now, only worthy men.

Rise up] Esaias here returns to speak of those troubles that were to come,

ye women] The Court-Ladies especialy, that were faulty, as the men; and the
more secure and careless, as less foreseeing dangers to come; and yet must
suffer in them alike, though less able to bear them then the men. Therefore
Esaias rouzeth up them; and by them, the men.

Many days and years] Heb. Many days above a year. Hezekiah, 2 Kings XVIII.
13. And afterward Hezekiahs life was prolonged fifteen years, chap. XXXVIII.
5. And he reigned but 29. in all, 2 Kings XVIII. 2.

for the teats] Which were to them as teats. There shall be beating upon the
breasts, Nahum II. 7.

shall come up thornes] Esaias seems here to pass from that short invasion of
the Assyrian, Nebuchadnezzar: As if he should say, I am now farther to acquaint
you with this later; and which is far worse every way, and of a far longer
continuance; in this, and the next verse.

for ever] a long time, about seventy years. Of, ever, see the Observations on
Deuteronomy. XV. 17.

Until the Spirit] Esaias concludes,

when it shall hail coming down on the forrest] God will preserve the fruits
of the earth for them,

and the City shall be low in a low place] Though the Cities built there, yet
shall be there secure, verse 18. even though, say some, it hail never so much;
and Cities be brought never so low.

Blessed are ye] Gods blessing on their husbandry and labors.

This Chapter seems to begin another Sermon, Chapters. And in the whole Sermon
Esaias mainly insists upon the destruction of the enemies of Gods people; and
upon their defense and deliverance, their privileges, and joyful flourishing
estate, thereupon ensuing, and opposed thereunto.

This Chapter is much of the same nature and subject with the former Chapter.

Woe to thee] Nebuchadnezzar; or rather Sennacherib, ver. 8.

they shall deal treacherously with thee] This may relate to Sennacheribs two
sons slaying their father, chapter XXXVII. 38.

O Lord] The Prayer of the faithful in time of trouble.

At the noise] This is in way of answer to the former Prayer.

fled] As the manner of the Prophets is, to speak of things future as past. So
it came to pass in the Assyrian Camp.

your spoils] Speaking to the Assyrians.

shall he run upon them] The Jew pillaging the Assyrian camp.

of thy times] O Hezekiah.

their valient ones shall cry] Show the disttesse of Gods people,

the Ambassadors] Sent with presents to Sennacherib, 2 Kings XVIII. 14. Or
those sent out to Rabshakeh, chapter XXXVI. 3.

He has broken the Covenant] Sennacherib did so, Kings XVIII. 14, 17.

Now will I arise] To help and deliver my people,

ye shall conceive chaffe] The Assyrians.

as the burnings of lime] Describes that fatal blow in the Assyrian Camp.

The sinners in Zion are afraid] Terrified with this dreadful execution done
upon the Assyrians, Number. XVI. 34.

with devouring fire?] With God, who is a consuming fire?

He that walketh] The Prophets answer.

Thine eyes shall see the King] A further blessing that such should enjoy,

the land that is very far off] Liberty to travel abroad in safety, unto the
remotest parts of the land, without danger or disturbance. Or, as some, remote
lands subdued by the King.

Where is the Scribe?] So now taunting Sennacherib, Cor. I. 20. either minds
not this Text; or alludes only to the phrase in it.

not see] For they shall be slain,

Look upon Zion] See how safe,

No galley] Of any enemy shall be able with help of wind and oars,

Thy tacklings] Speaking to the Assyrians.

the inhabitant] Of Jerusalem.

forgiven their iniquity] Being refined by their chastisements,

This Chapter, chapter XXIV. This being a Prophecy of the destruction of the
enemies of Gods people: And more particularly of the Edomites in Idumea: set
forth in many hyperbolical expressions.

And all the host of heaven] So strange and dreadful shall Gods judgments be,

Unicorns] Or Rhinocerots. See the Observations on Number. XXIII. 22.

for ever and ever] Heb.

The Cormorant] See the like, Chap. XIII. 18, -- 22. and XIV. 23. Zeph. II. 13,
14. Apoc. XVIII. 2.

Seek ye out] The certainty of this Prophecy:

they shall] These wild creatures shall.

This Chapter agrees much with chap.

Sharon] A fertile region, Lebanon, in the Tribe of God, and adjoining unto
Bashan, 1 Chronicles. V. 16. There were the Roses mentioned, Cant. II. 1. There had
David his herds feeding, 1 Chronicles. XXVII. 29. Likely it is the same with
Lassharon, Josh. XII. 18.

Strengthen ye] He incites them to hearten and encourge one another,

Then the eyes of the blind] Fulfilled in Christ's time,

For in the wildernesse] Literaly true in the Jewish Kingdom:

And an high way] They shall be blessed with peace,

the way of holinesse] A Type of the way to heaven.

but it shall be for those] Holy ones, verse 5, 6.

No Lion shall be there] As the way so plain;

This History is brought in to confirm and seal up the truth of some of the
Prophecies and Predictions aforegoing. This is recorded, 2 Kings XVIII. and
XIX. 2 Chronicles. XXXII.

came up] Upon pretense likely of the Contribution withheld by Hezekiah, Ahaz
had paid to Tiglath-Pilezer, 2 Kings XVI. 7, 9. and XVIII. 7.

without the Lord] Heb. Jehovah, Rabshakeh six times in his Speech.

Syrian language] See the Observations on Ezra IV. 7.

dung and pisse] See the Observations on 2 Kings X. 27.

and take you away] The manner of Conquerours to transplant the Natives.

Sepharvaim] Subdued before his time, Kings XVII. 24.

Eliakim] Now in Shebna's office and place. Shebna now the Scribe; and so here
is the beginning of his fall, chap. XXII. 20, 21. chap. XXXVII. 2.

This Chapter the same in substance with 2 Kings XIX.

a rumor] Verse 9. and 36.

So Rabshakeh returned] Most likely leaving the army still before Jerusalem.

Libnah] See the Observations on 2 Kings VIII. 22.

Lachish] See the Annotations on Micah I. 13.

Ethiopia] See the Observations on Genesis II. 13.

war with thee] Either to assist the Jews; Assyria, in the absence of
Sennacherib and his forces.

Thus shall ye speak] Instructions to his messengers, Hezekiah: Likely as if he
scorned to write himself to Hezekiah, but sent him only a Copy of the
Instructions.

Eden] See the Observations on Genesis II. 8.

Cherubims] See the Observations on Genesis III. 24. Annotations on Ezekiel. IX. 3.
and on this text.

a Signe] See the Observations on chap. VII. 14. Exodus III. 12.

ye shall eat this yeare] A confirmation of Sennacheribs sudden departure and
return home: And also including in it an assurance of a comfortable provision
of necessary food for them, out of the Land; notwithstanding all the havoc
that Sennacheribs armies had made in it; and the coincident Sabbatical year,
for intermission of culture. See the Observations on Lev. XXV. 21.

Then] In that night, Kings XIX. 35. the very next night after the message sent
from God, by Esaias.

and smote] The manner how is not expressed.

in the camp] Likely both before Jerusalem, and Libnah. See Chapter XXXVI. 2. and
verse 8, 9, 14, 33. of this Chapter.

all dead corpses] All in a manner. Yet some escaped, and sled with Sennacherib
himself. See chap. XVII. 14.

Nineveh] See the Annotations on Jonah I. 2.

his sonnes] These words here written; Kings XIX. 37.

Armenia] Heb. Ararat on the mountains whereof the Arc rested.

Esarhaddon] See the Observations on Ezra IV. 2.

In those dayes] Sennacheribs defeat and departure.

shall die] Yet a secret reservation there was. See Jer. XVIII. 7, 8. Ezekiel.
III. 18. See the Observations on Jonah III. 4.

to the wall] Which happily might be toward the Temple:

remember now] Humbly appealing to God,

wept s^re] One cause might be the want of a son. Manasseh was not yet born.
And the State of Church, and Commonwealth much unsettled.

Then] Before Esaias was gone out into the middle Court, Kings XX. 4. where the
text is City; but the margin, Court. And the first Court of the Kings house,
that nearest the Palace, and farthest from the street or City, seems here to
be meant.

to thy dayes] That he had lived already.

fifteen years] About the one half of his reign.

will deliver thee and this Citie] The promise before made, is again here
renewed; assuring him, as of his life; so of peace and tranquillity to be
continued to him, with it; that Sennacherib should not return; or any Assyrian
to molest him, or this City, 2 Chronicles. XXXII. 22. which yet afterward was done
in the days of his son Manasseh, 2 Chronicles. XXXIII. 11.

a Signe] Asked by Hezekiah, ver. 22. Kings XX. 8, 10.

So the Sun returned ten degrees] Not the shadow only: Cron. XXXII. 31. For
this miracle as it was visible in Judea, so in other parts of the world also;
particularly in Babylon; the King and Princes whereof observing the thing, yet
ignorant of the occasion, except by report only, which might deceive, for their
further satisfaction send Ambassadors to Hezekiah, not only to congratulate his
recovery, but to enquire of the wonder, 2 Chronicles. XXXII. 31. In this Miracle, if
the Sun went back in its ordinary pace and swiftness; and in like sort did
return forward again, then that Daylight must be long thirty two hours, if
by a degree, an hour be understood. If the Sun returned back ten degrees in
an instant, then it must be long twenty two hours. But by a degree here most
likely half an hour is understood. See more of this in the Annotations on this
text, and my Observations on 2 Kings XX. 9, 10, 11.

by these things men live] By thy promises, verse 15.

is the life of my spirit] As the life of all men is so continued; so by these
things is the life of my spirit miraculously prolonged, and I recovered; and
shall outlive in all the rest of my years that bitterness of my soul into
which I was formerly cast, ver. 15.

For Peace I had great bitternesse] Instead of it, and upon it; upon that peace
from the Assyrian, by his overthrow; then this grievous bitter affliction
suddenly surprised me.

a lump of figs] This might have no power in it;

that I shall go] So soon as within three days, Kings XX. 5. And for which he
asked the Sign, 2 Kings XX. 8.

Merodach Baladan] 2 Kings XX. Beredach Baladan. Of the change of letters, see
the Observations on Genesis IV. 25. and 2 Samuel VIII. 3. And of Names, see the
Annotations on Dan. I. 7. And on this text, Merodach, one of their Idols, Jer.
L. 2.

King of Babylon] Under the Assyrian.

glad] overmuch;

And of thy sonnes] Manasseh was carried thither, XXXIII. 11.

Eunuchs] Or Officers. Thus those of the posterity, and issue of Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. XXXVI. 6, 10, 20. Dan. I. 3, 4.

for there shall be peace] An humble submission preceding..

In the former Chapter Esaias,

Comfort ye] The Promulgation and approach of Gods purpose,

double] Abundantly;

The voice] The undoubted certainty of the performance of it, ver. 3, -- 8.

of him that crieth] This applied to John the Baptist more especialy, Mal. IV.
5. Matthew. XI. 14. Mark I. 2, 3. John I. 23.

surely the people is grasse] Yea, Peter applies this to the work of
Regeneration, wrought in the soul, by the Ministry of the Word, 1 Pet. I. 23,
24, 25. So, John VIII. 51. 2. John II.

O Zion, that bring good tydings] Or, A second command, for the promulgation
and proclamation of this good tidings to Zion, to Jerusalem.

be not afraid] Make no scruple or doubt of publishing it.

and his work before him] even that work, verse 11. lies open, and easy to him.

who has measared] A second proof of the undoubted certainty of Gods
performance of this his glorious Promise, ver. 12, -- 20.

To whom then will ye liken God] He is not like to Idols.

Have ye not known] Appliable both to the people of God;

yea, they shall not be planted] Be, as if not planted; etc.

How say thou, O Jacob] He taxes now his own people, who had been taught
better things, for their diffidence and distrust.

my way is hid from the Lord] He looks not after me, what I endure and
suffer; or what course is to be taken for my deliverance.

He gives power to the faint] He makes his might to appear in man's
weakness.

This is much of the same argument with the former Chapter.

Keep silence] God standing up to debate his cause,

renew their strength] To support themselves, and their Idols; and to hinder my
work for the recovery of my people, if they can.

the righteous man from the East] Cyrus from Persia, Cyrus herein a type of
Christ.

calling the generations] Having them at call and command.

saw it] These strange works of God, by Cyrus, set on foot for the deliverance
of his people.

and feared] Their own safety.

drew near, and came] Not to God; but to take counsel together, how to secure
and save themselves.

So the Carpenter] They made recourse to their Idols,

But thou] Confirms and strengthens his against all fear from the enemies;

whom I have taken] Abram from Ur of the Chaldees.

Sharp threshing instrument] To thresh the mountains; even thy greatest enemies.

I will open rivers] Rather then my people shall want means of comfortable
subsistence.

the Cedar, etc.] God will by his providence and provision so accommodate them,
as if such things had been done.

Produce your cause] God challenges the Idolaters to produce the strongest
pleas they can,

from the North] Cyrus, Media lying more Northerly; and Persia more Easterly,
ver. 2. He brought people and forces from both parts, against Babylon.

shall he call upon my Name] Or proclaim my name, Ezra. I. 1, 2.

who has declared] Which of your Idols?

from the beginning] Of old time; near two hundred years before it shall come
to pass.

he is righteous] That so he may be rightly called a God.

The first shall say] Or, Zion; I am the first that signified ought to Zion
concerning her deliverance; or the destruction of Babylon; and the persons by
whom these should be effected; which none of your Idols could do, ver. 26.

amongst them] Their Idols.

all vanity] The conclusion, of, and against their Idols.

Another Sermon, Chapters following; which are much of one Subject with the
former: Foretelling the Blessings that God would confer upon his people, partly
by Cyrus; and principaly by Christ: Discovering the vanity of Idols, and
sottishness of Idolaters: Taxing his people for their incredulity, blindness,
excesses, and obstinacy, the causes of their captivity: and yet Promising
pardon, and restitution, upon their sincere repentance.

my servant] Christ the Messiah, Matthew. XII. 14, 18, 19, 20. Some weakly, and
in a low degree, make also application of this; and what follows, to Cyrus, in
some sort herein as a Type of Christ.

thee] My Son,

neither my praise to graven Images] By my failings in my Predictions, and
promises.

of the rock sing] Of Petra, the chief City of Arabia, chap. XVI. 1.

The Lord shall go forth] To war, against the enemies of his people.

I have] The words of God himself. Chaldea, and of those that were adjacent,
and adjutant to it.

the rivers Islands] It was so done by Cyrus, Babylon.

And I will bring the blinde] Partly true, Jews out of the Babylonish
Captivity more true, spiritualy, in the Conversion of Jew and Gentile to grace
in the Kingdom of Christ, under the Gospel.

Hear ye deaf] Jews,

who is blinde] A reason why he gave his own people those titles, ver. 18.
because they deserved them, as well, yea rather, then any other.

as he that is perfect] Should be so; and has best means to be so.

opening the eares] In show at least,

he will magnify his Law] He is pleased to magnify his Law; as well by
execution of justice upon the transgressors of it, as by making good his
Promises unto those that observe it. Or, he magnified and dignified him with
his Law.

But this is a people] After all those favors and honors conferred upon them,

will give ear to this] To amend,

laid it not to heart] Their extreme stupidity;

But now] though a great part of my people continue still thus obstinate and
impenitent,

I gave Egypt for thy ransom] Exodus XIV. 20, -- 38. and XV. 9, 10.

Ethiopia, and Seba for thee] 2 Chronicles. XIV. 9, -- 15.

bring thy seed] by Cyrus temporaly,

Bring forth the blind people,] challenging the Gentiles, who were blind and
deaf, as their idols* to see if they can yet produce ought in defense of their
idols, ver. 9.

who among them] which of their idols could foretell those,

It is truth] that the Lord alone is the true God, and they all but base idols.

ye are my witnesses] ye my people;

and my servant] the Messiah: and in some degree, Cyrus.

that I am he] the only true God, ver. 12.

whose cry is in the ships.] Cyrus his draynings, to carry them in their flight
away: Or, they cry, to the ships, to the ships, for safety; as chap XXII. 5. to
the hills, to the hills. Yet some translate thus, the Chaldeans, together with
their choice ships which they vaunt of.

which makes a way in the sea] Red Sea; and Jordan.

Chariot] Pharaoh and his army.

they shall lie together] In the bottom of the Sea, Exodus XV. 10.

Remember ye not the fermer things] in comparison of the New; Cyrus; but
principaly and spiritualy by Christ.

I will even make a way] I will fit, Babylon.

they shall show forth my praise] Or at least should;

But thou] Have not been so careful to worship me:

me] But Idols,

I have not caused thee] Not I, but thine Idols have made thee at so much cost
with them, tyring thee out, as a slave to them, with such services.

But thou hast] Hitherto of their Failings; Faults. And all this, to show, that
the deliverance of them from their thraldom, was of his own free favor and
mercy, not for any merit of desert of theirs, as in the two next verses.

Thy first father] Or forefathers,

yet now] Notwithstanding all their sins;

I will poure] A type of that spiritual blessing,

One shall say] Gods blessing to them,

since I appointed the ancient people] The lineage of Abraham to be my peculiar
people.

things that are coming] Things to come, in a continued course, from the first
to the last, like lincks of a chain, hanging one upon another.

Is there a God besides me?] That can so foretell,

They that make a graven Image] The sottishness of them, ver. 9, -- 20.

Remember these] Their sottishness:

Sing, O ye heavens] At the redemption and deliverance of Gods people. Implying
such abundant matter of joy, as might well affect the whole Creation, were it
all sensible of it.

that frustrateth the tokens of the liars] Specialy those that would
prognosticate the long continuance of the Babylonian Monarchy.

messengers] Such as Esaias, Jeremy, Ezekiel, and others.

That says of Cyrus] Thus naming him about two hundred years before he was
borne. So to assure them of their deliverance by him.

This Chapter is also of the same subject with the former:

two-leaved gates] Such as great men's houses and Palaces are wont to have.

and create evil] Specialy to the Babylonians.

Drop down] A command of a Blessing from God: That Gods mercy and goodness
should so manifestly and plentifuly appear in the deliverance of his people,
and disposing all things for their behoof; as if the heavens, and the earth,
were full of blessings for them, even of righteousness, and salvation.

woe to him that] A curb to restrain the impatiencie of some,

Ask me] Or by interrogation;

raised him up] Cyrus.

build my Citie] Give order for it; and the Temple especialy, Ezra I. 1.

shall come over unto thee] How, Ezra I. 4. and chap. VII. 21, 22.

Some expound this whole passage of Cyrus himself; That because he had dealt so
freely with Gods people, God would therefore give him, as a reward, the wealth
of those rich Kingdoms, and Countries, which together with Babylon, of whom
they formerly held, at the fall of that State, fell also into his hands.

surely God is in thee] Or, with thee, with Cyrus typicaly; with Christ realy:
And he, in his Church.

verily] Esaias here admires the hidden depth of Gods dispensations,

I have not spoken in secret] As your false gods deliver their Oracles:

Assemble your selves] Ye that escaped the sword of Cyrus;

Look unto me] Leaving Idols, ver. 16, 17.

unto me every knee shall bow] And it is your wisest course therefore, to come
willingly in unto me, ver. 22. Psalm. II. 8, 10. The Apostle, Romans IV. 11.
applies this text to the last judgment, which is a thing herein necessarily
included.

be justified] God approving their innocence,

In this Chapter, Chapters before) is set down a full and pregnant Prophecy
against Babylon, and of her utter overthrow: and of Gods deliverie of the Jews
from her. Asserting withal, the vanity of the Babylonian Idols; and his owue
incomparable divine power, to effect it.

Bel] This Chapter begins with the ruin of their Idols: Observations on Judges
VIII. 33.

Nebo] Another of their Idols. Whose name is found inserted in many of the
names of their Kings, and Nobles; as Nabonassar, Nabopolassar, Nebuchadnezzar,
Nabuzaradan. The name imports Prophecy. And so this may seem, their Apollo;
as Bell, their Jupiter.

A burden to the weary beast] On whose backs the Medes and Persians lead them,
to carry them away.

which are borne] Minding them of his Divine power and love. ver. 1, 2.

and show your selves men] Not beasts,

Declaring the end from the beginning] Foretelling the issue of things; in a
continued course and progress, from the first to the last: which no other then
my self can do.

bird from the East] Cyrus from Persia; which is East from Babylon.

ye stout-hearted] Impious obstinate of the Jews: or rather, stomackful and
proud enemies.

far from righteousnesse] Or righteous dealing with my people.

my righteousnesse] In executing judgments on you;

This Chapter prosecutes the destruction of Babylon: State. And describes
throughout it, her dejected and despicable condition upon her overthrow,
together with the procuring Causes, and the suddenness, and unavoidablenesse
of it.

Uncover thy locks] Cast off thy stately head-tire;

as a man] But in full wrath,

in a moment, in one day] That night of Belteshazzars feast, Dan. V. 30.

This Chapter is also much of the same subject, Chapters XLIII. and XLIV.

out of the waters of Judah] The stock of Judah,

and thy neck is an iron sinew] A reason why God was pleased to foretell things
to his people, ver. 5.

new things] Yet further to convince thee of thy wilful obstinacy I acquaint
thee again,

very treacherously] In ascribing them,

For my Names sake] No merit of thine. My mercy and might,

but not with silver] Not so fully as silver,

my glory unto another] He is charie and jealous of a corrival.

loved him] Cyrus.

has sent me] Me the Prophet Esaias. This added, to give the greater assurance
of the truth and certainty of it.

Go ye forth from Babylon] Ezra I. 1.

Esaias having prophesied much of the Return of the Jews from the Babylonish
captivity; Chapter hitherto: does now mainly insist upon the instauration of
the Church by Christ; And plays the Evangelist, as it were, to the end of this
Book and Prophecy.

Listen, O Isles,] Christ calls for audience; Calling to his Office, by the
Lord, to be the Savior both of Jew and Gentile.

from the womb] Yet designed thereto from eternity, 1 Pet. I. 20.

my mouth like a sharp sword] God furnishes him with abilities to this great
office and work of man's Redemption.

Thou art my servant, O Israel, etc.] Or rather thus; Israel it is, in whom I
will be glorified by thee, the true Israel of God. And indeed to the Jews in
general he was first sent, as the minister of Circumcision.

whom man despiseth] Christ in the days of his flesh and humiliation.

Kings shall] Chap. XLV. 23. and LII. 15. Psalm. LXXII. 10, 11. Ephesians. I. 21
Phil. II. 10.

In an acceptable time] God the Father speaking unto Christ.

to establish the earth] Of Judea, to restore and settle the State of it
again, after their return from the Captivity: A Type of the other.

prisoners, Go forth] From Babels bonds,

They shall feed in the wayes] In their return from Babylon to Judea, God will
provide them of all necessaries in the way; and make it even and easy to them.

Sinim] Or, Sini, the Sinites, that lived in the desert of Sin, or about mount
Sinai. Or, from Sin, a chief City in Egypt, Ezekiel. XXX. 15, 16. And all this a
Type of those that out of all quarters of the world should be converted unto
Christ, and come in to him.

But Zion said] Her objection.

Can a woman] Gods answer, full of a tender affection to her.

gather themselves together] A Type of those numberless numbers that should be
brought home to the Church of God, under Christ, by the Ministry of the Gospel.

to the Gentiles] Their Conversion should make up this numberless number.

And Kings shall be thy nursing fathers] As Persian Emperors first;

and lick up] An expression of the lowest submission that may be.

even the captives of the mighty] Notwithstanding their pretended might and
right;

And I will feed them] And thus destroy their enemies.

This, Chapter, seem to make one Sermon.

Where is the Bill] A conviction of the Jewish people, verse 1, -- 9.

divorcement] Either, none at all; or not for slight causes, as they used to
give Bills of divorcement, but for great disloyalty, yet God ever had his
reserved remnant, in all times among them, Romans XI. 1, -- 5.

none to answer?] Their wilful obstinacy;

is my hand shortened?] No want of power in God, to deliver them.

tongue of the learned] The Prophet Esaias maintains his own Ministry, Esaias
there is no mention in the holy Story. And it is true, that the same may be
said of sundry particulars, in Psalm. XXII. and XL. and LXIX. applied expressly
unto our Savior Christ, in the New Testament, Matthew. XXVII. 34, 35, 43, 46.
Heb. X. 5, -- 10. And yet none make doubt, but that those Psalms, as they were
by David composed, so in his own person they concerned him; and that in all
likelihood, in some particulars which yet are not found expressly recorded in
the story of him. The like may be here.

my back to the smiters] Matthew. XXVI. 27. and XXVII. 26. John XVIII. 22.

He is near that justifies me] Saint Paul alludes to this, Romans VIII. 33, 34.
The Apostles manner is, to enlarge the promises of God, made to some particular
persons, as to Jacob, Joshuah, David, and others, Genesis XXVIII. 15. Josh. I. 5.
Psalm. XXIII. 1. extending them to all the faithful in general, as having a
joint interest therein, with them, Heb. XIII. 5, 6. And the Apostles argument,
borrowed hence, stands firm and good, in general.

Who is among you] An exhortation to the godly party among them, Esaias derides
them.

Hearken] Esaias returns to Comfort the godly party again,

alone, and blessed him, and increased him] And so I will deal with you.

shall comfort Zion] God can do, Abraham.

a Law] As a Law, Sinai; so a second Law, even the Gospel.

my salvation is gone forth] Aiming at Cyrus his Proclamation, I. 1, 2.

the Isles shall wait upon me] The Gentiles, at the law of the Gospel.

Awake, awake,] Spoken either in the person of Gods people; or by the Prophet
himself, moving in their behalf.

Rahab] Egypt.

Dragon] Pharaoh.

returne] From the Babylonish captivity.

and where is the fury?] The Babylonians are perished;

thy mouth] The mouth of Esaias.

that I may plant the heavens,] To make a new world, a new heavens, and a new
earth, chap. LXV. 17. and LXVI. 22. 2 Cor. V. 17, 18. 2 Pet. III. 13.

Awake, awake,] He largely declares the deep misery of Gods people; their
delivery; and the utter overthrow of their enemies; in the residue of the
Chapter.

To the thirteenth verse,

How beautiful] These bringers of good tidings of the delivery from Babels
captivity: Cyrus; spiritual by Christ.

Behold, my Servant] Here seems to begin a new Sermon; and continued in the
end of the next Chapter, jointly making up an entire Prophecy, of Christ, his
person, parentage, condition, manner of life, sufferings, humiliation,
exaltation, benefit redounding thence to his, and to himself.

shut their mouths at him] In admiration,

our report] Chap. John XII. 37, 38. Romans X. 16.

Stripes] Mat. XXVI.

Opened not his mouth] Mat. XXVI. 39, 42. 1 Pet. II. 23. Acts VIII. 32.

He was taken from prison, and from judgement] From all those harsh and cruel
courses, as under pretense of judgment were exercised upon our Savior,
whereby his life was taken from him.

And he made his grave, etc.] His burial was at the disposal of wicked ones,
and of rich ones, or Rulers, at his death. They not only took his life from
him, but disposed of his burial* at their pleasure.

he shall] Christ shall die no more,

by his Knowledge] Objectively. The words of God the Father.

justify many] The maine fruit and effect of Christ's Passion.

many] So, verse 12. Matthew. XX. 28. and XXVI. 28. Romans V. 15, 19.

Therefore I will divide him] God the Father will.

a portion with the great, and he shall] God would bestow many upon him, or
give many unto him, to be his subjects; whether with an allusion to a portion
of inheritance, or distribution of spoils, it is indifferent. This intimates
the numerous, or rather innumerable multitude of those that should be converted
unto Christ.

was numbered with the transgressors.] Mat. XXVII. 38. Mark XV. 27, 28.
Barrabbas let loose, rather then he should be let live.

made intercession] Luke XXIII. 34. Yet may relate further, to Christ's
intercession, which still continues, Romans VIII. 34. Heb. VII. 25. and IX. 24.
1 John II. 1, 2.

Another Sermon or Prophecy,

O barren] The Church under the New Testament; Cant. VIII. 8.

of the desolate] She that had been desolate: the Church of the Gentiles; then
that of the Synagogue of the Jews.

Enlarge] Thou Christian Church.

when thou wast refused] As in the time of the Babylonish captivity.

I have sworne] No express mention of that oath. Isaac, Psalm. CV. 9. yet
means as much as if he had taken a solemn oath; as he used in such solemn
Covenants.

nor rebuke thee] To forsake thee utterly.

For the mountains shall depart] Sooner may.

tossed with tempest] In the Babylonish captivity;

thy stones with fair colours] The spiritual excellencies of the Church under
the Messiah are here described in way of hyperbolies. See the like, Apoc. XXI.
11, -- 21. The stones here seem to be those of the Pavement.

borders] Or walls.

taught of the Lord] Jer. John VI. 45. 1 Cor. II. 10. 2 Cor. XIII. 3. Ephesians.
IV. 20, 21. 1 John II. 20, 27.

gather together] To attempt against thee.

No weapon that is formed against thee] By the Smith, ver. 16.

tongue that shall rise] To accuse or charge thee wrongfully.

their righteousnesse] The reward of their righteousness.

Ho,] Mat. XI. 28. John VI. 35, 37.

buy] This impeacheth not the freeness of the Gift. A Princes alms may be
said to be freely given, albeit it be required, that those that desire to share
in them, do repair to his Almoner. And a Scholar may be said to have his
learning freely given him, when no stipend is required for the teaching; yet
must he ply the School hard.

the sure mercies of David] Acts XIII. I will give you, for the fuller
explication, and fitter application of it; to his purpose. The like is, Luke
IV. 18. See Psalm. LXXXIX. and 2 Chronicles. VI. 42. touching these mercies of David.
But the full meaning is, The mercies of the Messiah, the David, not past, but
to come; the mercies before promised, and to be exhibited in, and by him; in
whom the Covenant is made with Gods people, and in whom all Gods Promises are
Yea and Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20. which Promises had never been made good, had not
Christ been raised up from the dead; And therefore the Apostle, Acts XIII. 34.
to good purpose alleges this Text.

I have given him] The words of God the Father concerning the Messiah.

And Nations that knew not thee] The Gentiles.

he has glorified thee] When after thy state of humiliation he shall have
glorified thee in heaven.

Seek ye the Lord] An exhortation both to Jew and Gentile,

his thoughts] They not free.

For my thoughts are not] But prone to pardon; and constant and immutable
therein: as that shows which follows.

For as the heavens] My disposition and dealings,

So shall the Word] My Promise to my people concerning reconcilement with them,

In stead] Relating to the Jews return out of the Babylonish captivity, chap.
IV. 2. and XXXV. 1, 2. The face and state of their Land and State should be
strangely altered to the better. And generaly the flourishing estate of the
Church of God, hereby is intimated, as abounding in spiritual graces and
comforts.

signe] Monument, Memorial, Trophie: an everlasting honor to God, and a sign
to his Church of his mercy to her.

Keep ye judgement]

Neither let the Son of the stranger] He comforts the Proselyte,

a Name better] Of great honor,

yet will Igather others to him] John X. X. 34, 35.

All ye beasts] Here seems to begin a new Sermon:

The righteous perisheth] Esaias here inserts somewhat for the Comfort of the
godly,

from the evil to come] As was the son of Jeroboam, 1 Kings XIV. 12, 13. and
good Josiah, 2 Kings XXII. 20. the evil, in the general ruin of the State, and
deportation of the people.

But draw neere] Esaias returns now to the surviving wicked ones;

are ye not, etc?] Deny it if ye can.

slaying the children] 2 Kings XVI. 3. Psalm. CVI. 37, 38.

is thy portion] Thine Altars, and thine Idol-service, is thy portion that thou
choosest and delightest in. As God is to his people, Psalm XVI. 5, 6.

a drink-offering] Used and annexed to most Kinds of sacrifices. Of this kind
were those, Jer. VII. 18. and XLIV. 19. offered to the Queen of heaven.

And thou wentest to the King] i. e.

unto hell] Abasing thy self to them in most servile manner.

thou have found the life of thine hand] Thou still imaginest so to do,

And of whom] Whom need thou to have feared,

have lyed] And dealt disloyaly with me.

my peace, even of old] My Lenity thou abusest.

thy righteousnesse] As thou esteemest it:

let thy companies deliver thee] Thy troops of strangers, or strange gods,
Judge. X. 13, 14.

And he shall say] God;

for the spirit should faile] This moves God, in way of commiseration to stay
his hand, Psalm LXXVIII. 38, 39. and LXXXIX. 47.

and will heal him] For my own Names sake,

Peace, Peace] Whereas before was no speech but of war; Now it shall be of
abundant peace and prosperity; and consequently of praise and thanksgiving. The
fuller complement of this is under the Messiah in the Gospel.

In this Chapter Esaias reproves them mainly for their Hypocrisy in Fasting.

and take delight] They seem so to do.

you find pleasure] You do not break off your sinful desires, minds,
pleasures, and purposes; but persist still in a purpose to pursue them; though
happily not upon the very day of the Fast to act them.

and exact all your labours] Debts, and services; with all rigor.

for strife and debate] Your fastings end in,

to make your voice to be heard on high] By your loud clamours used in your
prayers in the times of fasting. Or, that God on high should by fasting be
induced to hear your voice, and grant your requests.

Is not this the Fast] When it is joined with reformation and amendment of your
lives? Acts X. 2, 4.

Then shall thou call,] Then no cause to complain, verse 3.

the putting forth of the finger] Forbearing not acts of violence, and
threatening terms only, but even all gestures, and expressions of that kind
whatsoever.

and makes fat thy bones.] Fill them with marrow,

the old waste places] Of Jerusalem, Judah, and other like places.

thy soot from the Sabbath] Thy affections, and ways, which would pollute the
Sabbath. Whether it be the yearly, or the weekly Sabbath.

a delight] See Psalm. XXVII. 4. and XXXVI. 8. and XLII. 1, 2, 4. and XLIII. 2,
3, 4. and LXV. 1, -- 5. and LXXXIV. and CXXII. 1, 2.

honor him] In it; by sanctifying him, and it.

thine own wayes] Wicked works, and courses.

nor speaking thine own words] Those, verse 9.

to ride upon the high places of the earth] Aloft, chapter XXXIII. 16. Deuteronomy. XXXII.
13.

This Chapter relates their various enormous iniquities; verse 1, -- 15. And a
promise to the faithful ones, of deliverance from them; and of spiritual
mercies and blessings in and from the Messiah, ver. 16, -- 21.

is not shortened] Either to hear,

spiders web] To entangle and destroy others.

he that eateth] There is no safe dealing any way with them.

Their feet] Romans

not know peace] Experimentaly, to have and enjoy it. See Phil. III. 10. Apoc.
II. 17.

Therefore is judgment far from us] God stands off far from you,

our transgressions are with us] Stick close to us;

is fallen] For want of support.

cannot enter] But is shut out by violence.

a prey] He cannot be safe,

wondered] Spoken in an humane strain, Romans III. 9, -- 19. the Apostle
concludes hereupon the universal depravation of mankind, in his natural
condition.

no intercessor] No interpo^er.

his arme] He did the work alone himself.

brought salvation] Temporal, verse. 17, 18, 19. Spiritual, verse 20, 21.

breast-plate] Here is God,

repay] Vengeance to the enemies of his people.

And the Redeemer] Romans XI. 26. the Apostle applies this verse to Christ; and
the conversion of the Jews, when the fullness of the Gentiles be come in.
Where the Apostle retains the Ancient Greek version, as Hierom witnesses it
to have been in his time, having nothing in it disagreeing from truth, or
crossing that in ought for which he alleges it. This then cannot have
relation to the Angel slaying Sennacheribs army; or to Cyrus, further then as
Types of Christ, and his spiritual deliverance. And Esaias uses to slip from
temporal deliverances, in a close way, unto spiritual; and to close up the
Prophecies of the one, with the Promises of the other.

my Covenant] Of sending the Redeemer to them; Zion, his Church.

This Chapter contains the glorious state of the Church under the Messiah;

Thy light is come] The night of affliction is over;

glory of the Lord] In thy deliverance, and restoration.

But the Lord shall arise] The Sun of righteousness, Mal. IV. 2.

And Gentiles] To congratulate with thee,

and thine heart shall fear] With admiration,

shall come in to thee] By tendering both themselves,

Ephah] The posterity of Midian, Genesis XXV. 4.

the praises of the Lord] Repairing thither not for traffic, but to worship,
Acts VIII. 27.

the house of my glory] My Temple,

what are these] A question moved by Zion, touching their multitude; and speed.

Surely] The Answer returned.

first] With the first, or among the first.

their silver] Ezra I. 4, 6, -- 11. chapter LXVI. 20. and LV. 5. Romans XV. 16.

sons of strangers] Proselytes.

Kings] Cyrus, and others his successors.

and I will make the place of my feet glorious] The Ark, Zion, all resembling
the Church. verse 7.

such the breasts of Kings] Being as thy foster-fathers, chap. XLIX. 23. and
LXVI. 12.

For brasse] Thy damages shall be repaired with advantage,

thine exactors righteousnesse] Overseers; not such as shall pill and poll
thee, exact upon thee; but deal most righteously, moderately, and mercifully.

thy walls salvation] All should be safe with them,

The Sunne] Their chief and principal light and comfort should consist in such
a plentiful enjoyment of Gods gracious love,

Thy Sunne] Not clouded,

Thy people] Sanctified here,

inherit the land for ever] The new world, chap. LVII. 13. and LXV. 17, 18. 2
Pet. III. 13. Apoc. XXI. 5, 7. Canaan was a Type of this.

the branch of my planting] My in the margin: his in the text. The meaning may
be this, A branch of my plantations (by way of eminency and excellency,) a
work of my hands, to glory in.

A like one] A miraculous multiplication of the Church.

in his time] Speedily, when its due time is come, and till then they must
expect, chap. XIII. 22 and XXVIII. 16. and XXXVIII. 18. Hab. II. 3. Luke I. 20.

This Chapter is much of the same matter,

The Spirit of the Lord] Christ's calling to his Ministry, Esaias here. Christ
applies this to himself, Luke IV. 18.

has anointed me] In a special manner above his fellows, Ps. XLV. 7. Acts X.
38. Col. II. 3, 9. Heb. I. 8.

good tydings] Whence our Gospel; signifying, not Gods-spel or Word; but
Good-spel, Evangelium.

to proclaim liberty] Temporal, by Cyrus; spiritual, by Christ, Luke IV. 8.

year of the Lord] Relating to the Jubilee.

of vengeance] For his people, of their Oppressors.

build the old wastes] Upon their return to their own country,

And strangers shall stand] As servants waiting and attending on their Master.

the Priests of the Lord] In that repute, Pet. II. 9. Heb. XIII. 15. Apoc. I.
6. and V. 10.

For your shame, Honor, verse 6. as 1 Timothy V. 17. Zech. IX. 12.

possess double] Double in extent, or double in worth upon Gods blessing, when
they return to their land again.

love judgement] And therefore will right and repay the wrongs and damages
done to my people.

and I will direct] As verse 7. returning them a reward in lieu of their
misery: And directing their affairs in a successeful course, in a prosperous
way.

shall be known] Eminently, Psalm. LXXVI. 1.

I will greatly rejoyce] A solemn acknowledgement made in the Churches name,
of the manifold blessings of God, bestowed on her; mentioned, verse 3. and 7,

For Zions sake] Esaias his resolution constantly to solicit God, chap. LX. and
LXI.

thy righteousnesse] The Prophet Esaias turns his speech to Zion. a new name]
Verse 4. chap. LXV. 15.

Hephzibah] i. e. Psalm. XVI. 2.

Benlah] i. e. married.

thy sons marry thee] Thy sons shall as in marriage possess thee,

thy God] Christ, God and Man.

I have set] Spoken in the person of God. Have; Or, will. Watchmen] Prophets,
and Pastors.

make mention] Are his remembrancers; specialy by office and function.

arme] Let me not be deemed Almighty, chap, V. 9. and XXII. 14.

Go through,] The gates of Babylon, chapter XLVIII. 20. and LII. 11.

gather out the stones] That nothing may hinder them in the way.

Proclaimed] By Cyrus.

thy salvation] God thy Savior, as Luke II. 30.

sought out] Or,

Who is this] This seems to have relation to that, chap. LXII. 11.

Esaias asks this question, to whom the sight or apparition was offered in a
vision or ecstasy.

from Edom] Idumea. And Bozrah, the head-Citie of it. Put here for the enemies
of Gods people.

died garments] Verse 3. Apoc. XIX. 13.

glorious] Gorgeous; as great Commanders and Generals use in war; and
returning in triumph from the slaughter. See Psalm. LXVIII. 7, 8, 21, 22, 23.

travelling] Marching, stalking, with a stately gate, as victor.

I] Gods answer.

thou red] Says Esaias again.

I have troden] Gods answer to Esaias again. Lam. I. 15. Sometimes the wine press
of Gods wrath, to expiate the sins of his people, Apoc. XIX. 15. Here, the
enemies of his people as grapes in a wine press.

alone] In the greatness of his strength, verse 1. So, Deuteronomy. XXXII. 12. Yet
see verse 12. in this Chapter. And so, Zech. IV. 6. The power of the instrument
is from him alone. Some application of this may be made to that, Apoc. XIX. 15.

them] The Edomites, none of them to withstand me, nor any other assistant to
me.

stain all my raiment] Not with my blood in my passion; but the Edomites blood.

none to help] Chap* LIX. chap. XXVI. 18, 19. and XXXVII. 3, 36. 2 Chronicles. XX.
12, 15, 16, 17.

drunck] With their own blood.

Here seems to begin a new Sermon; and to continue to the end of the next
chapter.

I will mention] Esay's thankful acknowledgement of Gods great goodness, and
manifold mercies, to his people.

so he was their Saviour] Upon those hopes,

In all their affliction] He took to heart their afflictions, Psalm. CVI. 44.
Zech. II 8.

the Angel] Christ the Messiah, Exodus XXIII. 21, 22, 23. and XIII. 21. and XIV.
10, 24. Genesis XLVIII. 24. Mal. III. 1. Acts VII. 38.

But they rebelled] Their ungracious and rebellious demeanor toward God.

Where is he] The Prophet, Judge. VI. 13. The want of this enquiry is complained
of, Jer. II. 6, 8 And punished with the want of Gods presence in time of
adversity, Hos. V. 6. And thereupon that admonition is, Chap. LV. 6.

Look down] A prayer of the people,

Where is thy Zeale] What is become of them? Psalm. LXXXIX. 49.

the sounding of thy bowels] Chap. XVI. 11. rumbling, yearning in compassion, 1
Kings III. 26. Jer. XXXI. 20. Hos. XI. 8.

though Abraham be ignorant of us] As being dead, Israel long ago.

made us to erre] By denying us the conduct of thy Spirit; Sam. XXVI. 19. Psalm.
CXXV. 3. See the Observations on chap. VI. 9, 10.

but a little while] In comparison of thy promise.

This Chapter begins in the middle of a verse,

would rent] Considering the indignities, chap. LXII. 18.

come down] Psalm. XVIII. 9, -- 16.

terrible things] Of old, Ps. LXXVIII. and CV. and CVI. Nehem. IX. Exodus, III. 8.

welooked not for] Were then unexpected, or beyond expectation.

mountains flowed down] Judge. V. 5. Psalm. XLVII. 5. Deuteronomy. IV. 11. Exodus XIV. 3,
9. Hab. III. 3, -- 15.

For since the beginning of the world] This brought in, chap. LXVI. 8. The
Apostle, 1 Cor. II. 9. seems to have made use of the Prophets words in this
verse, applying them to his present discourse; as he does those other of the
Psalmist, XIX. 4. in that place of Romans X. 18.

that waits for him] 1 Cor. II. 9. that love him. And those that wait for
him, do love him.

For thou] A continuation of their commemoration of Gods dealings for,

meetest] Or, did meet, was wont to meet. As, Luke XV. 2c. Psalm. XXI. 2, 3.

him that rejoices, and works righteousnesse] Him that rejoices to work
righteousness, and delights in well-doing, Deuteronomy. XXVIII. 47. Psalm. II. 11. and
XXXVII. 4. and LXVIII. 3. and CXII. 1. and chapter LVIII 13.

in thy wayes] Of Providence; and of precepts and direction.

in those is continuance, and we shall be saved] In those thy ways. Or, in our
sins; and shall we be saved? interrogatively: importing the clean contrary.
Or, in those righteous works, and by their being with and among us, is our
continuance, and means of being saved.

But we] And so none of us fit to intercede. ver. 4, 5. Psalm. CVI. 23. Those
are now all gone, verse 7. Jer. V. 1. Mic. VII. 2. Psalm. XII. 1.

our righteousnesses are as filthy rags] So noting out, not the defects and
defilements, the inbred vitiosities of mere infirmities; in all the best
works, even of the best, and in the best manner performed; But the vile and
abominable practices which had so highly incensed the Lord against his people.
And the most righteous among us, for all our outward semblances of holiness
and righteousness, are indeed no better then such, Micah VII. 4. 2. Sam.
XXIII. 6. 7.

None] So few, as are drowned in the multitude.

hold of thee] To stay thee with us;

But now] A pathetical imploration of Gods favor and mercy.

thy people] thy peculiar people] Chap. LXIII. 19. Deuteronomy. V. 3. and XXIX. 10, --
15.

Our holy and our beautiful house] Chap.

burnt] 2 Kings XXV. 9. Lam I. 7, 10.

refrain thy self] Can thou endure to see them,

Another Sermon.

I am sought of them that] Romans Acts XIII. 46.

not called by my Name] Chap. LXIII. 19.

I have spread out] To the Jews, Romans X. 21. See Romans XI. 11, -- 24.

in gardens] To their Idols.

altars of brick] Of matter,

which remain among the graves] To consult with spirits, chap. VIII. 19. Deuteronomy.
XVIII. 11. 1 Samuel XXVIII. 8, 11.

and lodge in the monuments] In their idol-temples; or, in Caves under ground,
happily to expect dreams from their imaginary deities; or among the corpses; as
that possessed man did, Mar. V. 5.

and broth] Wherein unclean flesh had been sod.

stand by thy self] Though themselves so impure and vile, Luke VII. 39 Such
sinners would yet be such Saints.

a smoak] A continual provocation, and vexation to me.

written before me] Upon record in my sight.

and the iniquities of your fathers together] Though God lay nothing upon any
person, Sam. III. 12. Lam. V. 7. Matthew. XXIII. 32, 35, 36. 1 These. II. 15, 16.

a blessing in it] The little liquor in the cluster argued life and sap to be
in the plant;

not destroy them all.] A Remnant still reserved and saved, ver. 9. for the
propagating of the Church, Jer. XXX. 11. Amos. IX. 8.

Sharon] Under Libanus,

valley of Achor] Near Jericho.

that prepare a table for that troope] Feasts, Jupiter.

that furnish the drink-offering] Heb. that fill mixture; i. e. wine, Apoc.
XIV. 10. Psalm. LXXV. 8. Prove. IX. 2. strong wine is in these places meant,
without mixture of water. For they would not offer such to their Idols; though
in their ordinary drinking they did mix it for themselves.

behold] A strange alteration,

by another name] Verse 16. chap. LXII. 2, 4, 12. as being in another state and
condition, then you, or they formerly. Such a name as should be used, not in
Cursing, but in Blessing. See Hos. I. 6, 9. and II. 1, 23. Rom IX. 26. 1 Pet.
II. 10.

I create new heavens] A further more strange alteration. John I. 16, 17, Acts
II. 17, 33. Heb. IX. 9, -- 12. And hereunto is this change applied chap. LXVI.
22. 2 Cor. V. 17. begun here: to be perfected in heaven, 2 Pet. III. 13. Apoc.
XXI. 1, 5.

and the former] Jer. III. 16. 1 Cor. II. 9. 2 Cor. III. 7, -- 10.

But be ye glad] Gods speech, chap. III. 10. and XXX. 10.

the childe] He that was once a child. verse 22.

but the sinner] Such among them as remained still unreformed, unrefined,
unreclaimed, though he live never so long, shall at length prove a cursed wretch

as the days of a tree] As the Oak,

before they call] Chap. LVIII. X. 12. and IX. 20, -- 23. Luke XV. 18, 20. Acts
X. 44. and XI. 15. John XIV. 13, 14. and XV. 7, 16. and XVI. 23, 24, 26.

The wolf and the lamb] Such as had been of a wolvish disposition formerly,
chapter XI. 6, -- 9.

Another Sermon,

The heaven in my throne,] Cited Acts VII. See Psalm CIII. 19. Matthew. V. 34.

where is the House] That ye have, or should, or can, build unto me, when as I
fill heaven and earth with my presence, Jer. XXIII. 24 See 1 Kings VIII. 27.
Acts XVII. 14, 25. And this is to take off their minds from the Temple of
Jerusalem, wherein they overmuch trusted, and gloried, Jer. VII. 4.

place of my rest] Psalm. CXXXII. 8, 14. Not but that he can well be without
them; as he was also before they were. He needs no house to receive him, nor
service of man to be done to him, Psalm. XVI. 2. and L. 10, 11. He needs not
these things, as their idols do.

contrite spirit] John IV. Psalm. XXXIV. 18. and CXXXVIII. 6.

He that kills an Oxe] For sacrifice. Chron. XIII. 10, 11. But when they
rested in these outward things and exercises, without any grace and goodness
in the soul, and with much filthiness, and wickedness in their hearts and
lives, God loathes their persons and their sacrifices, chap. I. 11, -- 14. Prove.
XV. 8. and XXI. 27. Jer. VI. 20. and VII. 21, 22, 23. Amos V. 21, 22, 23. Micah
VI. 6, 7. Ezekiel. XX. 39.

blessed an idol] With a Present or oblation, Genesis XXXIII. 10. and XLIII. 11.

I also will choose] An implication of a Retaliation; chap. LXV. 12. Levit.
XXVI. 27, 28. Psalm. XVIII 26. Jer. XXXIV. 17.

their delusions] Passively, or objectively; their illusions or mockages, that
they shall be exposed and subject unto. As they have made choice of such ways
and courses, as please not me; so will I make choice of such things for them,
as they shall find small pleasure in.

their fears] Prove. X. 24.

that cast you out] Either by unjust Censure, under pretense of a legal
proceeding; John IX. 34. and XVI. 2. See chap. LXV. 5. Lam. IV. 15. Niddui a
word of this root is the lowest degree of Excommunication in the Jewish Church

for my Names sake] For your loyalty to me; As, Matthew. X. 22.

Let the Lord be glorified] Spoken in way of derision. Let him manifest his
might and majesty, in doing some remarkable matter for you, if ye be so dear to
him, as ye deem your selves to be. Thus jearing their trust and confidence in
God; As, chap. V. 19. Psalm. XXII. 7, 8. Matthew. XXVII. 43. 2 Pet. III. 3, 4.

but he shall appear] The answer to that jear.

A voice] Esaias breaks out into these words, chap. XIII. 4. Jer. L. 22, 28. and
LI. 54. A voice of noise of the destruction of Jerusalem, and the Temple, by
the Chaldeans, or by the Romans.

from the Temple] To control their vain confidence in it; as implying, how
little relief or safeguard they should then receive from it, Lam. II. 20.

to his enemies] Most likely, the obstinately wicked amongst the Jews, verse
V. 14. chap. LXV. 6, 7, and I. 24.

Before she travelled] A prophecy of the strange sudden, Babylon by Cyrus,
done at an instant by his Proclamation: not with so much ado, as that was out
of Egypt. Here Zion is like the Hebrew women, Exodus I. 19. But principaly this
relates to the times of the Gospel, and the Christian Church, under Christ; to
which the other is subordinate.

a man-child] Collectively multitudes are meant, verse 8. Ezra II. 64, 65. Acts
II. 41. and IV. 4.

shall I] Set upon a work,

suck] Chap. LX. 16.

and your bowes] Shall get vigor, Ezekiel. XXXVII. 1, -- 10.

come with fine] Toward and against his enemies.

They that sanctify themselves] Using superstitious rites of expiation.

in the gardens] Set apart for idolatrous services.

behind one in the midst] Or, one person, or company after another; possibly
purifying themselves in the fountain in the midst of the garden.

It shall come] Since this people do take such courses, ver. 3, 4. I will
execute judgment upon them, and casting them off, take in the Gentiles, Romans
XI. 11, 12, 15, 17.

Set a signe] A Sign or Ensign to gather them. Ezekiel. IX. 4, 6. Apoc. VII. 3.
and IX. 4.

those that escape of them] The reserves and holy remnant of the Jewish Nation,
the Apostles, and other faithful, to all Nations, to call them in by the
preaching of the Gospel.

your brethren] In Christ, chap. LX. 4, 9.

for Priests, and for Levites] Make of them Ministers of the Gospel.

For as the new heaven] Chap. LXV. 17. Heb. XII. 28.

remaine] Stand, continue for ever, Matthew. XVI. 18.

to worship before me] By allusion in terms to the old Jewish manner of
worship, Zech XIV. 16.

and look upon the carcases] Be spectators and witnesses of the execution of
Gods vengeance upon those wicked ones, verse 15, 16. Psalm. LVIII. 10.

for their worme] Hell here is principaly intended. See chap. XXX. 33. Matthew.
III. 12. and X. 28. and XVIII. 8, 9. and XXV. 41. James V. 3. Apoc. XIV. 10,
11. and XIX. 20. and XX. 14, 15.

Jeremiah.
JEREMIE, a Priest of Anathoth in Benjamin, prophesied forty one years, and
upwards; thus, From the thirteenth of King Josiah's reign, to the end of it,
being nineteen years; eleven in the reign of Jehojakim; and eleven in the
reign of Zedekiah, chap. I. 1, 2. and chap. XXV. 3. and XXXIX. 11. And he
prophesied some years after that, in Judea first, and Egypt last, chapter XLII. 2.
and XLIII. 10. and XLIV. 8, 24. But how long is uncertain. He was much opposed
by false Prophets: and sustained much hard measure from the Priests, Princes,
and People. And after the taking, and destruction of Jerusalem, City, and
Temple, we read of his usage, chap. XXXIX. 11, -- 14. and chap. XL. 1, -- 6.
and XLII. 2. and XLIII. 2, 6. Jeremiah in this Book mainly preaches against
the sins of the Jews. And for them foretells the ruin of their State by
the Babylonians, which he lived to see; and to lament in his Book of
Lamentations. He foretells the LXX. years captivity there; Their return thence,
and happy enlargement under that blessed Branch, the Messiah; And he propesieth
also in the latter part of his Book against other Nations, the Enemies and
Oppressors of Gods people, against Egypt; the Philistines; Moab; the
Ammonities; Edom; Damascus; Kedar; Hazor; Elam; And foretells chiefly the utter
ruin of Babylon, and the Empire by Cyrus; the Medes and Persians.

His Chapters as they now stand numbered, and placed in the Hebrew text, and in
our English Translations, if they were rancked according to the course and
Histories of the times, and the things done in them, after the first twenty
Chapters, would follow in this ensuing Order, keeping the numbers of the
Chapters that we now have, 20. 22. 23. 47. 26. 25. 36. 1 -- 8. 45. 46. 36. 9 --
32. 35. 27. 24. 49. v. 34 -- 39. 29. 30. 31. 28. 51. v. 59 -- 64. 21. 32. 33.
34. 37. 38. 39. 40. 41. 42. 43. 44. 48. 49. 50. 51. v. 1 -- 59. 52. Thus much
varying from the Order wherein we have them. The LXX. also marshal them in
another rank and order much differing from the Hebrew Text. And as Chapters
here are thus displaced; so also in Daniel partly. And the Hebrew Text seems
sometimes not so rightly to divide the Chapters, as Esaias LXIV. And in our
English Bibles, Chapters sometimes are not so fitly and exactly divided, as
Esaias 4. 1. and 26. 20. and 52. 13. 14. 15. And in other Books. No nor verses
neither; as Esaias 53. 9, 10. and 58. 9. and 59. 15. The end of his Book, Chap.
52. 31 -- 34. was written by some Prophet after Jeremies death. But when, and
where he died, is not recorded.

in the thirteenth year of his reigne] Then Jeremie was called from being
ordinary Priest,

captive] There were Captives under Jehojakim, Jeconiah: But this is the last
and greatest of Jerusalem it self; when both City, and Temple was sacked, and
burnt, and the Kingdom destroyed, in the days of Zedekiah.

in the fifth moneth] This might end the eleventh year of Zedekiah's reign,
chap. LII. 12

Then] When God first called him. Chapter, the manner of his Calling; and such
general instructions as God was pleased then to give him concerning his
carriage in it, and discharge of it.

I sanctified thee] Designed thee to be a Prophet: Gal. I. 15. See the like use
of the word, Esaias XIII. 3. This stretches not to inward sanctification; as
that of John Baptist does, Luke I. 15.

Nations] Both Jews, and other Nations also, verse 10. Chap. XXV. 15, etc. And
chap. XLIII. and XLVI. and XLVII. and XLVIII. and XLIX. and L. and LI.

I cannot speak] Not dumb, Zachary, Luke I. 20, 22. or slow, and stammering,
as Moses, Exodus IV. 10, 14. But that he could not deliver such a message in
that manner as was fitting; considering his childhood, and weakness, wanting
that gravity, etc.

put forth his hand] In a Vision.

to root out] By publishing my word, chap. XVIII. 7, 8, 9. A foolish
application is made of these words to the Popes pretended power over Kingdoms.

came unto me.] Seemingly at the same time with the former.

What see thou?] See the like, Amos VII. 8. and VIII. 2. Zech. IV. 2. and V.
1.

I see] In a Vision.

Almond tree] That does bud and blossom, the earliest of any.

hasten my word to perform it] 2 Kings XXIII. and chap. XXIV. 2.

a seething pot] Resembling Jerusalem.

Kingdoms of the North] Babylonians,

gird up thy loines] Address thy self manfully to thy employment.

In this Chapter Jeremy directs his speech and Sermon to the whole body of the
State, viz. minding them of Gods mercies and favors toward them; taxing them
for their base and unworthy thy carriage toward him; convincing them of their
extreme folly and madness, in bringing mischief and misery upon themselves;
and forewarning them of the sorry success they should find by relying on such
as would not be able to relieve them.

the kindness of thy youth] What kindness, Psalm. CVI. 4. Esaias XLVI. 3.

when thou wentest] Gods kindness to them then, even though they then did but
ill deserve it, Psalm. CVI. 7, 32, 33. Amos V. 25, 26.

what iniquity] No fault in God,

mine heritage] As dear to me,

and with your childrens children will I plead] As I formerly pleaded the cause
with your forefathers, chap. VII. 25. 2 Chronicles. XXXVI. 14, 15. Pleads here upon
a new ground, verse 10, 11. Though they had no cause to plead with him, v. 29.

Kedar] In Arabia;

desolate] Lose your luster.

Is Israel a servant] That he is so servilely,

The young lions] Former judgments upon them;

Noph and Tahapanes] Cities in Egypt.

Sihor] Nilus.

river] Euphrates. The two broken Cisterns, v. 13.

when upon every high hill] Notwithstanding thy Promises and engagements.

see thy way in the valley] God points them,

dromedarie] A swift beast, whence in Greek it has its name. A lesser and
lower kind of Camel, very rife in Arahia; and much used by Curriers there.
Strabo l. 15. Diodore l. 2. c. 54. Leo Afric. l. 9.

A wild Asse] Male, Ezekiel. II. 9. Jonah. I. 17. and II. 1.

snuffeth up the winde] Of lust, after the male or female.

in her month they shall find her] When she is heavy with young, goes near
her time, and cannot so easily shift for her self.

withhold] A wholesome admonition and Caveat;

will I go.] Whatsoever comes of it. And so they are past cure, and past care.

to a stock] The ignorant idolatrous Jew no worse then the ignorant idolatrous
Papist:

Arise, and save us.] Judges X. 10, 13, 14, 15.

of thy Cities, are thy gods] Tutelar gods. As Papists had their Tutelar
Saints, to every City, Parish, Corporation, trade, sickness, etc.

See the Word of the Lord] As, Micah VI. 9. See Deuteronomy. XXIX. 2, 3, 4. Prove. XX.
12. Eccles. I. 16. Psalm. XVII. 2. and LXVI. 18. Jer. II. 19.

we will come no more unto thee.] We have no further need now of thy support;
we can do well enough without thee.

forgotten me] Their ornament,

why trimmest] Esaias LVII.

thou also taught] Wicked Harlots may learn of thee; by thy evil example.

but upon all these] The skirts of thy garments,

to change thy way] Ranging up and down,

ashamed] 2 Chronicles. XXVIII. 20.

from him] Heb. this; place: into captivity.

The five first verses seem to belong to the former Chapter and Sermon.

shall he return unto her again?] Clearly No. Deuteronomy. XXIV. 1, -- 4. Neither
could his heart brook it.

lien with] So, Deuteronomy. XXVIII. 30. In both places the over-mannerly Masorets
check the Penmen of Scripture, in appointing an honester term to be read, in
the room of that they found written. See the Observations on 2 Kings X. 27.

as the Arabian] As Thamar did, Genesis XXXVIII. 14. See Ezekiel. XVI. 24, 25, 31. or
to truck and trade with them.

from this time] Of my Correcting thee, v. 3. and chap. II. 25.

My Father] Lamenting, as a child to his father offended.

thou have spoken] As formerly, v. 4, 5.

and done evil things] But still do evily and wickedly.

as thou couldest] Get opportunity, and have ability; As, Micah II. 1.

A new Sermon in Josiah's days.

backsliding Israel] The revolt of the then Tribes: and Gods Bill of divorce
thereupon given her.

her treacherous sister Judah] Not fearing, Israel, v. 11.

but feignedly] In the days of good Josiah. Kings XXIII. 32, -- 37. 2 Chronicles.
XXXVI. 12, 14.

North] Whither the ten Tribes were carried. Ezekiel. XX. 46. and XXI. 2.

one of a Citie] God would make such an exact inquiry and search for them, one
only of them in a City, or some two only in a whole Country, yet he would,
etc. See a parallel place, Esaias XXVII. 12.

in those dayes] After the enlargement and growth of the Church under the
Messiah.

The Arke] An utter cessation of Legal Rites, under the Messiah. Now they
should have no miss of it, no want, or use of it at all.

Jerusalem] Gods Church; Call. IV. 26. Apoc. XXI. 2. See Esaias LX. 14.

and all the Nations] Esaias II. 2.

neither shall they] Israelites, or Proselyte-Gentiles.

Judah walk with the house of Israel] They shall be reconciled together.

land of the North] From Chaldea, and Assyria. The spiritual deliverance, and
restitution of them by Christ, being shadowed out in these Prophetical Sermons,
by those temporal deliverances and restaurations. So, chap. XXXI. and XXXIII.
Esaias XI. and LIVE. and LX.

But I said] I had such thoughts as these with my self.

How shall I] Demanding of them, how he should do so great things for them,
whenas they had dealt so perfidiously with him, in times past, verse 6, 9, 13,
20. Somewhat like that, Hosea VI. 4. and XI. 8.

and I said] After such cross thoughts to dissuade me, yet at length I
resolved to do it, upon the condition following; which in effect God promises
to effect in them.

surely as a wife] God requires her to engage her self to such future loyal
carriage;

A voice was heard] Or, Esaias XIII. 4. bewailing their sins, chapter XXXI. 19, 18.

Returne] Gods exhortation,

we come] Their Answer; and Confession, to the end of the Chapter.

O Israel] Doubtful, Judah.

in him] In God.

men of Judah and Ierusalem] Them he exhorts to repentance;

Break up] Hosea X. 11.

Blow the Trumpet] To give warning of the enemies approach.

toward Zion] Whereby men may be admonished to repair toward Zion,

The Lion is come] Nebuchadnezzar.

thou hast] The false Prophets in Gods Name; verse; those he blames for
promising them peace.

unto me] To do my will against them.

from Dan] The utmost bound Northward, Babylon, chapter VIII. 16.

Ephraim] North-border of Judah; by which Nebuchadnezzar must come.

watchers] Hostile forces, v. 17.

my bowels,] The Prophets passionate grieving at the miseries of the war upon
his people, chapter IX. 1. Esaias XXII. 4 bewailing their folly that would take no
warning.

my tents spoiled] The tents of my people.

I beheld] In a spiritual rapture,

the earth] The Land of Judea. Very Rhetorical delineations do follow of their
miseries by this invasion of Nebuchadnezzar, graphicaly as in a Map described.

yet will I not make a full end.] But reserve a remnant.

rentest thy face with painting] Noted as a whorish practice in Jezabel, Kings
IX. 30. in Aholah* and Aholibah, Ezekiel. XXIII. 40.

if ye can find a man] Zeph. Sodom; how much is it stranger that not one in
Jerusalem, a larger City? See the ecumenical contagion; and yet Gods
marvelous mercy. So Genesis XVIII. 32. Yet here, by a man, and any, we are not to
tie it up to one individual person; No doubt more then one such there were:
among those, chap. XXVI. 16, 24. and chap. XXXVI. 25. in Jehojakims time. And
in Zedekiahs time, during the siege there were Ebedmelech, Jeremie himself, and
others. The meaning must be, to understand scarce a man, very few, no
considerable number, worth the speaking of; that a man might go to and fro for
a long time in it, and yet not light on any man, one, or other, that were
sincere and upright. See the like, Genesis VI. 1. Psalm. XII. 1. and XIV. 2, 3.
Esaias LXIV. 6, 7. Micah VII. 1, 2.

The Lord liveth] Of swearing, Observations on Hos. IV. 15.

These are poore] Poverty may put them upon evil courses.

a Lion] Nebuchadnezzar, and his forces.

Go ye up] Gods Commission to the Chaldeans.

not a full end] Verse 18. chap. IV. 27.

not he] That thus threateneth, Jeremie and some others.

a Nation] The Chaldeans.

O house of Israel] Of Judah, who are of the lineage of Israel.

which have eyes, and see not] Esaias XLII. XII. 2. Acts XXVIII. 26, 27. See the
Observations on Esaias VI. 9.

they catch men] As Jezabel set a trap, Naboth.

they overpasse the deeds of the wicked] They surpass them. Psalm. LXXIII. 5.

and the Priests bear rule by their meanes] Priests;

This Chapter is full of plagues and judgments,

Benjamin] Which Tribe adhered still to Judah; Jerusalem; and joined to the
North-side of it, Josh. XVIII. 28.

flee out] Before flee unto it, for succor; chap. IV. 6. now to flee out of
it, to escape: yea, out of the Land, chapter X. 17.

Tekoah] A fenced City, built by Rehoboam, 2 Chronicles. XI. 5, 6. Where Amos was
among the herdmen, and called to be a Prophet, Amos I. 1. And where that wise
woman dwelled, 2 Samuel XIV. 2.

Bethhaccerem] Nehem. III. 14. Very many Cities in Jurie, begin with Beth.
There set up a sign of fire, or fire a Becon, to give warning of the
Babylonians approach.

Wholly oppression] As if all made of it.

before me continually is grief and wounds] Their grievances and woundings one
another,

Be thou] A summons to Repentance.

Turn back thy hand] Gods speech to the Chaldeans.

To whom] The Prophets Speech.

I am full] The Prophet cannot longer hold it in.

the aged] With the decrepit.

were they ashamed] The false Porphets.

stand ye] The seduced people;

we will not] Their wilful obstinacy.

Nations] God calls all the world to witness.

To what purpose] So long as their lives and courses were such as had been
showed, Esaias I. 11, -- 15.

Sheba] Psalm. LXXII. 10.

I will lay stumbling-blocks] I will bring those things upon them that shall be
means of ruin and mischief to them, Ezekiel. III. 20. and VII. 19.

I have set thee] God to his Prophet.

They are all] The Prophets answer.

One only verse in Jeremie is written in the Chaldee-language; for the ready
use of the Jews there, among, and against the Chaldeans Idols; viz. that in
Chapter X. v. 11.

The seventy years captivity, or serving the King of Babylon, Chapter XXV. 11. take
their rise and commencement, not from the last of Zedekiah; But from the first
of Nebuchadnezzar, and third or fourth of Iehojakim; if not from the last of
Iehojakim; and captivity of Iechoniah. See Jer. XXV. 1, 11, 12. and XXIX. 1, 2,
3, 10. Ezekiel. XL. 1. and XXXIII. 21. 2 Chronicles. XXXVI. 21, 22.

Rach l (who kept her fathers sheep, and had her name from Sheep or Ewe) her
weeping for her children, chap. XXXI. 15. applied mostwhat by way of Allusion,
to the mothers weeping for their children, Matthew. II. 17, 18.

Jonadab, the son of Rechab; and not Rechab, the Author of that Injunction
and Inhibition, to his Posterity; Chap. XXXV. 6, 8, 14, 16, 18, 19.

The Command concerning the Yoakes, chap. XXVII. 1, 2, 3. was either enjoined
in the beginning of the reign of Jehojakim, (and so the reign of
Nebuchadnezzar, and of Zedekiah, propheticaly foreseen and foretold by
Jeremiah) And was after executed in the reign of Zedekeih, when the Messengers
of those neighboring Kings, verse 3. came to Zedekiah, to congratulate him in
the Beginning of his reign; or to solicit him to rebel against
Nebuchadnezzar, in the fourth year of his reign, chap. XXVIII. 1, 10. Or
otherwise Jehojakim, in chap. XXVII. v. 1. must by error of the Scribe be
crept in, for Zedekiah; mentioned again, v. 12. which thing in all Copies may
not be admitted.

He shall be called, The Lord our Righteousness, chap. XXIII. 6.

She shall be called, The Lord our Righteousness, chap. XXXIII. 16. The Lord
is our Righteousness.

Iehojakim is made King by Pharaoh Necho, and paies to him the tribute imposed,
2 Kings XXIII. 31, 32, 34, 35. slaies Uriah the Prophet, Ier. XXVI. 20, -- 23.
And in the third or fourth year of his reign, and first of Nebuchadnezzar, he
was conquered by Nebuchadnezzar; as Jeremie foretold, chap. XXV. 1, -- 11. And
he served him three years, 2 Kings XXIV. 1. In which time he burns the Book
written by Baruc from the mouth of Jeremie, chap. XXXVI. After rebels against
Nebuchadnezzar. And at last, after that, 2 Kings XXIV. 2. he is taken by him,
and bound in fetters to be carried to Babylon, 2 Chronicles. XXXVI. 6. But dying by
the way, his dead body is cast out, and he buried with the burial of an Ass;
as Jeremie foretold, chap. XXII. 18, 19. and XXXVI. 30. And so he slept with
his fathers, 2 Kings XXIV. 6.

Zedekiah saw with his eyes the eyes of the King of Babylon: But not Babylon it
self, where yet he should die in captivity: Having his eyes put out by
Nebuchadnezzar at Ribla, Jer. XXXII. 4, 5. and LII. 10, 11. Ezekiel. XII. v. 13.
and XVII. 16.

In the first year of Zedekiahs captivity and nineteenth of Nebuchadnezzar,
Nebuzaradan came, in the fifth month, seventh day, unto Jerusalem: and after
two days preparation, and taking order about it, on the tenth day burnt the
Temple, Kings house, and all the great men's houses. Or, began to burn them on
the seventh day, which fire continued burning, and came to its height, or end,
on the tenth day, Jer. LII. 12. 2 Kings XXV. 8. Jews carried capives into
Babylon, by Nebuchadnezzar: in his
I. Year; and third, or fourth month of Jehojakim; Daniel* and his three
Companions; and others. And part of the Vessels of the Temple, Jer. XXV. 1.
Dan. I. 1, -- 6. VII. Year; and eleventh and last of Jehojacin; 3023. Persons.
And, it seems more Vessels of the Temple, Jer. LII. 28. 2 Chronicles. XXXVI. 7.
VIII. Year; with Jehojakim; men of might, and apt for war, 10000. out of all
Jerusalem: and 1000. Smyths: and more Vessels of the Temple; and cut them in
pieces, 2 Kings XXIV. 13, 14, 16. 2 Chronicles. XXXVI. 10. And at that time,
Mordecai, Ester II. 5, 6. And Ezekiel; who calls it his Deportation, Ezekiel.
XXXIII. 21. and XL. 1. XVIII. and XIX. years; and last of Zedekiah; He carried
away Zedekiah; and 832. persons. And all the rest of the Vessels of the Temple,
great, and small. And by Nebuzaradan the Captain of the Guard, burnt the City
of Jerusalem, and the Temple; brake down the Walls: slew Serajah the High
Priest, and the second Priest; and twelve other principal men, and sixty others
brought to him to Ribla by Nebuzaradan; Ier. LII. 11, -- 29. 2 Kings XXV. 8, --
21. 2 Chronicles. XXXVI. 17, 18, 19. XXIII. Year; and fifth of Zedekiah's captivity,
by the aforesaid Nebuzaradan; 745. Ier. LII. 30. This was after the murder of
Gedaliah.


Their number at their Return out of the Captivity was far greater, Ezra II.
64, 65. Neh. VII. 66, 67.

Leopard] Or rather an Ounse,

I am weary with repenting] God repents, Genesis VI. 6, 7. and in many other
places. But this is not properly Repentance, such as is in man. Man Repents
with trouble of mind and conscience, for some fault, or out of fickleness, or
through some oversight, or impotence. In which respects God cannot Repent, Number.
XXIII. 19. 1 Samuel XV. 29. Mal. III. 6. James I. 17. But he is said to Repent
improperly. And so this, and other Humane Passions, in some semblance, are
ascribed to him improperly for our better apprehension. And thus God is said to
Repent, when he does as men use to do when they Repent, 1 Samuel XXV. 33, 34.
When he undoeth what he had done before, revoketh a doom that he had passed
before, stays the execution of a Sentence that formerly he had denounced,
withholdeth the punishment denounced against sin when the Persons repent of
the evil of sin. So, Judge. X 13. 15, 16. 1 Kings XXI. 21, 27, 29. Jonah I^I.
10. Ier. XVIII. 8, 10. and XLII 10. Psalm. CVI. 45. The end being thus
accomplished for which the doom was denounced: Without which Repentance in
man, God will not Repent of his purposed punishment; Esaias XIV. 24, 27. Ier. IV.
28. Zech. VIII. 14. Thus Repentance in man produces this kind of Repentance
in God. Man Repenting changes his mind, will, and act: But God Repenting,
willing this change in man, alters the act; His mind and purpose abiding
still the same, Ier. XX. 16.

Shallum] This seems to be the same with Jehoachaz, Johanan, 2 Kings XXIII.
30. 1 Chronicles. III. 15. And that Shallum named, 1 Chronicles. III. 15. seems to be
another from this Shallum, as being reckoned distinctly the fourth son of
Josiah, and happily dying before his father Josiah. See the Observations on 2
Kings XXIII. 31.

Branch] Is taken for the Messiah. And so, chap. XXXIII. 15. and Zech. III. 8.
and VI. 12. Esaias IV. 2. XI. 1. Yet that King, Esaias XXXII. 12. and XXXIII. 17.
seems properly and immediately to be understood of Ezekiah; of Christ only
Typicaly. And that, Esaias VIII. 18. and XLIX. 1. and chap. LXI. 1. of Esaias
partly, but of Christ principaly. As likewise that, Esaias XLIX. 1. And that,
Esaias VIII. 8. Of Esaias literaly, of Christ figuratively, Heb. II. 14. And
again, Esaias XLII. 1. of Christ principaly, of Cyrus Typicaly. That Esaias XLI.
2. of Cyrus only. Many speeches of the Prophets, concerning themselves, and
others who were Types of Christ, are in the New Testament applied to Christ;
being one way, and in one manner verified of them; and another way, and in
another manner also, many times fulfilled in him. And so those words, 2 Samuel
VII. 14. compared with 1 Chronicles. XXII. 10. and Heb. I. 5. And those, Heb. II.
13. Yea, in diverse Prophecies, some Particulars agree to the Type, and not to
the Truth; as, Psalm. XXII. 6. and XL. 12. Some to the Truth, and not to the
Type; as, Psalm. XVI. 10. with Acts II. 29. and XIII. 36, 37. Or to the Type in
one sense; to the Truth in another: so in those Psalms wherein David is a Type
of Christ, as Psalm. II. and XVI. and XXII. and those in which Solomon, as,
Psalm. XLV. and LXXII. Christ is called the Branch, because springing up as a
bud or sprout from the root of Jesse, Esaias XI. 1, 10. And so from David, Apoc.
V. 5. and XXII. 16. Psalm. CXXXII. 11, 17. Acts XIII. 23, 32. called the
Righteous Branch, in this Text, and chap. XXXIII. 15. springing from a withered
stock and stump, and sprouting at first in a mean and despicable manner, Esaias
XXXIII. 2, 3, 4. Yet after branching out beautifully, retaining its verdure
perpetualy, spreading and growing, flowering and flourishing to all eternity,
Dan. II 44, 45.

A man] See the Annotations on Esaias II.

uncles sonne] Son omitted in the Original, verse. 7. preceding. As likewise
the word Sister seems to be omitted, 2 Samuel XXI. 8. And the word Brother,
Verse 19. of that Chapter.

Funeral Burnings, Chr. XVI. 14. This was denied to the wicked King Jehoram, 2 Chronicles. XXI. 19. yet granted here to Zedekiah, in Babylon: And that burning of
the Flesh of Saul, and his sons, 1 Samuel XXXI. 12. was a case extraordinary,
and as their present condition, and that exigent seemed to require.

when they cut the calf in twain, etc.] The manner of making Covenants; whence
the Hebrew phrase is to Cut a Covenant, that is from the right of Cutting a
beast in twain, sometime for Sacrifice, sometime for Feasting; and the
Covenanters passing through between the Parts of it; implying it seems, and
that by way of execration, Themselves to be alike cut in sunder in case of
violating the Conditions of the Covenant, Matthew. 24. 51. Though some make the
Cutting to relate to the strict and exact cutting out of Articles agreed upon
for mutual performance by both parties, Gen XV. 9, 10, 17. Deuteronomy. XXIX. 12. Of
Covenants, see more between man and man, and between God and man, Genesis IX. 9,
-- 17. Genesis XXI. 27, -- 32. and chap. XXVI. 28, -- 31. and chap. XXXI. 44, --
55. Exodus XXIV. 4, -- 8. Deuteronomy. V. 2, 3. whence the two tables are called the
Tables of the Covenant; and the Ark, the Ark of the Covenant. And the
Tabernacle, The Tabernacle of the Covenant; the Book of the Law, the Book of
the Covenant, Josh. XXIV. 24, 25, 26, 27. Neh. IX. 38. 1 Samuel XVIII. 3, 4. and
XXIII. 18. 1 Kings V. 12. and XX. 34. 2 Kings XI. 17. and XXIII. 3. Ezra. X. 3.
Esaias LIX. 21. Jer. L. 5. And God promises to make a New Covenant with his
people, Jer. XXXI. 31, 32, 33, 34. cited, Heb. VIII. 8, 9. which yet is not
simply New, in regard of the substance of it: for the maine matter and
substance of the former Covenant is there, verse 33. And, Genesis XVII. 7. Deuteronomy.
XXVI. 17, 18. and XXIX. 13. And both Covenants ratified by the blood of the
Messiah. But as Love is called a New Commandment, John XIII. 34. So this a New
Covenant; in that it is ratified by the death of our Savior exhibited; in that
the Doctrine of the Gospel is now more fully and clearly revealed; in that this
runs wholly upon the spiritual, and celestial Blessings; in that the
Ceremonials are removed, and the more Spiritual Service substituted for it; in
that it is more generaly dilated and enlarged to all Nations; in that a large
measure of Spiritual Gifts and efficacy of the Spirit is now vouchsafed; in
that the continuance of it, without change, is to be to the end of the world.

has sworn by himself] Having no greater to swear by, Heb. VI. 13. So, Genesis
XXII. 16. Jer. XXII. 5. Amos VI. 8. By his soul; So is the Hebrew in this text,
and chap. LI. 14. By the excellency of Jacob, Amos VIII. 7. By his Holiness,
Amos IV. 2. And again, the Form of his Oath is thus expressed, As I live,
Heb. I. live, so, Jer. XXII. 24. and XLVI. 18. Ezekiel. V. 11. And, I live for
ever, Deuteronomy. XXXII. 40. So men use to swear, The Lord lives, Jer. IV. 2. and V.
2. As the Lord lives that made us this soul, Jer. XXXVIII. 16. Gods oath shall
undoubtedly be fulfilled, Psalm. CX. 4. and CXXXII. 11. Heb. VI. 17, 18. Of
Oaths, see more in the Annotations on Hos. IV. 15. and Genesis XXIV. 3.

carried away captive] Babylon are mentioned in Scripture.

Lamentations.
THese are not those of Jeremie, for Josiah, 2 Chronicles. XXXV. 25. No more, then
those were for him, Ezekiel. XIX. 1, 14. which indeed were commanded to be taken
up by Ezekiel, for Jehoachaz, and Jehojakim; But these were written by Jeremie,
in the time of the Babylonish captivity, after the Temple of the Lord, and
City of Jerusalem were burnt, and destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar: Lamenting here
those more then lamentable miseries; As the whole Matter and Contents of this
Book does declare: And particularly, that very passage it self, chap. IV. 20.
which is appliable properly to King Zedekiah; and not to King Josiah. The LXX
and Jerome, does express this very time, in the beginning of the Book it self.

These Lamentations are full of Pathetical expressions. And for the weight of
the Matter, and the Help of Memory; The first, second, and fourth Chapters do
contain twenty two verses apiece, according to the number of the Letters of
the Hebrew Alphabet; and do begin each verse with one of them in their order
methodicaly. And chap. III. contains 66. verses, treble the former number: And
begins each three of them, with one letter of the Hebrew Alphabet, in the order
methodicaly. The last Chapter only is without this Art.

Many Signs of Lamentations are expressed here. Which from hence, and other
Scriptures, may more fully be gathered, thus; Sighing, Mourning; mournful
Songs; weeping, howling; Fasting; changing of the garments, mourning women,
Ier. IX. 17. 2 Chronicles. XXXV. 25. Amos V. 16. rending of the Clothes; wearing
black, and sack cloth; sitting on the ground, and keeping silence; lying
prostrate upon the ground, sitting, lying, covering, rolling, wallowing in
ashes; in dust, and ashes; casting up dust, ashes, earth upon them, and their
heads; spreading, and wringing the hands; laying the hands upon the head;
smiting with the hand; stamping with the feet; hanging down the head;
uncovering the head, and bare, and again in some ages, the covering the head,
covering head and face too, as our close mourners; covering the upper lip;
barefoot, shaving the head and beard; making baldness; plucking off the
hair; beating the breast; printing marks upon the flesh; tearing it; cutting
it. Amongst other places, see these, viz. Lam. II. 10. and III. 16. Lev. X. 6.
and XIII. 45. and XIX. 27, 28. and XXI. 5, 10. Deuteronomy. XIV. 1. Josh. VII. 6. 1 Samuel IV. 12. 2 Samuel I. 2. and XIII. 19. and XIV. 2. and XV. 30, 32. and XIX. 4.
2 Chronicles. XXXV. 25. Ier. IX. 17. Ezra IX. 3. Ester IV. 1, 3. and VI. 12. Job I.
20. II. 12. XLII. 6. Esaias XV. 2, 3. and LVIII. 8. Jer. II. 37. and VI. 26. and
XIV. 3, 4. and XVI. 6, 7. and XXV. 34 Ezekiel. XXIV. 17. and XXVII. 30. Micah I.
10, 16. Amos V. 16. Nahum. II. 7. Luke XVIII 13. Lam. I. 17. Ier. VII. 29. and
IX. 17, 18. XIV. 3, 4. XVI. 6, 7. XLI. 5. XLVIII. 36, 37. Lam. III. 48. Ezekiel.
VI. 11. VII. 18.

In the Observations and Explanations upon this Book; as also upon Daniel; and
the twelve small Prophets; I am the briefer, because that portion fell to my
share in the last Great English Annotations; to which in many things I shall
now refer thee.

Ezekiel.
EZEKIEL, like as Jeremy, was both Priest, and Prophet. Being carried captive
with Jehojacin, He prophesies in Chaldea: And calling that His captivity, as
was said, he makes it his Epoch; and from thence begins the account and
reckoning of years, in all the distinct times of his several Prophecies,
throughout his Book; Thus, In Jehojacins Captivity. In the
V. Year, fourth month, fifth day, He begins to Prophecy, chap. I. 2, 3. And
so continues on in the seven first chapters: with some other short Notations of
Times, soon following, chap. III. verse 15, 22, -- 27. and chap. IV. v. 5. VI.
Year, sixth month, fifth day, (420. days from the former time, chap. I. v.
2.) He was carried in a Vision to Jerusalem, chap. VIII. 1, 2, 3. chap. IX.
chap. X. chap. XI. 24. And thereafter does continue on Prophesying to the
twentieth chapter. VII. Year, fifth month, tenth day, (335. days from that
time, chap. VIII. 1.) He was consulted by the Elders. And thereupon Prophesied,
Chapters 20, 21, 22, 23. IX. Year, tenth month* tenth day (when the siege of
Jerusalem began, 2 Kings XXV. 1, 2.) He Prophesied, Chapters 24, 25. X. Year,
tenth month, twelfth day; Against Pharaoh, and Egypt, Chap. XXIX. v. 1, -- 17.
XI. Year, first month (though some think the fifth) fifth day, against Tyrus,
Chapters 26, 27, 28. v. 1, -- 20. Zidon, chap. XXVIII. v. 20, -- 26. First
month, seventh day; Against Egypt, chapter XXX. v. 20, -- 26. Third month,
first day; Against Egypt, chap. XXXI. Fourth month, ninth day; The City
taken, Jer. LII. 5, 6. 2 Kings XXV. 2, 3, 4. Fifth month, tenth day;
Nebuzaradan burnt the Temple, and City, Jer. LII. 12, 13.
XII. Year, tenth month, fifth day; The news brought to Ezekiel. And then he
Prophesied, chap. XXXIII. v. 21, -- 33. and chapters XXXIV. -- XL. Twelfth
month, first day; Against Egypt, chapter XXXII. 1, -- 16. Fifteenth day; Against
Egypt, chap. XXXII. v. 17, -- 32. and chap. XXXIII. 1, -- 20.
XXV. Year, first month, tenth day; He has that large Vision, chapters XL. --
XLVIII. XXVII. Year, first month, first day; Against Egypt, chap. XXIX. v. 17,
-- 21. and chap. XXX. v. 1, -- 19.
The Glory of the Lord
Appearing By Chebar, chapter I. 3, -- 28. In the Plain, chap. III. 22, 23. In
Jerusalem, chapter VIII. 4, and c. X. 15, 20, 22.
Departing, by degrees, chap. VIII. 3, 4, 5, 6. and IX. 3. and chap. X. 3, 4,
5, 18, 19. and chap. XI. 22, 23. Returning, chap. XLIII. 2, 3, 4.


The Measures mentioned in the Description of Ezekiels Visionarie Temple; and
Division of the Land, chap. XL. -- XLVIII. are Calamus, and Cubitus; the Reed,
and the Cubit. The length of the Reed is defined, chap. XL. 5. and XLI. 8. That
of the Cubit, is more usualy known; adding that, chap. XLI. 8. and XLIII. 13.
See more of these, in my Annotations upon Ezekiel XL. 5. among those large
Annotations upon the Bible, printed Anno 1651. By the Cubits are measured, the
Gates, East, North, South, of the Exterior; and of the Inner Courts: with their
Posts, Porches, Arches, and Chambers: The Courts, and the Pillars, and Chambers
about them; The Tables: Chambers of the Singers, and of the Priests; and the
Porch of the House, chap. XL. The several Parts, Places, and Chambers of the
Temple; and of the Separate Place, chap. XLI. The North-Chambers; and
South-Chambers; before the Separate Place, chapter XLII. The Altar of
Burnt-Offerings, chap. XLIII. And the waters, chap. XLVII. 3. By Reeds, besides
a few other parts, chap. XL. 6, 7, 8. there is, or seems to be, Measured; The
Wall about the outmost Court; five hundred Reeds, on each side of that square
Court, chapter XLII. 15, -- 20. Which, if Literaly understood, it makes the Temple,
and all Holy Building about it; and the Courts of it, to be bigger then
Solomon's Temple, and all the City of Jerusalem with it. But if we understand
by five hundred Reeds, Reeds of five hundred Cubits, that is, making up five
hundred Cubits, on each side of that Square Court; as Tremelius does; And
indeed the Suburbs of it are named to be fifty Cubits ^ound about, chap. XLV.
2. Then we shall bring that Sacred Visionarie Building into a spacious, yet
reasonable and proportionable quantity; But with a very harsh, as it seems,
translation of the words of the sacred Text. And as for that Oblation of the
Land offered to the Lord, that Holy Portion for the Priests; and for the
Levites: and that Land for the City of Jerusalem, and Suburbs, and Use of it
being in all 25000. square; mentioning neither Reeds, nor Cubits, chap. XLVIII.
20. And the Princes Portion of Land, lying on the outside of it, East, and
West, chap. XLVIII. 21. If we take that great Square to be so many Reeds, as
most do; with very great probability in this Visionarie Division; We shall so
make that Visionarie Square to be as big as the whole Land of Canaan. But if we
understand it of Cubits, we shall bring it to be about the compass of twenty
five miles on each side of the square: and so leave a proportionable quantity
of Land for the twelve Tribes, chap. XLVIII.

stand upon thy feet -- set me upon my feet] Ezekiel. XI. 19, 20. and XVIII. 31.
with chap. XXXVI. 26. and chap. XI. 19.

land of Pathros] A Province in Egypt, chap. XXX. 14. Jer XLIV. 1, 15.
possessed by the Pathrusim, or Pathruses which were of the lineages of
Mitsraim, or Egyptus, Genesis X. 14. 1 Chronicles. I. 12. Likely the same with Thebais,
higher and further up in the Country the Noph, Esaias XI. 11.

Lybia] Heb. Phut, or Phuth, or Put. These Lybians were of the same race with
the Ethiopians, Genesis X. 6. 1 Chronicles. I. 6. Seated in Africa, to the West of
Egypt.

Lybia] These were in Africa, and came of Lud, the son of Mizraim, and
grandchild of Cham, Genesis X 6, 13. Ger. XLVI. 9. The Lydians in Asia, or
Anatolia came of Lud the son of Shem, Genesis X. 22. Esaias LXVI. 19. See the
Annotations on Ezekiel. XXX. 5.

Tehaphnehes] Or, Tahapanes, Tachapanes, Tapanhes, or Tachpanches, and the
same, as it seems in a contracted form Hanes, or Chanes, Esaias XXX. 4. a Prime
City in Egypt: taking likely its name from Tahpenes Queen of Egypt, 1 Kings
XI. 19, 20. Seated not far from Pelusium; whence termed by the Greeks and
Latins Daphnae Pelusiacae. See Jer. II. 16. Here J^remy was, chap. XLIII. 8.

Ezekiel. XLVIII. 8, -- 22. In this Visionary Description, The Portion or holy
Oblation of Land, for the Priests, and the Sanctuary; for the Levites; for the
City, and Suburbs; for the Prince; was all at most no greater or biger then
the several Portions for each of the other Tribes. And therefore in that
Draught of mine set forth by my learned and industrious friend Master Thomas
Fuller in his Pisgah-sight of Palestine, V. Book. page 189. I desire to be
rightly so understood, and no otherwise. The said Draught is represented there
in a far larger Proportion. But the only Reason was, That so there might be
room enough for the setting down of the several Situations, and Limits among
themselves, of the Priests Portion, and of the Sanctuary in the midst of it;
And of the Levites Portion by themselves; And of the City Jerusalem, and
Suburbs, of it, by themselves; And of the Princes Portion, lying, and guarding,
as it were, all the former, at both Ends, East, and West. The true quantity of
all this, in relation to the other Tribes, being no other then I have formerly
expressed.

Daniel.
DANIEL was carried Captive in the first year of Nebuchadnezzar, and the third
or fourth of Jehojakim, Dan. I. 1, -- 6. And at this time began the Babylonian
Monarchy: and the Jews Subjection or Captivity, which lasted seventy years.

Daniel living, and young, was so famous for Prayer and Piety, That in the
thirteenth or fourteenth year of his Captivity, He is matched with Noah, and
Job, Ezekiel. XIV. 14. And in the eighteenth or nineteenth year, He is held such
an unparalled pattern for Wisdom, That the King of Tire, who thought himself
so wise above others, is taunted in these words, Behold, thou art wiser then
Daniel, Ezekiel. XXVIII. 2.

His Book begins with his own Captivity; reaches to our Saviors time, Dan.
IX. 25. And ends a while after, with the final Destruction of the Temple, and
City of Jerusalem, by the Romans, Dan. IX. 27. Daniels Prophecies stretch not
beyond Daniels own People the Jews.

Some reckon the times thus; seventy years in the Babylonish captivity, or
subjection to Babylon: seventy years seven times, or seven weeks of years; that
is, four hundred and ninety years, thence to our Saviors death. And forty
thence to Jerusalems Destruction, and the end of the Jews Commonwealth: in
all, six hundred years. But others rather, upon more likely grounds, extend the
number of years to a great sum.

His Book is Historical, in the first six Chapters Prophetical, in the rest.

The Language of it is Chaldee, from chap. II. v. 4 to chap. VIII. A little
Arabique being intermixed in the sixth Chapter. Because, as some conceive, the
matters contained in those Chapters mostwhat concern the Chaldeans, and were
things known to them; or at least such as no danger by the knowledge of them
accrued to the Jews. In all the rest, before, and after, it is Hebrew, the
Churches dialect, and treasure. And yet here are sometimes some kind of
concealments from the Hebrews themselves, in the darkest Visions, chap. VIII.
26. and chap. XII. 4.

The Chapters in Daniel fall within the reigns of several Kings, Thus, In the
reign of
Nebuchadnezzar; in his I. Year, Chapter I. V. Year, Chap. II. VI. Year, most
likely, Chap. III. XXXV. Year, Chap. IV.
Belshazzar, in his I. Year, Chap VII. III. Year, Chap. VIII. Last year, Chap.
V.
Darius, in his first year, Chapters VI. and IX. Cyrus, in his third year,
first month, Chapters X. and XI. and XII.
So that in the Order of the Chapters, there is this Transposition; That the
seventh and eighth Chapters, as now they stand numbered and placed, in order of
time go before the fifth and sixth Chapters.

And for the matter of some Chapters; Those Prophetical Dreams, and Visions,
Chap. II. and IV. and VII. and VIII. and XI. seem mostwhat to expound one
another; falling so often upon the same matters, less or more; and going over
them, or some of them still: Nebuchadnezzar, and the Babylonian, is the Golden
Head, Chap. II. the Tree, Chap. IV. the Lion, Chap. VII. The Mede and Persian,
is the Breast and Arms of silver, Chap. II. the Bear, Chap. VII. the Ram,
Chap. VIII. and Chap. X. 1, 13, 20. and Chap. XI. 1, 2. The Grecian Alexander,
is the Belly and Thighs of Brass, Chap. II. the Leopard, Chap. VII. the
he-Goat, Chap. VIII, and Chap. X. 20. and Chap. XI. 3, 4. The Grecian divided,
chiefly into the Seleucide, and Lagide, are the Legs of iron, and Feet, part of
iron, and part of clay, chap. II. The fourth Beast, chap. VII. and the Kings of
the North, and of the South, chap. XI.

Daniel having his suit denied by the Prince of the Eunuchs, makes his address
to his Steward, and prevails, chap. I. 10, 11.

That second year, Dan. II. 1. is not of Cyrus, the last word of the former
chapter; But of Nebuchadnezzar: Nor of his Reign, or Monarchy either; But in
his reign; as the Hebrew distinctions in the Context seem to import; Namely,
the second year, after the three years of Daniels education were past, and he
brought in to stand before the King; which falls in with the fifth year of
Nebuchadnezzars reign, and Daniels Captivity, and with the eighth or ninth of
Jehojakim. In the second year, in Nebuchadnezzars reign, Nebuchadnezzar had
this Dream; and Daniel was then sought for to be slain, with the rest of the
Wisemen and Magicians.

That huge Image of gold, though hollow within, as the two brazen Pillars were,
Jer. LII. 21. which was set up to be worshipped, Dan. III. seems to be soon
after the former Dream, and before Jehojacins Captivity; Being Daniels three
companions only, newly advanced, are accused; and no other Jews; for not
worshipping it, and committing such gross and open Idolatry.

That Dream and Vsion of the Great Tree, chap. IV. being when Nebuchadnezzar
was at rest, after all his Victories, chap. IV. 4. And flourishing in his
Palace, after his conquest of Egypt, which was in the twenty seventh year of
Jehojacins Captivity, Ezekiel. XXIX. 17, -- 20. seems to be some thirty years
after the former Dream, chap. II. and in the thirty fifth year of
Nebuchadnezzars own reign, and Daniels Captivity. A year after this Dream,
he fell mad, chap. IV. 29. and continued so seven years, verse 16, 25, 3. even
so long as Solomon's Temple was in building, which he destroyed. And about two
years after his restoring to his wits, and Kingdom, v. 26, 34, 36. in the
forty fourth or forty fifth year of his reign, and thirty seventh of
Jehojacins Captivity he died, Jer. LII. 31.

Evilmerodach, the son of Nebuchadnezzar, in the first year of his reign,
advanced Jehojacin, 2 Kings XXV. 27, -- 30. Jer. LII. 31, -- 34.

Belshazzar, the grandchilde of Nebuchadnezzar, was the last of Babels
Monarchs, Jer. XXVII. 7. Dan. V. 28, 30, 31. Though he be called the son of
Nebuchadnezzar, and Nebuchadnezzar be called his father, Dan. V. 11, 13, 18, 22.

The Roman Empire is none of the four Beasts, chap. VII. But the Greeks are
the Dealers in the end of wrath. Antiochus Epiphanes, the last of the ten
Horns of the fourth Beast, was the most furious Persecutor of the Jews, and
their Religion. See of him largely, Dan. VII. v. 8, 11, 20, 21. and chap. VIII.
v. 9, -- 14. and v. 23, 24, 25, 26. and chap. XI. 21, -- 45. and chap. XII. He
raged terribly, for two thousand three hundred days, chap. VIII. 14, 24, 25,
26. that is, six years, three months, and some twenty days, viz. from the one
hundred forty second year of the Kingdom of the Greeks, when after wicked
Jason, worse then Menelaus had got of Antiochus to be High Priest, having in
him the fury of a cruel Tyrant, and the rage of a savage beast, 1 Macc. I. 11.
and v. 20, -- 53. 2 Macc. IV. 25. from this time Antiochus continuing his rage
until the one hundred forty eighth year, ninth month, twenty fifth day, 1
Macc. IV. 52, 53, 54. But raging most of all for a time, times, and the
dividing of time, Dan. VII. 25. and, chap. XII. 7. that is, three years, and
ten days; from the time he took away the daily Sacrifice, and set up the
abomination of desolation, till the restoring of Gods worship again, 1 Macc.
I. 54, 57, 59. and chap. IV, 52, 53, 54. Or three years, and a half; beginning
so at 1 Macc. I. 30. And again, from that time of taking away the daily
Sacrifice, and setting up the abomination of desolation, were one thousand two
hundred and ninety days, to the end of those sad times of the Churches
troubles. But the one thousand three hundred thirty fifth day, which was forty
five days after the former, was the last end of the indignation, the Blessed
time perfectly to finish those furious persecutions by Antiochus, by the death
of Antiochus himself, Dan. XII. 6, 7, 8, 11, 12. 2 Macc. XI. 33. 1 Macc. VI.
16. And at the end of the Kingdom of the Greeks, subdued soon after by the
rising up of the Roman Empire, Christ came, and erected his everlasting
Kingdom; and all Dominions shall serve and obey him, Dan. II. 34, 35, 44, 45.
and Chap. VII. 9, 10, 13, 14, 27. But of these things see more in my
Annotations upon Daniel, in the large Annotations upon the whole Bible,
printed, Anno 1651.

Gabrieal the only Angel in Scripture that has a proper name, Dan. VIII. 16.
and chap. IX. 21. L^ke. I. 19, 26. Michael being understood of Christ.

Darius the Median, the son of Ahasuerus, Dan. V. 31. and VI. 28. and Cyrus,
the Persian, Dan. IX. 1. seem fellows in Empire: and Cyrus, the Survivor, and
sole Monarch.

Messiah a proper name, Dan. IX. 25. And hence famous in the New Testament,
John I. 41. and IV. 25.

The Abomination of Desolation has reference to Antiochus Epiphanes, Dan.
VIII. 13. and chap. XI. 31. and chap. XII. 11. And to the Romans, Dan. IX. 27.
Matthew. XXIV. 15.

like the Son of God] Or rather like a son of the gods. Psalm. LXXXIX. 6. As
a phrase not unlike, is in Judge. VIII. 18. Many of the Ancient Fathers, being
desirous to get proofs of the Mystery of the Trinity, and of Christ's Humanity,
out of the Books of the Prophets, did catch at all occasions, and made use of
any thing in them, that might have the least show and shadow to look that way.
And so they have wrested, though not rightly, this speech of Nebuchadnezzar to
that purpose.

great Babylon] The compass of it within the walls was about four hundred
furlongs, Annotations on this place. And the learned Annotations on Jer. LI.
53, 58. It is said to sit upon many waters, Jer. LI. 13. to have a Sea, ver.
36. Esaias XXI. 1. by reason of the great river Euphrates whereon it was seated;
and the vast lakes, meeres, and pooles that were made out of it in that great
plain of the Land of Shinar and Babylon; Genesis XI. 2. This is an ancient City,
built by Nimrod, Genesis X. 10. And was under the Assyrian Empire. Manasseh King
of Judah was carried hither by Esar-haddon the Assyrian Monarch, 2 Chronicles.
XXXIII. 11. The Kings of it, when it came from under the Assyrian Empire, we
read in Scripture to be these, Merodach Baladan, Nebuchadnezzar, Evilmerodach,
Belshazzar, Esaias XXXIX. I. 2 Kings XXV. 27. Dan. V. 1, 11. Jer. XXVII. 7. Yet
some interpose one Assure, and Labarssardach, before Belshazzar, for short
times; But not out of Scripture. This City of Babylon is called Sheshach, Jer.
XXV. 26. and LI. 41. (though a King of Egypt was of the like name, 2 Chronicles.
XII. 2.) And likely this name is from some Babylonian Idol; whence Michael
might by the Babylonian Chamberlain be termed Meshach, Dan. I. 7. And happily
hence the Sacean Festival in Babylon for eleven days together, which ^erosus,
and Ctesius do mention, took that name: A Feast not unlike the Greek and Latin
Saturnalia, and our Christmas. And in the time of which Feast probably was
Babylon taken by Cyrus; as Her^dote, and Xenophon do report. And the Prophet
Jeremie himself by naming it Sheshach, may seem to point as it were with the
finger to the very time of that Feast, wherein Babylon, and that State was to
receive its fatal blow. See Dan. V. 1. V. 30.

to the Medes and Persians] Medes coasted upon the Caspian Sea. Esaias XIII. 17.
Medes descended from Madai, the son of Japhet, Genesis X. 2. 1 Chronicles. I. 5.
They, and the Persians, in some sort one people, as well for vicinity, as
affinity; and acknowledging one King, Esaias XXI. 2. Jer. LI. 11. Dan. V. 28. and
IX. 1.

like the son of man] Rather like a son of man. Ezekiel is called a son
of man; and as men in Scripture are usualy called the sons of men. And so is
that place to be understood, Apoc. I. 13. Like a son of man. And again,
chap. XIV. 14. Like unto a son of man.

Province of Elam] Elam is Persia; Elam the son of Sem, and brother to
Asshur, and Arphaxad, Genesis X. 22. 1 Chronicles. I. 17. The Province of Elam is that
part of Persia that bordered upon the Medes: whereupon Elamites and Medes are
joined together, Esaias XXI. 2. Jer. XXV. 25. They served under the Assyrian
Monarchs Salmanesar and Sennacharib, and under the Babylonian Nebuchadnezzar
against the people of God, Esaias XXII. 6. And therefore are judgments denounced
against them by the Prophets, Jer. XXV. 25. and chap. XLIX. 34, 38. And they
became afterward Gods instruments to execute his vengeance upon the
Babylonians, and to deliver his people from their bondage and captivity, Esaias
XXII. 6. and XLI. 2, 25. and XLIV. 28. and XLV. 1, etc. and XLVI. 11. and
XLVIII. 14. See more in the Annotations on Esaias XIII. 17.

Uphaz] Where the finest gold seems in those times to have been, Jer. X. 9.
This some suppose to be the same with Paz, or Phaz, Job XXVIII. 17. Psalm. XXI.
3. Esaias XIII. 12. and Mupaz, 1 Kings X. 18. 2 Chronicles. IX. 17. Some take it to be
Phez in Africa.

Hosea.
HOSEA Prophesied in the days of four Kings of Judah; and seven Kings of
Israel: from Vzziah of Judah, to Hezekiah; and from Jeroboam the second of
Israel to Hosheah, when, after that the two Tribes and a half had been
carried captive by Tiglath-Pilesar, King of Assyria, in the days of Pekah, 2
Kings XV. 29. 1 Chronicles. V. 26. All the rest of Israel, was captivated, and that
Kingdom extirpated by Shalmanesar, in the days of King Hosheah, Hos. X. 7,
15. 2 Kings XVII. 6. and chap. XVIII. 10. But of him, and the rest of the small
Prophets, see more at large in my Annotations upon them, in the large
Annotations upon the whole Bible printed Anno 1651.

He was sent chiefly to Israel: And begins to Prophecy Destruction to them;
even when they were in the height of their prosperity under Jeroboam the second.

Among other reasons of Gods vengeance upon the house of Jehu for the blood of
Jezreel, Ahab, stretched not to slay King Ahaziah of Judah, and his brethren.

(...) Most commonly taken illatively for Therefore; Esaias VII. 14. and XXX. 18.
and LI. 21. Ier. XVI. 14. and XXX. 16. Ezekiel. XXXIX. 25.

nor swear, The Lord liveth] Swearing, and this Form of swearing is lawful.
It is a part of our duty, and Gods worship to swear, when we are lawfully
thereunto called and warranted, Esaias XIX. 18. Psael. LXIII. 11. But not in our
ordinary communication, Matthew. V. 34, 37. Ia^es V. 12. Not upon vain and light
causes; as Herod's oath was to the dancing damsel, Mark VI. 23. much less to
be a bond to wickedness; as those, Acts XXIII. 12. to kill Paul. But in
necessary and weighty causes* As for ratification of Covenants, and promises of
importance: So did Abraham and Abimelech, Genesis XXI. 31. Isaac and Abimelech,
Genesis XXVI. 31. Jacob and Laban, Genesis XXXI. 53. David and Jonathan, 1 Samuel XX.
17. And so God commands it, for removal of suspicions, of jealousy, Number. V.
21. of Theft, Exodus XXII. 11. 1 Kings VIII. 31. 2 Chronicles. VI. 22. And so many
men in Scripture upon weighty causes did lawfully require an oath. So did
Abraham of his servant, Genesis XXIV. 2. Jacob of Esau, Genesis XXV. 33. and of his
son Joseph, Genesis XLVII. 31. Rahab of the Spies, Josh. II. 12. Sampson of the
men of Judah, Judge. XV. 12. Saul, and the Egytian of David, 1 Samuel XXIV. 21.
and XXX. 15. Nebuchadnezzar of Zedekiah, 2 Chronicles. XXXVI. 13. And many in like
cases did freely and voluntarily give their oaths: so Moses to Caleb, Josh.
XIV. 9. David to Bathshebah, 1 Kings I. 13. Gedaliah to the Remnant of Judah, 2
Kings XXV. 24. King Zedekiuh to the Prophet Jeremie, Jer. XXXVIII. 16. And so
godly men, to bind themselves the more to God, and his service, and good
duties have sworn to the Lord. So David to find out an house and place for
Gods habitation, Psalm. CXXXII. 2. So the Priests, Levites, and all Israel, to
reform the strange Marriages, Ezra X. 5. So King Asa, and all the people
entered into a Covenant to seek the Lord, and they swear unto the Lord with a
loud voice, and with shouting, and with Trumpets, and with Cornets, 2 Chronicles.
XV. 12, 13, 14. Yea, God himself is mercifully pleased so far to condescend
as to swear unto men, for the better assurance and confirmation of their faith
in the truth of his promises, Heb. VI. 13 -- 18. So he swear to Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, Genesis XXIV. 7. and XXVI. 3. Exodus VI. 8. Luke I. 73. So to David,
Psalm. LXXXIX. 49 And sometime in wrath, to ratify his Threatenings against
sinners. So, Psalm. XCV. 11. Heb. III. 11. In sacred account then is the Bond of
an Oath. Though it be taken to men, yet it is called the Oath. of God, Eccles.
VIII. 2. Ezekiel. XVII. 19. And why? Because therein men call God to be both a
witness of the truth, and an avenger of the lie, and breach of promise. And so
an Oath binds the soul with a Bond, Number. XXX. 2. It must therefore carefully be
taken, in truth, in righteousness, without rashness, and in judgment, upon
just grounds, in just causes, Jer. IV. 2. In truth, without equivocation, or
mental reservation. And carefully kept: yea, though made to Heathens, or
Heretics; without Popish dispensations, or relaxations. We must fear an Oath,
Eccles. IX. 2. fear to break it. And therefore the godly man, though he
swears to his own hurt, yet changes not, Psalm. XV. 4. Though the Gibeonites
beguiled Joshuah, and the Princes of Israel, yet, say they, we must let them
live, lest wrath be upon us, because of the Oath which we swear unto them,
Josh. IX. 15, 19, 20. And the breach of the matter of this Oath by Saul, so
long after, we read punished sorely upon him in his sons, 2 Samuel XXI. 1, --
6. And of Gods fierce wrath against false Oaths, and Oath-breakers, we read
more, Exodus XX. 7. Levit. XIX. 12. Jer. VII. 9. and XXIII. 10. Ezekiel. XVII. 15,
-- 21. Hos. IV. 2, 3. and X. 4. Zech. V. 3, 4. and chap. VIII. 17. Mal. III. 5.
It bore a part in Peter's sin, for which he wept so bitterly, Matthew. XXVI. 74,
75. Now the Form of this swearing here, Hos. IV. 15. is lawful; It is taken in
the Lords Name. Gods Name is to be used in Oaths, Deuteronomy. VI. 13. and X. 20.
Psalm. LXIII. 11. Esaias XLV. 23. and LXV. 16. Ier. XII. 16. So Jacob swear to
Laban by the Fear of his father Isaac, Genesis XXXI. 42, 53. We must not swear
by false gods, Josh. XXIII. 7. ^er. V. 7. and chapter XII. 16. Not by Baal, by the
sin and Idol of Samaria; the manner of Beersheba, by Malcham: Against such
swearers God threateneth his judgments, Ier. V. 7. Amos VIII. 14. Zeph. I. 5.
Nor must we swear by the Creatures, as if they were God; or we had power over
them, as our own, to pawn them on the truth of what we say, Matthew. V. 34, 35,
36. and chap. XXIII. 16, -- 22. James V. 12. See on Matthew. XXIII. 16, -- 22.
And again, though this manner of Speech, The Lord lives, may be taken in a way
of a strange asseveration only, thus, As surely as the Lord lives. As likewise
that, Genesis XLII. 15. 1 Samuel I. 26. and XXV. 26. Yet it goes often in Scripture
under the notion and name of an Oath, as, 1 Samuel XIX. 6. Ier. V. 2. and chap.
XII. 16. And is here forbidden, because God would not have his Name once in the
mouth of Idolaters, as not enduring to be joined with Idols, 2 Cor. VI. 15.
Zeph. I. 5. Ezekiel. XX. 39. Of Oath, see more in page 10, 52, 74. and upon Ier.
LI. 14. And of the Manner and Ceremonies in swearing, see Genesis XXIV. 2. and
XLVII. 29. and XIV. 22. Exodus VI. 8. Exodus XX. 5, 15, 23. Dan. XII. 7. Apoc. X.
5, 6. And there are diverse Rites and Gestures for it in diverse Countries in all
ages.

as the rain; as the later and former] Rain in due season is mentioned,
Levit. XXVI. 4. Deuteronomy. XXVIII. 12. Ezekiel. XXXIV. 26. The First or former Rain,
and the later Rain are mentioned, Deuteronomy. XI. 14. Jer. V. 24. so called in
relation to their husbandry, and the order thereof. The former rain was in
their Seeding time, in the eighth month, part of our October and November,
requisite for the bringing up of their Seed, and thereupon is called the Seeds
rain, Esaias XXX. 23. And that month is called Bull, from the abundance of
rain, and great showers then requisite and falling, as making a Deluge, Jer.
III. 3. and this former rain is called Yoreh, or Moreh, from a word that
signifies to pour down. The later rain was in the first month, Joel II.
23. part of our March and April, for the filling of the corn then in the ear,
and the fitting of it for harvest; whence this month is called Abib, Exodus
XIII. 4. which signifies the stalk with the ear of corn. Their harvest-time
for corn being commonly within the compass of two months, half Abib or
Nisan, all Jair or Zif, and half Sivan. And hereupon were those two Offerings,
of corn in the sheaf, and of two loaves enjoined, at the Beginning and End of
harvest, Levit. XXIII. 10, -- 21. Number. XXVIII. 26. Deuteronomy. XVI. 9, 10. See my
Annotations on Zech. X. 1.

bread of mourners] Banquets at Burials, Prove. XXXI. 6, 7. Jer. XVI. 7. Ezekiel.
XXIV. 17. Matthew. IX. 23.

Memphi^; Moph; And thence with the Greeks and Latins Memphis. In Esaias and
Jermie, named Moph, Jer. XLIV. 1. and XLVI. 14, 19. Likely now that Grand
Cairo, the Great City. See. Esaias XIX. 13. Ezekiel. XXX. 13.

Chap. IX. 7. and Chap X. 3, 4. do show the miserable state and condition of
things in those times.

Is true liberality of the Body of the Church of Israel in Egypt. Matthew. II. 15.

Jacob wept, Moses.

The names for Lions in Hebrew are very many; Annotations on Job. IV. 10 The
like is true for the variety of the names of gold. See the Annotattons on Job
XXVIII. 15, -- 19.

I did know thee] Own thee, as, Psalm. I. ult. Exodus III. 7. Deuteronomy. XXXIV. 10.
Psalm. XXXI. 7. and XXXVII. 18. and CXLII. 4. Matthew. VII. 23. Romans VII. 15. As
for that place, Acts XXIII* 5. Most likely it is that Paul did not know Ananias
to be High Priest, he being so long absent from Jerusalem; and the High Priest
being so often changed in those times.

Joel.
JOEL; Preaches to Judah. And by the Matter and Argument of his Book, as well
as by the Rank wherein we find him placed, He seems to Prophecy when Hosea
did, in the days of King Uzziah. Yet some assign to him a later time, upon
those passages, chap. III. 1, -- 9.

He declares a dreadful judgment of Famine, brought upon them by a Drought,
and Vermin: Exhorts to true Mourning, Fasting, and Repenting; with Promises
thereupon of abundant Blessings, Temporal, and Spiritual, upon themselves: and
of Gods dreadful judgments and revenge upon their enemies.

The Army, and Camp described, chap. II. is not of the Assyrians, or
Babylonians; But of those Vermin, Gods Host, named, chap. I. 4.

The Valley of Jehoshaphat, is not the place for the General judgment in the
end of the world, at Christ's second coming; But serves only to note out thus
much, That Gods judgments upon the enemies of his Church, shall be visibly in
her sight, and before her eyes; as the Valley of Jehoshaphat was nigh the
walls, and in the sight of Jerusalem.

weep between the Porch and the Altar] The Porch of the Temple, Ezra X. 1.
and 1 Macc. VII. 38.

Visions] By them God of old did speak to man, will unto him, Job XXXIII. 15.
Particularly to his Prophets, Number. XII. 6. Hos. XII. 10. Ezekiel. VII. 26. So to
Abraham, to Jacob, to Samuel, 1 Samuel III. 1, 15. to Esaias; Ezekiel, and others;
whence Judea is called the Valley of Vision, Esaias XXII. 1. And so to Daniel, to
Peter, Acts X. 19. and to Paul, Acts XVI. 9. and XVIII. 9. 2 Cor. XII. 1. Yea,
to Balaam, Number. XXIV. 4. And to Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. II. 28. See my Annotations
on Ezekiel. I. 1. This whole Text, And so on to the end of this Chapter, is cited
by Saint Peter, Acts II. 16, -- 21. and applied to his present time, the
Beginning of the Gospel, the time immediately preceding the destruction of the
Jewish Polity, their City and Temple; as being fulfilled and completed then
and there: He shows that both this effusion of the Spirit; And likewise those
wonders showed in heaven, and in earth, so particularly mentioned, had their
accomplishment before that terrible day of their destruction by Vespasian and
Titus, about forty years after their crucifying of our Savior, which said
great and terrible day our Savior likewise foretells, and gives the dreadful
signs the forerunners of it very largely in the twenty fourth Chapter of Saint
Matthew, as may be gathered more specialy out of ver. 33, 34. Vainly therefore
is this pouring out of the Spirit applied to our times so far advanced toward
the end of the world; to patronize our New Lights, and pretended Divine
illuminations, our extraordinary Gifts and Inspirations poured now by the
Spirit on all sorts of Christians, young and old, sons and daughters, even to
the sleighting and superseding of all external offices, and Officers, Orders,
and Ordinances, in the Church: Whereas this was a Peculiar Privilege and
character of those First times, and had a Propriety to them. And unadvisedly
are those dreadful times and signs, Matthew. XXIV. or any of them appropriated
to the end of the world, and last coming of our Savior to judgment; having
received their true accomplishment before Jerusalems final fall aforesaid; as
Jewish and Heathen Histories make manifest; unless we take them out of their
Literal meaning, and make them to serve as Symbolical Representations of what
likely may ensue at the last day.

Amos.
AMOS; Of an Herd-man was made a Prophet; chapter VII. 14. He uses sometimes
Countrey-similitudes, chapter II. 13. and III. 12. and IV. 1, 3. And sometimes he
has high and Astronomical expressions, as, chapter V. 8. and ch IX. 6. As Job had
formerly: And God himself, unto Job. And Esaias, chap. XIII. 10. Yet we may not
understand them of such Constellations or Configurations, as our Astronomers,
do now retain from the Greeks and Latins, which have their figures and
denominations assigned them from the feigned stories of the old fabulous
Greeks: we should rather retain the Hebrew terms and names; adding our best
exposition of them.

Amos has great conformity with Hoseah, living in the same time, chap. I. 1.
and sent to the same people, of Isreal's principaly.

Amos foretells strange shakings and destructions of six Heathen Neighboring
Nations, the Churches enemies; for their three transgressions, and for four
severaly.

As likewise he does the same of Judah: And so of Israel, chap. I. and II. He
pursues in five chapters following Israel manifold transgressions, and mighty
sins: Intermixing both Threatenings and Exhortations. Threatenings of
Judgments generaly, upon all Israel, That they shall finaly be drowned in a
flood of miseries, and be captivated: Particularly, upon Jeroboams house; and
upon Amaziah Priest of Bethel. And inserting Exhortations to Israel for
repentance; as, chap. IV. 3. with Promises of Mercy thereupon; as, chap. V. 4,
14. 15. And after, upon their Obstinacy, and Incorrigiblenesse; He shows in
the two last chapters, under two Types, of a Basket of Summer fruit; and of
smiting the door of the Temple; their ripening, approaching subversion, and
Gods abdicating his house, and people. Yet concluding all, with Evangelical
Promises to his Church, of a Reduction, and restoration by, and under Christ.

Among other places, chap. V. 10, 13. and chap. VI. 10. do show the evil of his
times.

Carmel] Carmel signifies plenty, Asher, and Issachar, near the Midland-Sea;
and not far from Mount Tabor, Josh. XII. and XV. chapters. See more of it in
my Annotations on this Text.

revealeth] Yet Gods true Prophets are not always in all things, Chron. XVIII.
2. 2 Kings IV. 27. 1 Samuel XVI. 6. The meaning here is, That God usualy reveals
to his Prophets his great judgments which he intends to bring upon his own
people, for their sins.

A kind of Ironie, Genesis III. 22. 1 Kings XVIII. 27. and XXII. 15. 2. Chron.
XVIII. 14. and XXV. 8. Eccles. XI. 9. Job XII. 2. Lam. IV. 21. Mark VII. 9. Of
Hyperbolies, see on Josh. XI. 4. Genesis XI. 4.

mighty sinnes] Ezekiel. chap. XVII. 15, 16, 18. See my Annotations on Ezekiel. II.
4, 5. God is said to fret at sin, Ezekiel. XVI. 43. And to ease and quiet
himself upon vengeance taken for it, Esaias I. 24. Ezekiel. XVI. 42.

Obadiah.
OBADIAHS Time is uncertain. His Prophecy is against Edom. And the like to
this, in Matter, and in Words, is likewise against Edom, in Jer. XLIX. 7, --
22. And in Ezekiel, chap. XXV. 12, 13, 14. The Sum is; Gods Revenge upon
Esau, notwithstanding all his Pride; Self-Wisdome; and Confidence: And that for
his Violence against his brother Jacob; and insulting over him in the day of
his Calamity. Which God reproves; and foretells that Saviors shall come up on
Mount Zion, for Deliverance; and to judge, devour, and possess the Mount of
Esau: and the King dome shall be the Lords.

Gilead] A large Mountain, or mountainous Country; Genesis XXXI. 47. A place of
a rich soil for wealth, and abounding with Balm, and Spicerie, Genesis XXXVII.
25. Number. XXXII. 1. Half of Gilead given to Reuben, and Gad; and the other
half to half Manasseh, Deuteronomy. III. 12, 13. Josh. XIII. 11, 25, 31. and XXII.
9, 13. Of Gilead, see more in my Annotations upon this Text.

Jonah.
JONAH Prophesied in the days of Jeroboam the second, 2 Kings XIV. 25. A time
wherein a Constellation of Prophets appeared. He was sent to Nineveh, the great
City, and Metropolis of the Assyrian Empire. But fleeing to Joppa, a clean
contrary way; and taking Sea; He is followed with a Tempest; and being thrown
overboard, is swallowed of a Fish, called a Whale, Matthew. XII. 40. And in the
Whales belly, three days, and three nights; which is a resemblance of Christ's
lying in the Grave; And to that end is thrice alluded unto, and alleged by our
Savior himself, Matthew. XII. 39, 40. and chap. XVI. 4. and Luke XI. 29. Not yet
that the Correspondence in all points must be exact and absolute; either for
the space of three whole days, and three whole nights; for our Savior, as
himself foretells, did rise on that third day in a part of it: no, nor yet for
some part of three days, and of three nights, unless we reckon the days of
twenty four hours, from midnight to midnight. But the Type here, and Text,
Matthew. XII. 40. needs no such subtle shifts, and curious quirks, to make up
their sense. Only this, That this of Jonas was the fittest and nearest shadow
of Christ's lying in the Grave, that the Scripture did afford. There prays.
And the Whale vomiteth him out upon the dry land. Being sent the second time,
He obeyes; Nineveh repents; And God in pity spares Nineveh for that time: And
justifies his pity against the angry Prophet, repining at it.

Wonderful great was the City of Nineve, Iohah I. v. 2. and c. III. 2, 3, 4
and chap. 4. XI. And such the City of Babylon, Ier* LI. 31, 58.

made vowes] Of Vows, Annotations on this Text.

Joppa] Or Japho. Dan, as it joins to the Tribe of Ephraim, Josh. XIX. 46.
Hither was all the Timber brought in floats that was cut and wrought in
Lebanon, for the building of the Temple, (and other buildings) by Solomon, 2 Chronicles. II. 16. And for the new building of it, by Zerubbabel and Jehoshuah,
after the Return from the Babylonish captivity, Ezra III. 7. We see here Jonah
fled hither; far enough from the way to Nineveh: And this in the days of
Jeroboam the second, King of Israel: In the days of the Apostle Peter, he
being at Lidda, was sent for hither; and here raised from the dead that good
and charitable Tabitha or Dorcas, Acts IX. 38, 40. And tarrying here many days
with one Simon a Tanner, by the Seaside; He Praying, in a trance saw a Vision,
a certain Vessel, as it had been a great sheet, etc. And at that instant
being sent for to Cesarea, by Cornelius, he goes thither, Preaches Christ to
Cornelius, and his kinsmen, and near friends. And upon their conversion and
receiving the miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost, he Baptiseth them.

A City of God, i. e. exceeding great; an Hebraisme. So we read the Wrestlings
of God, Trembling of God, 1 Samuel XIV. 15. a Sleep of God, 1 Samuel XXVI. 12. Genesis
XXX. 8. the Mountains of God, Psalm. XXXVI. 6. Trees of God, Psalm. CIV. 16. the
Cedars of God, Psalm. LXXX. 10. the Increasing of God, Col. II. 19. Prince of
God, Genesis XXIII. 6. the Host of God, 1. Chron. XII. 22. And so much alike of
the garden of God, of the Flame of God, Cant. VIII. 6. a Fire of God, Job I.
16. Cant. VIII. 6. River of God, Man of God, the Visions of God; the Voice of
God, the Kindness of God, 2 Samuel IX. 3. Harps of God. See my Observations on 1 Samuel XIV. 15.

yet forty dayes] Gods Threatenings and doomes have yet their conditions and
limitations, Jer. XXI. 10. and XXV. 9, 10, 11. and XXXII* 29. and XXXIV. 2, 22.
and XXXVII. 8, 10. compared with chap. XXVI. 13. and XXXVIII. 17. And so David
understood that threatening, 2 Samuel XII. 14. conditionaly, verse 22. So, Judge.
X. 13. Esaias XXXVIII. 1. Jer. XVIII. 7, 8. Ezekiel. III. 18. Yet sometimes God
expresses his doomes of judgment against some sinners irrevocably; as, Ezekiel.
XIV. 13, 14, 16, 18, 20. See the Observations on 1 Kings II. 20.

East-winde.] Hos. XIII. 15. Ezekiel. XVII. 10. and XIX. 12. Psalm. XLVIII. 7. See
my Annotations on Hos. XII. 1. an hurtful, dry, and skorching wind.

The Ninevites in all probability, were the rather reduced to their repentance,
and that in such a manner, by that Preaching of Jonah; upon the knowledge of
him, and of his being in the Whales belly.

Micah.
MICAH; Is the last of that great number of Prophets that lived, and
Prophesied, in the same times. Micah his time is set out thus; in the days of
Iotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah. He is like to Esaias, the first of them, in Matter;
and in lofty style. He Prophesies to, and against, both Judah, and Israel:
Declares Gods wrath; Lamenteth them; and tells their future destructions, and
captivities, by the Assyrians, and Babylonians; For the manifold sins of the
People, Princes, and Prophets, Chapters I, II, III. The Repenting Remnant He
comfort with Promises of Temporal Blessings; and Deliverances from their
enemies: But chiefly with Promises, and Predictions of Christ; foretelling the
Place of his Nativity; And the manifold Spiritual Blessings of Him, and his
Kingdom, Chapters IV. and V. And after a fresh controversy, and contestation
of God with all his People, for their ill requiting of all his ancient
Kindnesses; with their present sundry sins, chap. VI. And the Prophets
Complaint thereafter of the Paucity of good men; He ends his Prophecy, with
the Churches Consolation, in he Patient Expectation of Gods time to plead her
Cause, to the shame of her insulting enemy; and her own marvelous felicity,
chap. VII.

The sins of the Prophets, chap. II. 11. and chap. III. 1, 2, 3, 11. and
chap. VII. 2, -- 6.

The people of God seem to argue, and resolve thus; All people naturaly are
addicted to their several superstitions, and will walk every one in the Name of
his God: Much more we will, as we have all right and reason for it, walk in the
Name of Jehova our God. Yea, though every Sect oppose their Superstition to us,
triumph, and glory in theirs, and insulting over us, conspire in one against
us, and our way; yet will not we despond, or shrink, but overlook, and
overcome all difficulties, obstructions, and oppositions whatsoever; the Name
of Jehova our God shall render us invincible, to walk constantly in him, and
his Name, and his true way of worship, for ever and ever.

Bethlehem-Ephrata] To distinguish it from another Bethlehem in the Tribe of
Zebulun, Josh. XIX. 15. This being in Judah, Matthew. II. 1. And in these parts
were many names of this stamp; as, Bethel, Bethaven, Bethania, Bethesda,
Bethsaida, Bethabarah, Bethbarah, Bethhaccerem, Bethshemesh, and others. This
Bethlehem, and this Text, was alleged by the chief Priests and Scribes to
Herod, for the place of Christ's birth, Matthew. II. 5, 6. And though here called
little; yet by the Priests and Scribes called not the least; either reading the
words of Micah interrogatively in a Negative sense; or varying the Text out of
ignorance, or of set purpose before Herod; though yet both readings may well be
reduced to one true sense; Bethlehem little, when David was borne there; not
little, but famous, for, and after that the true Son of David, and Son of
God was borne there.

Nahum.
NAHUM; seems to live, and Prophecy, in the days of Josiah. His Prophecy
is. The Burden of Nineveh. The Ninevites after their Temporary Repentance, upon
the Preaching of Jonah, returned to their former sins; Through their
Ambition, Covetousness, and Cruelty, they overthrew the Kingdoms of Syria,
and Samaria, after Jonah his time; They invaded Judea, and besieged Jerusalem;
and grew up to be like a great Cedar in Lebanon, Ezekiel. XXXI. 3, -- 9. And Nahum
now propounds Gods dreadful power in himself; and his furious revenge upon his
enemies: that He will make an utter end of Nineveh; affliction shall not rise
up the second time; No more of the name of the Assyrian shall be sown. And
this shall be for Judah's Consolation chap. I. And then he expounds more fully
the Manner, and the Means of the Ruin of Nineveh; and the woeful Mourning for
it, that they shall mourn, as with the voice of Doves, tabering upon their
breasts; and bewailing their former flourishing estate, chap. II. And lastly,
He insists upon her sins, the Causers of Gods wrath, in her shameful ruin:
ascertained by the example of populous No (or Alexandria) to be verified upon
her; that notwithstanding all her strong holds, and numerous Assyrian
Captains, and crowned Commanders; yet there shall be no healing of her bruise,
and mortal wound, chap. III.

Not Nahum I. 15. But Esaias LII. 7. is alleged, Romans X. 15.

Habakkuk.
HABAKKVK; Does comfort the godly against the Chaldeans; as Nahum did against
the Assyrians. He succeeds Nahum soon after. He does humbly expostulate with
God of his delay, to hear, and to redress things amiss; Complaining to him of
his peoples sins; chap. I. 1, -- 4. And declaring from God, his wonderful
judgments to come upon them by the Chaldeans, verse 5, -- 11. He states the
End and Issue of Gods dealing therein, verse 12. And yet after admiration, and
expostulation, that God should use such wicked instruments for executioners of
his judgments upon his people, verse 13, -- 17. He puts the godly upon their
living by Faith, chap. II. 1, -- 4. And then he largely insists upon the
Chaldeans several sins, Intermixing their punishment for them, verse 5, --
20. And lastly, concludes with a wonderful Prayer, chapter III. Celebrating therein
Gods mavelous, and mighty works, of terrible executions upon the enemies, and
of the deliverances of his people, in ancient times: and triumphing in Faith,
even in the worst of times, in expectation of the like deliverance.

Is thrice alleged in the New Testament. Heb. X. 38 to persuade to Patience,
Gal. III. II. to prove, No justification by the Law. And Romans I. 17. to prove
justification by Faith. The Hebrew is, The just shall live by his Faith. The
Apostle still omits the particle his. The LXX. translating the Hebrew, have my
for his. That place, Heb. X. 37, 38. may seem only to allude to this place,
Hab. II. ver. 3, 4. with a liberty of some Variation; which most accords with
the LXX. translation of the Hebrew text.

Here is Selah in the middle of a verse. verse 9. Though very rarely so. Of
Selah, see A. Rivet on Psalm. XXIV. 6.

Zephanie.
ZEPHANIE; Prophesies toward the beginning of the days of Josiah, chap. I. 1.
and chap. II. 13. He does charge upon Judah, and Jerusalem great and grievous
sins: And does threaten them therefore with a great Day of the Lords wrath,
near at hand, chap. I. He exhorts them to Repentance before the day of the
Lords anger come upon them. And warnes them by Examples of like judgments upon
Neighboring Nations, denounced against them, chapter II And after a sharp Reproof
and Commination of Jerusalem taken up again; He concludes with glorious
Promises of her deliverance and restoration at the last; and of Evangelical
Blessings; and that God will joy over her, and rest in his love.

Her Prophets are light and treacherous persons] Hos. Micah III. 5, 6, 11.
Deuteronomy. XIII. Prophets of Baal, 1 King XVIII. 2 Kings 10, 19. False Prophets in
Israel, and Judah, 1 Kings XXII. Neh. VI. 14. Esaias XXVIII. 7. Ier. V. 31. and
VIII. 1, 2. and XIV* 13, 14. and XXIII. 9, 13, 14, etc. and XXVI. 8. and XXVII.
14, etc. and XXVIII. 1, 10, 16. Ezekiel. XIII. and XIV chapters. See the Argument
upon the Prophecy of Ezekiel. So there were false Prophetesses, Neh. VI. 14.
Ezekiel. XIII. 17, 18. Apoc. II 20. And again there were both true Prophets, some
extraordinary ones, spoken of, John VII. 52. extraordinarily called, and
qualified: Others ordinary, mostwhat, if not altogether Priests; and Levites,
going under the name of Prophets, from the times of Ahab, and after. And also
there were true Prophetesses, as Deborah, Huldah, Anna, and Philips four
daughters Virgins.

Haggai.
HAGGAI; His whole Prophecy is within the compass of somewhat less then four
months: and was upon four several days within that time; viz. in the second
year of Darius [Hystaspis] on the VI. Month, first day, chap. I. 1. 24. day,
chap. I. 13, 15.
VII. Month, 21. day, chap. II. 1. IX. Month, 24. day, chap. II. 10, 18, 20.


The maine matter is, for Zerubbabel, the Governor of Judah, and Joshua, the
High Priest, To Build the Temple. With the Promise of the greater Glory of this
Temple, then of the Former, by the Coming of the Messiah into it.

Zechariah.
ZECHAIAH; Prophesies likewise in the reign of Darius; in his II. year 8th.
month, chap. I. 1. 11th. month, 24 day, chapter I. 7.
IV. year, 9. month, 4. day, chapter VII. 1.


He Prophesied likewise, with Haggai, to Zerubbabel, and Joshua for the
Building of the Temple, Ezra. V. 1. Adding the Promise of the Branch. And he
being the son of Barachiah, chapter I. 1, 7. And living after the second Temple
was builded, at the later end of the Old Testament, He may seem rather to be
meant by our Savior, Matthew. XXIII. 35. though his Death be not recorded
before; then that Zechariah flaine by Ioash, 2 Chronicles. XXIV. 21. as the Great
Annotations on 2 Chronicles. XXIV. 20. would have it.

There were seventy years, from Iehojakim his fourth year, to Darius the Mede:
and from Iehojacin, to Cyrus his Monarchy: and from Zedekiah's eleventh year,
to the second of Darius Histaspis: and from the murder of Cedaliah, to the
fourth of Darious, chap. I. 7, 12. and VII. 1, 5. Thus the best Chronologers do
agree.

The Man and Angel, for he is called both that talked with the Prophet, and is
mentioned, chap. I. 8, -- 14, 19. And again, that Commands the Angel that met
him to run, and speak to the Prophet, chap. II. verse 3, 4. And again, is
mentioned, chap. III. 1, -- 6. and chap. IV. 1, -- 5. and chap. V. 5, 10. and
chap. VI. 4. is the Son of Man, the Angel of the Covenant Jesus Christ. And so
again, The Branch, and Stone is Christ, chap. III. 8, 9.

The four Horns, are Principaly the Chaldeans; And the four Carpenters, the
Medes and Persians chap. I. 18, 20.

The Candlestick, with the seven Lamps of it; alluding to the Candlestick in
the Temple; Represents the Church, shining forth to the world in the light of
Faith, and Life; of Profession, and Conversation, Matthew. V. 15, 16. Phil. II.
15. The two Olive trees, and Branches, that through the two golden Pipes empty
the golden Oil, out of themselves into the Bowl, and thence to be conveyed by
the seven Pipes, to the seven Lamps of the Candlestick, may seem best to
signify the manifold Gifts and Graces of God* and of Christ, flowing from Him,
by the Spirit; and the mystical power of communicating the same, sundry ways,
and by sundry means, to the Church, and to the chief anointed Rulers of it;
for the plentiful use, and good of it. Chap. IV.

Chap. VIII. 19. The Fast of the IV. Month, ninth day, was for the taking of
Jerusalem, Jer. XXXIX. 2 and LII. 6, 7. 2 Kings XXV. 3. V. Month, tenth day,
was for the burning of the Temple, and City, by Nebuzaradan, 2 Kings XXV. 8.
Jer. LII. 12, 13. VII. Month, for the murder of Gedaliah, Jer. XLI. 1, etc. X.
Month, tenth day, was for the first day of laying the Siege against Jerusalem,
Jer. LII. 4. 2 Kings XXV. 1.


Of Swearing see my Notes on Genesis

pleasant land] Heb. Psalm. CVI. 24. Jer. III. 19. Hephzi-bah, Beulah, Esa^,
LXII. 4. the glory of all lands, which God spied out for them, Ezekiel. XX. 6.

Is cited in Mat. Mar. XI. 2, -- 7. Luke XIX. 30, -- 37. John XII. 15. Where
Christ rides, not one while upon the Ass, another while upon the Colt; but
upon the Colt only, Mar. XI. 7. Luke XIX. 30, -- 35. Even upon the Colt, the
foale of an Ass; as the same particle is used, Mark X. 45. And a Speech not
unlike is that, Matthew. XXVII. 44.

His staff of Beauty seems to be his Loving,

His staff of Bands, or Binders, his severe Ruling them by Punishments; as,
Esaias X. 5. The three Shepherds seem to be the many evil Priests and Prophets;
and happily those three Sects of Pharisees, Sadduces, and Essenes; or Priests,
Scribes, and Lawyers, in the days of our Savior. The Price, and Potter, are
cited, and expounded, Mat. XXVI. 15. and chap. XXVII. 9, 10.

His breaking both the Staves, seems to signify the utter rejecting of Judah,
and Israel; and the taking to him the Israel according to the Spirit, all true
Believers. The foolish Shepherd signifies evil Pastors, and Governors, which
God suffered to raise themselves to those Offices.

Cited and alleged, John XIX. 37. and Apoc. I. 7. where Saint John leaves the
LXX. Translation scoffed, or insulted; and sticks to the Hebrew Text, pierced.

The like is done by Matthew. XXVI. 31. and Mark XIV. 27. in alleging that Text,
Zech. XIII. 7.

a rough garment] Or garment of hair. of the world. So Elias is called an
hairy man; not in body, as Esau; but in his rough and hairy attire, and
letherne girdle, 2 Kings I. 8. And so John Baptist, the second Elias,
answerable to him, had his raiment of Camels hair, not finely spun into
Chamlet, or Grogran, but into rough sackcloth, or hair-cloth, such as is
mentioned, Apoc. VI. 12. And suitable to his letherne girdle, and course diet,
Matthew. III 4. And so those two witnesses did Prophecy clothed in sackcloth,
Apoc. XI. 3. And so Esaias the Prophet used to go attired, Esaias XX. 2.

Shows that in Egypt there is no rain;

Malachi.
MALACHI; The last Prophet; and after the Temple was built; Contemporarie with
Nehemiah, as may seem by chap. II. 11. and chap. III. 8. compared with Neh.
XIII. Or at least presently after him, in the later end of the reign of
Artaxerxes Longimanus; or, in the time of Ochus called Nothus. He ends the Old
Testament; Reproving their Prophansing of Gods Worship in the Temple, chap. I.
7, -- 14. And other manifold Vices in their lives: Threatening them, both
Priests, and People: and Exhorting to Repentance, chap. II. Promising, and
Propheticaly telling them, of the sending of Elijah, the Messenger, and
Harbinger; And of the sudden coming of the Lord of the Covenant, in whom they
delight, to his Temple, chap. III. 1, etc. Mean while Referring them to the
Law of Moses. In his Prophecy he prooceeds most Dialogisticaly.

Hence Saint Paul argues directly, ratione pari, by a Consequent at least,
Romans IX. 11, 12, 13. for the Freedom of Gods Will and Pleasure, in the free
Election of some to Salvation; and the Preterition of others.

Seek the Law at his mouth] The Priests duty to teach it. Ier. II. 8. Deuteronomy.
XXXIII. 10. Neh. VIII. 8. The Prophets so frequently mentioned in the practice
of it, ordinarily were the Priests and Levites.

Against Polygamie, Matthew. XIX 3, -- 13.

Chap. III. 1. and chapter IV. v. 5, 6. mentioning the Messenger, Elijah, is
expounded of John Baptist, by Zacharias, Luke I. 76. and by Mark, chapter I. v. 2,
3, 4. and by our Savior himself, Matthew. XI. 10, -- 14.

dreadful day] Ierusalems final destruction by Vespasian and Titus.

to the children] Or, rather with the children; turning and converting them
both to Christ, by his preaching of Repentance, and Faith in Jesus; so
preparing the way before him.

FINIS.

