DR. REIGNOLDS HIS LETTER TO that Worthy Councellor, SIR FRANCIS KNOLLES,
Concerning some passages in Dr. Bancroft Sermon at PAVLES Cross, Feb. 9. 1588.
in the Parliament time.

As also A QVESTION RESOLVED BY A LEARNED DOCTOR, whether the Angels of the
seven Churches, Revel. 2, and 3. make for Episcopal prae-eminence Jure Divino.

LONDON Printed by W. I. dweling in Red-crosse Street. 1641.

DOCTOR REIGNOLDS his Letter to Sr. Francis Knolles concerning Dr. Bancrofts
Sermon at Paul's cross, Feb. 9. 1588. in the Parliament time.
ALbeit (Right honorable) I take greater comfort in laboring to discover and
overthrow the errors of Jesuits and Papits, (enemies of religion) then of the
ministers of Christ, yet seeing it has pleased your Honor to require me to
show mine opinion of some things that certain of these men maintain and stand
in, I thought it my duty by the example Deuteronomy, 33, 9.
of Levi, who said of his father and mother I regard them not, nor
acknowledged he his brethren to declare the truth without respect of persons.

Of the two points therefore in Doctor Bancrafts sermon which your honor
mentions, one is concerning that he semeeth to avouch the superiority which
Bishops have among us over the Clergy to be Gods own ordinanc though not by
express words yet by necess^ry consequence; In that he affirmed that there
opinion who oppugn that their s^^^riorety to be heresy, wherein I must
confess he has committed and oversight in my Judgment, and himself I think
advertised thereof will acknowledge it, for havinge page 18.
said first that Aerius affirms that there was no difference by the word of
God betwixt a Pressed and a Bishop and afterward that Martin and his companions
do maintain this point of Aerius, he adds that Aerius persisting therein was
condemned for an heretic by the general consent of the whole Church, page 19.
and likewise page 69
that Martins, and all his companions opinio^^ has herein been condemned for
heresy.

Touching Martine, if any man behave himself otherwise then in discretion and
charity he ought, let the blame be laid where the fault is, I defend him not;
but if by the way, he utter a truth, mingled with whatsoever else, it is not
reason that that, which is of God, should be condemned for that which is of
man; no more then the doctrine of the resurection should be reproved because
Act, 2 3.8.
it was maintained and held by the Pharisees. Wherefore removing the odious name
of Martin, from that which in sincerety and love is to be dealt with, it
appears, by the aforesard words of D. Bancroft, that he avoucheth the
Superiorety which Bishops have over the Clergy to be of Gods own ordinance;
for he improveth the impugners of it, as holding with Aerius, that there is no
difference by the word of God betwixt a Pressed, and a Bishop, which he could not
do with reason, unless he himself proved the Bishops supreriorety, as
established by Gods word: and he adds, that their opinion, who gain say it
is Heresy, whereof it insueth he think it contrary to Gods word; since Heresy
is an error repugnant to the truth of the word of God, as (according to 1 Timothy,
6, 3. Titus 3, 10. 2 Pet 1 19 21.
the Scriptures) our own Church The defense of the Apolog. part 1 et 7 de
vision 2 answ. to the Rhem. Titus 3 10,
does teach us.

Now the Arguments which he brings to prove it an heresy, are partly
overweake and partly untrue: ouerweake that pa 18
he begins with, out of Epiphanius; untrue, that he adjoyneth of the general
consent of the Church. For though Epiphanius do say, that Aerius his assertion
is full of folly, pa 19, et 69
yet he disproveth not the reason which Aerius stood on, out of the Scriptures;
nay he deals so in seeking to disprove it, that Bellarmine the Jesuit, Tom.
1 cont 5 lib, 1 ca^pt 5
though desirous to make the best of Epiphanius, whose opinion herein he
maintains against the Protestants, yet is f^rced to confsse, that Epiphanus
his answer is not all of the the wisest, nor any way can fit the text.

As for the general consent of the whole Church which D. Bancroft says,
condemned that opinion of Aerius for an Heresy, and himself for an Heretic,
because he persist^d in it, that is a la^ge speech: but what proof has he
that the wh^le Church did so? It appears he says in Heresy 15,
Epiphanius. It does not, and the contrary appears by in epist ad Titum 1 et
Epist 85 ad Evagrium
S. Jerome, and sundry others, who lived some in the same time, some after
Epiphanivs, even Saint Austin himself, though D. Bancroft cite him, as
beareing witness thereof* likewise I grant S. Austin cap 53.
in his book of heresies, ascribes this to Aerius, for one, that he said,
Presbiterum ab episcopo nalla differentia deberi discerni: but it is one thing
to say, there ought to be no difference betwixt them, (which Aerius saying
condemned the Churches order, yea made a schism therein, and to is censured by
S. Austen counting it an heresy as In Ar^ument prefix lib, 3
Epiphanius be took it recorded, himself, as de here is, ad quod unit De umin
prefatio ne
he witnesses, not knowing how far the name of Heresy should be stretched)
another thing to say, that by the word of God there is no difference betwixt
them, but by the order and custom of the Church. which S. Austen Epist, 19
says in effect himself, so far was he from witnssing this to be heresy by
the general consent of the whole Church Which untruth how wrongfully it is
fathered one him and on Epiphanius (who yet are all the wi^nesses, that D.
Bancroft has produced for the proof hereof, or can for ought that I know) it
may appear by this, that our learned country man of godly memory Bishop
defense of the Apolog part 2 cap. 9 divis 1, page 198.
Jewel, when Harding to convince the same opinion of heresy alleged the same
witnesses, cyting, to the contrary Chrysostom, Ierom, Austen, and Ambrose,
knit up his Answer with these words: All these, and other more holy Fathers,
together with the Apostle S. Paul, for thus saying by Hardings advice, must be
held for heritickes. And Michaell Medina (s) a man of great account in the
Council of Trent, more ingenious here in then many other Papists, affirms
not only the former ancient writers alleged by Bishop Jewel, but also an
other Ierom, Theodoret, Primasius, Sedulius, and Theophilact, were of the same
mind touching this matter with Aerius. With whom agree likewise in 1 Timothy, 3.
Oecumenius, De sacris, hom, orig, et confir. lib, 1. cap 5.
and in Epist, ad Titum.
Anselmus Arbp: B: of Canturbury, and an Collect, can. lib, 7 cap, 87, and 127.
other Anselmus, and Policar lib 2 Titus 19, et 39.
Gregory, and (z) Gratian, and after them how many? It being once enrolled in
the Cannon law for found, and Catholic doctrine, and thereupon publikly taught
by learned Author gloss. in ca did, citat. hodericus ca^^. Ave lat, inconcil,
Basil, Du^ren, de sacra eccle minist. lib 1 cap. 7.
men; All which do bear witness against D. Bancroft, of the point in
question, that it was not condemned for in Heresy by the general consent of
the whole Church: For if he should reply, Ccap, legimus, did, 39, cap, Olimp,
did, 95.
that these later witness did live a 1000 years after Christ, and therefore
touch not him who page 19.
said, it was condemned so in the time of S. Austin, and of page 69.
Epiphanius, the most flourishing time of the Church that ever happened since
the Apostles days, either in respect of learning or of zeal, first they, whom
I named, though liveing in a latter time, yet are witnesses of the former.

Oecumenius the Greek Scholiast treading in the steps of the old greek
Fathers, and the two Anselmes, with Gregory, and Cratian, expresing S. Ieromes
sentence word by word. Besides that, perhaps it is not very likely that
Anselmes of Caunterbury should have been Canonized by the Pope of Rome, and
worhiped for a Saint, that the other Anselmes, and Gregory, should have such
place in the Popes library, and be esteemed of as they are: that Gratians
works should be allowed so long time by so many Popes for die golden
foundation of the Canon law, if they had taught that for Catholic, and sound,
which by the general consent of the whole Church, in the most flourishing time
that ever happened since the Apostles days, was condemned for heresy: cheifely
in a matter of such weight, and moment, to the Popes supremacy: which as they
do claim over all Bishops by the ordinance of God, so must they allow to
Bishops over Pristes by the same ordinance, as they say at length: and
therefore have not only decreed it now in the Sess 28 cap 4. canon 6 et 7.
Council of Trent, but also in Annot. marg, ad cap legimus did. 1^.
the new edition of their Canon law have set down this note, that one Hughs
Gloss allowed by the Archdeacon (saying, that Bishops have differed from
Priests always as they do now in Government, and Prelatship, and and efices,
and Sacraments, but not in the name and Title of Bishop, which was Common to
them both) must be hell hereafter for S. Ieromes meaning at least for the
meaning of the Canon taken out of S. Ierom, though his words be flat and
plain against this gloss, as Bellarmine Tom 1 contro 3 lib. 1 cap.
himself confesses. Whereto may beadded, that they also who have labored
about the reforming of the Chvrch these 500 year, have taught that all Pasters
be they entitled Bishops, or Priests, have equal authority and power by Gods
word, First the Aeneus Silvius histo. ^o^em, cap 35 et Pigh Hierarch Eccles.
lib 1 ^ap 10. Defens, p^cit (...) 2. cap. 15
Waldenses, next (i) Marsitius Patavinus then (k) Wickliffe and his scholars;
afterward Aeneas Silvius loco citato.
Husse: and Hussites: last of all Adversus fall so nominat or din, epist et ad
ver Pap^ Romans
Luther, in epist, ad philip, 1 et Titus 1
Calvine Apos. Confess Wit^e^^. c 2 21.
Brentius, Decad 5 set, 3
Bullinger, Loc Com. Tit de minist verbi,
Musculus and other, Tho, Walde^ doct fidei Tom 1: lib 2 cap 60. et Tom 2 c 17
who might be reckoned perticularly in great number, since as here with us both
Bishops; and the Quienes (s) Professors of Divinity Jewel loca citat, et
Pilkington in the Treatise of burning Paul's C^urc^s D Humphrey in cap et in
D^re^^ Iesuitas part 2 ^at, 3 et D Whit ad tat. Camp^a^^ et confuta, Durel
Iesuitae lib 6,
in our Universities, and M. Bradford, Lambert et others. M. For Acts et. D
Fulke against Bristow Motives 40. and Answer to the Rhemists Titus 1, 5.
other learned men do consent therein: so in foreign Nations all whom I have
read treating of this matter, and many more (no doubt) whom I have not read,

The sifting and examyning of the Trent Counsel has been under taken by only
two, which I have seen, the one a divine, the other a Lawyer, part 2.
Kemnis^^s, lib, 4.
and Gentilletus; they both condemn the contrary doctrine thereunto, as a
Trenterrour; the one by Scriptures; and Fathers, the other by the Canon Law.
But what do I further speak of several persons? It is the common judgment
of the Reformed Churches of Helvetia, Savoy, France, Scotland, Germany,
Hungary, Polon, the Lowcountries, and our own, witness the Ha^mony sect 11. in
Helvet, post G^lia, Belgia, Anglia. etc.
Harmony of Confessions.

Wherefore since D. Bancroft (I assure my self) will not say that all these
have approved that as sound and christian doctrine, which by the general
consent of the whole Church, in a most flowrishing time, was condemned for
heresy: I hope he will acknowledge, that he was over seen, in that he
avouched, the Superiority which Bishops have among us over the Clergy to be
of Gods own ordinance. And thus far of the former point of D. Bancroft
Sermon.

The latter is, concerning that he affirms, that S. Ierem page 14, et 69.
says, and M. Calvin seems on his report, to confess that Bishops have had
the said superiority ever since the time of S Mark the Evangelist. Of the
which point I think as of the former; since neither Ierom says it, neither
does Calvin seem to confess it on his report. For Bishops among us, besides
ordeyning, and laying on of hands, may do sundry other things, which inferior
Ministers, or Priests (as D. Bancroft terms them) may not; But Epist, ad
Evagrum.
Ierom, after mention of the superiority allotted to Bishops since S. Marks
time, what does a Bishop (says he,) except ordination, which a Priest does
not? Meaning, and in forcing by this kind of speech, as a thing most evident,
and such as no man could deny, that Bishops had, that only power above Priests
then, which Hom, 11. in 1, Tim.
Chrysostom also witnesses.

Though nether had they it alone in all places as it is apparent by a Council.
4. ^an. 3.
Counsel of Carthage, showing their Churches order: that the Priests laid
their hands together with the Bishop on those who were ordained. Yet Ierom
having proved by testimony of Scripture, that in the Apostles times, Bishops,
and Priests were all one, even in the right In 1 Timothy, 4 14.
of this two, grants that afterward Bishops had that peculiar unto
themselves some where, but nothing else save it. S. Ierom therefore says not
of that superiority whereof the question is, that Bishops have had it ever
since S. Marks time.

No more does M. Calvin seem to confess it upon his report. For Calvin in the
(same Instit, lib. 4, cap, 4, sect, 2
place that D. Bancroft quoteth) showing how in old time the Ministers that had
charge to teach chose of their company one in every city, to whom they did
especially give the title of Bishop; lead equality should breed dissension, yet
(says he) the Bishop was not above them in honor and dignity, that he had
rule over them, but look what is the consuls duty in the Senate. to propose
matters, to ask their opinions, to direct others by giving the^ advise, by
admonishing, by exorting, to guide the whole action by his authority, and see
that performed which was agreed upon by their common consent, that charge had
the Bishop in the assembly of Ministers. And having declared, that S. Ierom
shows this to have been brought in by the consent of men upon the first of
Titus, he adds that the same S. Ierom otherwhere shweth, how ancient an order
of the Church it was, even from S. Marks time to Hereclas and, Dionisius at
Alexandria. In which words of Calvin, seeing that the Order of the Church he
mentions, has evident relation to that before described, and that in the
describing of it, he had said, the Bishop was not so above the rest in honor to
rule over the^: It followed, that M. Calvin does not so much as seem to
confess of Ieroms report, that ever since S. Marks time Bishops have had a
ruling superiority over the Clergy.

Wherefore to use no more profes in a thing manifest which else might easily be
proved more at large out of S. Ierom and M. Calvin both: it is certain that
neither of them does affirm, that Bishops so long time have had such
superiority as D. Bancroft seems to father upon them.

Thus have I signified mine opinion of the points that your Honor specified in
D. Bancrofts Sermon. Which yet if he, or any do prove, that I have erred in,
or take him otherwise then I ought, I shall be willing by Gods grace to
correct: 1 Cor. 14.31.
remembering the Apostle lesson, that The spirits of the Prophets are subject to
the Prophets. 19 Sept: 1598.

FINIS.
A QVESTION RESOLVED BY A LEARNED DOCTOR, whether the Angels of the seven
Churches, Revel. 2, and 3. make for Episcopal prae-eminence Jure Divino.
For the Negative. First Did these seven Angels denote seven praesidents of
the Praesbyteries of those seven Churches, yet this would not conclude for
episcopal praeeminence over Presbyters. Cicero pro Mu^aenaicum multi pares
dignitate sunt, vnus tamen primum locum s^lus potest obtinere.
For D Reignolds was of opinion (in his conference with Heart) that in each of
these 7. Churches, there was praeses praesbiteri^, and that such a one is noted
by the Angel; yet was he utterly against the Ius divinum of Episcopal
praeeminence over praesbiters. as appears by his letter to Sir Francis
Knolles.

2. But there is no sufficient evidence to prove that in those seven Churches
there was any such praeses, praesiding over the rest of the praesbiters, for
these Reasons.

1. When Paul sent to Ephesus for the praesbiters Act. 20 when he told them
they should see his face no more, we find no color of any such praesidency
among them. to them the Church is commended to be fed by them, without all
respect to Tymothy who stood at his elbow, and had been with him in Macedonia,
and was now waiting upon him to Jerusalem.

2. M. Mede in his Co^mentary upon the Revel. page 265. has these words.
Denique (vt iam semel iterumque monvimus) quoniam Deus Angelos adhibit
providentiae suae, in rerum humanarummotubus, and conversionibus ciendis,
gubernandisque administros, id cirquoque multorum manibus perag u^ ur, Angelo
tame^ tanquam rei gerend^^ pre sidi and duci pro co^muni, loquendi modo
tribunntur. Lastly (as we have already once and again admonished) because God
uses the Angels of his providence, as ministers in the mooving and managing of
the motions and conversions of humane affairs; therefore those things which are
performed by many, are nevertheless attributed (as we speak commonly, to the
Angel as the presaes and author of the managing of the businsse. Now if it be
so, that in other places, where one Angel is mentioned, many are meant, may it
not be so in this?

3 If by the Name of the Angel in each place is comprehended the whole Church,
how much more by that Angel may, yea must be comprehended the whole company
of presbyters? But under the Name of that Angel is comprehended the whole
Church, as Ambrosiv^ An^bertus in his second book upon the Revelation, not
only writes but proves in these words: Vna eademque locvtione and Angelos
and ecclesias Vnum esse designat: Nam cum in principio locutionum, quaead
septem fiunt Angelos dicat, et Angelo illius ecclesiaescorbe, in fine tamen
earundem noe dicit: qui habet aurem, audiat quid spiritus dicat Angelo, sed
quid Ecclesia dicat.

Thirdly, For further evidence unto this Truth it is observable from the very
Text it self, that albeit the seven Candlestickes are said to be the seven
Churches; In heaven that goes for a starr which some times is found to be a
compound of many stars.
yet the seven Stars are not said to be seven Angels of the seven Churches,
but thus, The seven stars are the Angels of the seven Churches. Revel. 1.20.

Fourthly, This is further confirmed by Epiphanius, who writing of the Heresy
of the Milesians, says, that in ancient times, this was peculiar to Alexandria
that it had but one Bishop, whereas other cities had two. And he being Bishop
of Cyprus, might well be acquanted, with the condition of the Churches of Asia,
which were so nigh unto him.

5 yet is there a more pregnant argument the^ these, out of the very text, and
it is taken out of the epistle to Thyatira, where a distinction is made between
the members of that Church thus (...), vobis and reliquis: Now who are
signified by vobis, but those to whom he spoke under the name of the Angel? And
by Reliquis, who are signified but the rest of the people? The people governed,
and you governing, and that in the plural number, vobis: what can be more
evident to prove, that by the Angel is meant all the presbiters which have a
joint preeminence over the people, not one in preeminence over the presbiters?
Yet what is this preeminence of presbiters over the people, not a preeminence
of Dominion, but a preeminence of service, and therefore ought to be called not
(...) an Hierarchy, or sacred government, as commonly it is, but (...) rather,
a servile Government: as the Author of the History of the Council of Trent
well observes, and all the authority of the Church in the exercise of
ecclesiastical ce^sures, even of the sorest Excommunication it self, is but
the fruit of love, and for their good on whom it is exercised, mourning for
them, who through hardness of heart could not mourn for themselves, and
therefore to excommunicate is in Scripture phrase to mourn 1 Cor. 5.2. and 2
Cor. 12 2.

Lastly, The censures of the Church were (...), the censures of many, and not
the censures of one, 2. Cor. 2.6. And surely, when our Savior referres us to
the Church, under these words, Dic Ecclesiae, Mat. 18. he referrs us not to
one, but to many.

FINIS.

