Raillerie a la Mode CONSIDERED: OR THE SUPERCILIOUS DETRACTOR.

A Joco-serious Discourse; showing the open Impertinence and Degenerosity of
Publishing Private Pecques and Controversies to the World.

Occasionally Written. To a Young Gentleman, to show the Odium of this
Ingentile Humor, and to direct him in the best choice of Men and Books.

Multi cum alijs maledicunt, sibi ipsis convicium faciunt,
Seneca. LONDON, Printed by T. R. and N. T. for Henry Million at the Bible in
Fleetstreet, MDCIXXIII.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
Generous Reader,
FOR such I would have thee to be, to Answer the true Design of these few
Sheets: First occasionally writ by way of Advice to a Young Gentleman abroad,
and I humbly conceive not unseasonable to any that make pretense to that Name
or Quality.

It teaches true Curtisie, Charity, Civility, and the Duty of Good Language
which we owe unto all Men, which are indeed the Supreme Points of Generosity,
Policy, Christianity, as well as of Moral Virtues, among such as approve and
practice them.

You have here the Character of a Detractor, accurately drawn forth and
Detected through all his Protean Shapes and Disguises, with the true
Imbelishments that should adorn a Bred and Worthy Man, whereby your self are
left to judge which of these are most amiable, when you behold both their
Pictures here set before you.

These Lines were purposely set to pull up this Croking Mandrake (Detraction)
from amongst us, and to root (...)

(...) deed is this strictly so, for it is no more than the Old mad Humor of
the Cobbler of Gloucester new Vampt.

And lest you may not perhaps have seen enough by the Books themselves I have
(at your desire) sent you, I shall take a little pains to give you my Sense of
the present sort of Writing, to show you (as seasonable to your Young and
Inconversant Years) the Ridiculousness, Incivility, and Inhumanity of it, in a
few short and sober Reflections on this Public Piece of Folly, which does but
indeed render us the mere Ludibrium and May Game of Strangers, it is a fashion
so illy introduced among us.

It is a Vicious sort of Buffoonry, that this mistaken Age is ready to cry up
for a high acquired Ornament) and Piece of Refined Education, while a sober
Judgment, or modest Innocence, is as much mistook, and exploded for mere
Dullness and Ignorance. He that can abuse another handsomely, is presently
applauded for a shrewd Wit, a notable Man, which indeed imports no better than
an abusive K -- as a good harmless honest Man is but the better word for a Fool.

It is indeed, Sir, much my satisfaction, that your Retired inclination has so
happily settled you, (for your seasoning time) so commodiously remote from the
Corrupt Converse of a great part of this Infectious Town: And I assure you,
that I think it altogether my Duty to be as careful that no Contagious Subjects
come intrudingly to your hands; and would also advise you to be as cautious of
receiving any, as many were of London-Letters the last Great Pestilence here
amongst us.

Pray take this Advice as from a Friend that most unfeignedly Loves and Tenders
you; and be sure ever to Choose your Books as you would your Acquaintance, (i.
e.) let them be few, choice, and reputable.

You cannot well complain you want good Company, when you are not withont good
Authors to converse with; and that too at the best Advantage, (as I take it)
their Writings being for the most part much the best of them, compared with
their common converse and personal society.

When you are soberly contemplative, your Companion is still at hand to
entertain your Humor; when your thoughts incline you another way, then have you
others to divert you; and when you are weary of all, at last you may take down
Apollo's Lute, and refresh your fancy with the most pleasing, and not
unprofitable, strains of Poetry, English or others.

But truly to Buy or Read these Cudgel-playing Books, is but to make
Billings-gate your Diversion; or to know the best way how to give bad Language:
it is no better than downright Railing, Frenchisi'd into Raillerie a la mode.

Beside the smart Itch of Writing and Replying in this New Canting Drolling
Way, made up of a few fugitive Expressions, I am sure he that gives himself up
to this, must at once licentiously let go the Rains of his Sobriety, Reason,
and Religion, to play at Have at All; or to Write in a Refined sort of Frenzy:
For let his Rodamantadoes and Bombast be but unreachably Remote, or Far-fought,
(as we commonly say) and it will want nothing to make it off; provided the
Bookseller be but Wise.

To be Witty at this Rate, is certainly very Poor, Pitiful, as well as
Spightful, for any one to signalize himself by, because every one that will
(sans regard) assume this abominable abusive Liberty, may as easily attain the
accomplishment (if any will have it one) for as much as Men's Wits are naturally
readier at this than any other Theme: Yet though the Ape be never so curiously
tricked up, he is still but the same: so let such Works be set out in never so
quaint Language, yet what are they better then unsavory Breaths perfumed? a
more precious kind of stink in the Nostrils of either the Judicious or Good;
and smell still too much of the Dunghill Declamations of the Schools; studied
Oppositions, though by some they may be said smart or witty, yet the order of
their Design, or Matters wherewith they meddle, are very little Just or
Conformable to the Precepts of good Morality, Humanity, or Christianity, in any
degree; and so base and degenerate a Genius, ought utterly to be abandoned by
the sober and civil sort of Mankind, and of all that prosess and love Virtue,
as dissentaneous to the right Rules of true Generosity; and as much beneath
that Grandeur of a Christians high Profession, which teaches Men not to revile
and slander one another; and forewarns them from being Busybodies in other
Men's matters.

Some Men, in the heat of Humor, while the letcherous Itch lasts, care not who
they Traduce or Reflect upon, so they can but do it handsomely in huggermugger.
Kings and Privy Counselors cannot escape them. But could you peep through the
Keyhole while he is in close Adultery (in his Study) with his Wanton Muse, and
let but a Mouse, or the least Noise stir, how he obrupty starts, and rumples up
the Naughty Sheets in more haste and confusion than the Gallant shifts the
Scene of his private Debaucheries upon a dangerous surprise! and when all is
whist, is presently at it again.

When it is once delivered, it is presently pawned upon the Public, like a Brat
upon the Parish, the Incognito Parent standing by to observe how it is received;
who railes, with the rest, against that, which shame and danger dares not let
him own for fear of Penance, or a Whipping-post.

But 'twere with such highly ridiculous, to ask in St. Paul's Language, What
Profit have ye of those Things whereof ye are now Ashamed?

And in vain may we expect common Civility from those that are not afraid or
ashamed (at these days) irreverently to scoff at, and impiously to detract
those most Princely Presidents of Piety in holy Writ, David and Solomon. The
lewd and Venereous Person, (who makes his Body a Burnt-offering to his inflamed
Lust) seeks to acquit and justify himself with this Plea, and to seem wittily
wicked, asks you, What did David ail when he complained of his Bones, and his
Sore ran down in the Night? Give him grave and sober Advice, or but go about to
stop him in his Career of Folly, and he presently pleads Solomon; and will
purchase convincement at no cheaper a rate, than the dangerous high Price of
Experience. He builds Sconces, and runs on Tavern-scores, and then Pleades that
Paul Pawned his Cloak, etc.

At this profane and paltry rate he seeks to purchase the repute of witty: he
out-Huffs Hell, out-Hectors Beelzebub, and can dispense with the Name of
Atheist, if he be not proud on it, and openly own and glory in it.

This is one that with little Fear, and less Wit, will still be at his Ludere
cum Sacris; that dare be impudent with Heaven, and saucy with its most awful
Majesty, to the Hearers astonishment, and his own shameful confusion; that,
like an over-daring Vaulter, will forsooth be showing tricks of Activity upon
the very Brink and Precipice of Hell; and play at Hide and Seek with the Devil
himself, till at last he catches him in his Clutches, as the Cat does her
wanton Prey, and so spoils his Sport on a sudden.

But let us leave him to the Justice of that Power his Folly thus
inconsiderately provoked; and Sir let me Advise you to shun the Society of
such, lest you share in their Punishment, and as you would escape the infamous
Censure you will thereby fall under, always taking it for sure, That you shall
go under the same Account and Character of the Company you consort with, since
the World has ever looked upon this Rule as infallible.

And now Sir, passing this, and to come nearer home to my purpose, I shall
briefly observe to you, how profuse and heedless Men now a days are of their
own and others Fame or Reputation, (too valuable to be thrown or made away in
sport) while they thus publicly traduce, detract and asperse one another, as
they do both in word and writing; which latter I shall chiefly take notice of,
and look upon as a Libel of the Devils Dictature, such Writers being set on by
pure Idleness, the Primum mobile of all Mischief.

What is there in it else but a mere Itch of Spleen, edged on by the hope of
building up a new Credit upon another Man's Weakness.

A Leap-Frog Fancy of Writing Alternis Vicibus, by fits and girds, as the Humor
hits, or holds out to the hap-hazard of the adventurous Bookseller, but the
adornment of Posts and Pissing-places, worthy of no further regard or notice,
then the Printed Bills for Prizes at the Bear-Garden, being at best but a Trial
of Skill another way, where both sides beat up and flourish as Victors; but set
no sharper an edge either on their Wits or Weapons, than what will well serve
to cut your Purse-strings, the whole aim of these cheating Challengers* which
if the overcurious Widgins of the World will not believe, but will be still
cozened thus with this Hocus Pocus Humor, let them, I say; but (my good
Friend) I hope you will take my word, and be wiser.

Nor do I indeed much doubt or question your discretion, I understand you, and
you your self better: And the best on it is, such Books, besides making the
Authors ridiculous, do seldom prejudice the Readers more than with loss of
time; nor so altogether, for sure (if he have any sense) he shall grow wiser by
the folly represented him, as Drunkards sometimes loathe themselves by
beholding it soberly in others.

Can we term it less than a shameless incivility in such as would go about to
oblige the World (whether it will or no) to take notice of their Private
Picques and Controversies, which with a great deal of pudder they publicly
expose to common Censure; nor can it be thought less in those that are the
busy Pryers into these public Impertinencies, the very Reading of which is a
kind of unhappiness, but a Revisal both Guilt and Approbation.

Certainly as long as this odd mood lasts of taking up one another Works in
this Nature, we must never look to see Ingenuity flourish, for our growing Wits
will be afraid to put forth, while the early Blossoms of their best Endeavors
are still in danger to be publicly blasted by the vituperous Breath of every
malepert Momus, who like the Basilisk, strikes dead all he sees at first sight,
and whose whole stress of Wit strives only to stiflle others; and such are well
set forth by the Ingenious (and therefore envied) Pen of the sam'd Dryden in
this single Couplet of his: Those that Advantage of each slip do take,
Find but those Faults, which they want Wit to make.


Away then with this ill-natured, disingenious, fault-finding Humor, and be
favorable to the failings of others, as ever you expect Men may in kindness
connive at your failings or imperfections; when they happen Humanum est errare,
it is liable to all in some things, but especially to such as either write much,
or variously often; and ought not with an over-rigid Censure to be too severely
insisted on; for this does but breed vain jangling; for as one ill word begets
another, so (we see) does one abusive Book another, till they even puzzle, as
well as weary the whole World with reading the bare Titles of them.

One Book bears the Bell away one while, and then presently comes out
Reflections, Observations, Answers, Replications, and Exceptions upon it, till
the Press is so bepestred with them, that at last the Sheets grow more numerous
than the long Books and Papers of a Chancery Cause, which are as pertinent and
worthy of publishment as the first, (for ought I know) and in time may both
serve to one and the same use (after the World and the Court have dismissed the
Controversy and Brangle) in a Grocers or a Chandlers Shop.

If any such Book have intruded into your Study, let them be turned out for
Wranglers, as unfit to keep Company with the quiet and civiler sort.

Or take my advice, and change 'em away quickly while the humor holds up, for
others more pleasant and profitable, though (you lose well by 'em) before the
Gamesters have crossed the Cudgels,, and the Ring-round world leaves minding
them: As some tough and sturdy Trojans, after much belabouring one another,
have long since done. -- Laus Deo.

Our Laureat himself cannot escape Calumny, (though I must confess he too much
dared it) that Reward of Wit (Sacred to Poets) he finds could not defend him
from the blast of a Critics Breath. In spite of Apollo's self they will
attaque him; some thinking to be reputed Wits for only impudently daring to
meddle with it.

Thus was he (for sooth) taken to Task, Post-poned, and there Lashed on both
sides by the two, too unkind Universities, Oxford first taking him up, while
his Mother Cambridge Chastised him severely. In the first place, for forgetting
his old Grammar Rules. So rigidly strict were they to keep him to the
scrupulous Precepts of their (long since exploded) Pedantry, befettering his
fugitive fancy in the Poetic Transport, that he should not hereafter Sore
beyond the near Ken of their slow and short sighted Genius; and next for
abusing his Grandsire Shakespeare, and Father Ben, and being very saucy with
others of his Elders. But he is hush and done, say they, while they seem to
hold a little Rod, made up of a few Stalks of disjunctive sense, they had
spightfully spoiled the beautiful Bed of his best Flowers off, and picked out
to lash him with. And fain would they have confined his Licentious Muse (as
they brand her) to her Nunnery: But they since may see how briskly she turns up
her Vail, and with a modest scorn acquaints them in the words of her Hero.
That he has neither concernment enough upon him to write any thing in his own
Defense; neither will he gratify the Ambition of two wrethed Scriblers, who
desire nothing more than to be answered: Finding he wanted not Friends, even
among Strangers, who defended him more strongly, than his contemptible Pedant
could Attaque him.

By this becoming scorn you see how he prevents them from further undertaking
against him, when (like a Morose or Frumpish odd Fellow, bob'd in the Street
with a byword) had he turned again he would have had half the Town hooting at
him. Thus he shows more Wit in his slight and silence, then possibly he ever
would by his Pen when it performs best; though I truly believe that he is able
to make those piecemeal Features, which his over curious Critics examine so
illy apart, to appear in their right place and position, no less then what
himself says, as so many real Beauties in the Eye of such as are able to judge
and admire the true perfections of a Muse.

Sir, I speak this because I know you have always had a just value for Mr.
Dryden's Poems, as well as my self, and I have believed you very discerning
this way; and so he cannot easily be brought low in your esteem; you too well
perceiving the Design of his Enemies without more words.

But to inform you further, having, Sir, lately the leisure of an Afternoon, I
took occasion to go among the Booksellers to enquire what else there was newly
extent: I chopped upon an an Adventurous Author, who had took on him to write
Remarques on the Humor and Conversation of the Town; which had not been long
abroad, but it was seized upon by the sharp Claw of a Critic, and by him
Stigmatized with the Name of Remarques upon Remarques. I was unwilling, and
thought it vain to read one without the other, and so thought best to buy
neither.

But the Bookseller would still impose further on me, and presents me with
another new piece, called the Rehearsal Transprosed, etc. a Title I understood
not I confess: But seeing it a thing that had twice troubled the Press, and
having the Booksellers word that it was worth reading, I took it. But having
spent my time and Money upon it, all I could say was, I found my self very
Wittily beguiled of both: But (believe me) I think I might as well have read
Tom of Lincoln, or Bevis of Southampton, for ought I edified by it, and would
pay thanks to boot to any little Boy to change with me.

Yet truly I must confess, Wit there was in it, but like a Jewel in the
Dunghill of Detraction, not worth the Generous and Ingenious Man's raking for.
But the Crab-tree Stock of some Men's Humors will bear no better Fruit; yet
methinks they should not then carry their sower Sentences to the Press, they
seem so little serviceable or seasonable, and cannot be counted Solomon's
Apples. But some Men's petulant Homours incline them still to transpose the
Proverb, which says, It Is better to be at the latter end of a Feast, than the
beginning of a Fray.

Now you must understand Transprosal is the little a la Mode Word that at
present obtains and has of late made such a deal of Gingle Gangle abroad, by
the help of Transprosing. The Rehearsal Transprosed (Answer) the Transproser
Rehearsed, etc. But how extremely pleasant is it to observe how wittily the
Transproser turns Transposer, and finds himself sport at Tick Tack for half a
Dozen Pages together, and all with two poor Letters [ I. and O.] I warrant the
Man has a most extraordinary fancy at Composing Anagrams and Acrosticks, and is
excellent at Wiredrawing Wit, that can so prittily play with two Letters so
long, and they happened to be lucky ones for his turn.

Every one will have a bob at Bays, though alas he is not likely he get a
wreath of it, for the Wit he lays out upon it. And now the yelp is up, 'stoo
him Bays Cries one; Hollo Bays Cries a second, Whoop Bays a third, enough to
worry one out of his Wits. I cannot tell what better to compare it to, than
like the clapping and scolding of a ragged-canting Crew of Billingsgate
Rhetoricians, or those of Rosemary Lane, where if any will once but give the
Cue of one Word provocative, he shall presently hear a full Peal of most
exquisite Harmony indeed. You shall not meet with a Term so mild as Gregory
Father Gray Beard; they could have furnished him with a Title ten times more
Taking, ( ex Tempore) and possibly more intelligible too. But hanged, let it
pass, it comes all to one purpose.

Having thus given you some hints of this hateful Humor, I would fain draw to
a close with my Discourse, there remains only a few Cautionary Remarques to
direct you in your choice of Men. And what your own Judgment will represent to
you, will render the rest odious enough to your generous mind, without any
further reflections.

If we consider the mischief as well as degenerosity of this Destructive Humor
among Men, either in Words or Writing, we would certainly shun it with greatest
destation.

As then you have any respect for your own Peace and Quiet, endeavor still to
keep your self unconcerned from impertinent listening after* or prying into
private or public Reports of this sort; for that you must either betray, or
inevitably bring in question your Friendship if you conceal it; or if perhaps
on the other side you impart it, you but kindle Coals of contention, and beget
private grudges and heart-burnings, and make your self in a mannner bound
either to accuse or vindicate, and had therefore much better to be deaf and
dumb in such concerns in both Offices.

Be sure therefore to show no kind of Countenance to such as can find no other
means to screw themselves in to your opinion and favor, than by this
treacherous way of traducing others to you.

Nor would I have you over apt to lissen to, or trust him that fain would be
tickling you with adulatory praise of your parts and qualities; especially if
the Party be a stranger to you, and one that you never any ways had obliged
before; for it is common with some sort of men to put on a fawning familiarity
upon the first Acquaintance they have with any one, to make lavish offers of
Friendship and service to you. Sir, (I say) take good heed of such a one, least
there be (as it is odds if there be not) some Sting of Design at the end of
their Tail.

Besides, what can sound more harsh or untunable in the Ear of the generous,
wise or modest, than to hear an Encomiastick Harangue or Elogy of Praise
personally addressed to his Face. Music fit for none but Fools to caper at;
alas! they must be but silly Trouts, that will be so tickled to death. The
saying of Tully ought to be every true Gentleman's; Nolo esse lauditor, ne
videar Adulator. Now (for ought you know) this great Praise may be but Ironice
prodere Famam; the Man that speaks so and so, may possibly mean nothing less,
but the quite contrary; but be sure he that has any Sense, will not be imposed
on at this rate; but will soon find it out, and know how to retort it in the
like Language.

But on the other side, where this kind of Flattery on both sides takes, as
said, sadly, really, and indeed, then cannot there be more pleasant Diversion,
than to see two Asses bray out Applauses to one another. This is Mulus mulum
scabit, or Kee me, and I Will kee thee, as the old Proverb speaks. But certain it
is, none can be flattered of another, till he first flatter himself.

One may observe a sort of Natural Rhetoric, even among the Common Professors
of the Art of Railling; they have their Figures, Graces, and Ornaments peculiar
to their kind of Speech, though they do not distinguish or use them
Grammatically, by the Names of Sarcasmus, Asteismus, Micterismus, Antiphrasis,
Charientismus, or Ironia, yet have they their Dry Bobs, their Broad Flouts,
Bitter Taunts, their Fleering Frumps, and Privy Nips. Besides the use of their
admirable Art of Canting, they have a cunning way of Jeering, accusing others
by justifying themselves, and saying, I never did -- or by asking the Question
general, Who did so and so? Why who did you Whore cries 'tother? did I? and so
the Game begins; but by this evasive way of Abuse they will be sure to keep
wide off the Law's Tenterhooks.

Thus you see there is none can come out Master of this Art that has not been
brought up at Billingsgate, for only there are found the best Proficients of
this kind, which while some of our Authors are but the bashful Imitators; alas,
see how far they fall short of the true force and efficacy that is to be found
in the perfection of this Faculty.

But I have deviated a while from my first discourse, giving you the foregoing
Reflections, I now come again to consider the end of Writing, and what is most
commendable. The principal end of Reading is I am sure to enrich the Mind; and
doubtless that is the best Work where the Graces and the Muses meet. But where
every Man thinks what he lists, speaks what he thinks, writes what he speaks,
and prints what he writes, from such kind of scribbling, carried on by a
frantic Figgary, I do not well apprehend what Advantage can in the least
accrue one way or other to the Readers, either to the enriching their
Discourse, or advancing their Knowledge.

Nor is it easy to conceive the drift or design of this odd fantastic way of
writing without the help of a skilful Interpreter, they having more need of
Notes and a Comment, than the History of Don Quixot, without which you shall be
no more able to apprehend our Author, than capable to carry off the Intregue of
one of our Now-adayes Comedies, so hard it is to force the Poetic Fire out of
their flinty Inventions. The Treasury of Wit being of late so close looked up
in the Wild Meanders of our present Muses, that he that has not the Court-key
of the newest forge, shall hardly be the better for it.

I cannot tell how this way of Writing comes to be now the Mode that so much
obtains, I mean of Detracting and Traducing Persons; for I do not remember the
Ingenious Author of the Book called, Reflections upon the Eloquence of the Bar
and Pulpit, so much as once mentions, much less commends this manner of writing
or speaking, as either modish, modest, or decent; but gives this Gentle Lash to
the Users of it, That nothing of that kind is entertained with effect, when too
personally addressed: and that though with civility we may glance at, yet may we
not without rudeness and ill manners, too openly stare upon the faults or
imperfections of any Person.

Detraction is an old Vice, although it be but newly come into request among us
again: It was the sin of Haman against Mordecai, of Saul against David, of
Iezabel against Naboth; and there are whole Psalms of Execration for this Sin.

I find an old Poet of ours (Gower) Declaiming against this Vice in this
manner. Invidiae pars est Detractio pessima, pestem
Quae magis infamem flatibus oris agit.
Lingua venenato sermon repercuit aures,
Sic ut in alterius scandala fama volat.
Morsibus a tergo quos inficit ipsa fideles
Vulneris ignoti sepe salute carent.
Sed generosus Amor linguam conservat, ut ejus
Verbum quod loquitur nulla
sinistra gerat.


This honest old Author sets out this Vice in this sort, by way of Admonition.
Ever keep thou thy tongue stylle,
Thou myzt the more have of thy will,
If that thy self art envyous,
Thou shall not be gracious,
As thou parauentur sholdest be else,
There wol no man drink of the wells,
Which as he wot is poison ynne;
And often such as men begin
Toward other, such as they find;
That set hem often fer behind,
When that they wenen be before
My good sone, and thou therefore
Beware and leave thy wicked speech,
Whereof has fallen often wretch
To many a man before this time;
For who so wol his hands lyme,
They must be the more unclene,
For many a mote shall be seen,
That wol not else cleue there,
And that should every wise man fere,
For who so wol another blame,
He se kyth often his own shame,
Which else might be right stylle, etc.


Now should I go about to Paint a Detractor forth in his proper Colors, or to
Draw every Feature of Deformity in his Face, I fear, in the first place, I
should find my Ink not Black enough to Paint so Foul a Monster; nor could a Man
have Courage enough to Draw the Devil, without the Security of some Good
Guardian by his side.

But I Will venture on Him; for, as they say, if we can but draw Blood of
Witches, their Envious Intents cease: so if the Nib of my Pen be but
sharp-pointed enough to prick to the quick, I need not fear the worst he then
can do to me; neither need others, after once they are forewarned.

THE CHARACTER OF A Detractor.
A Detractor is a kind of Camelion, that lives upon the worst sort of Air; at
first bred up and suckled with sour Sustenance from the lank and flaggy Dugs of
his lean and meager Mother Envy, he afterward feeds on Fame; his words are
worse than Poison of Asps, and are a kind of Witchcraft, so that the Sufferer
may justly be said to be under an Evil Tongue. Like one of the wayward Sisters,
he spightfully picks the foul and poisonous Weeds out of the fairest Gardens of
Men's fruitful Labors, wherewith to work his wicked Sorceries; with venomous
Breath endeavoring to blast the best and fragrant Flowers of Men's Writings,
that they may wither in the minds and memories of the World.

He is a sort of turbulent spirited Furiozo, continually foaming out his frothy
Passion on all sides, like a malicious old Woman, ever muttering, extremely
incensed; he can find none to vouchsafe to vex him, till out of pure spite he
is fain, at length, to be himself both Satyr, Answer, and Reply. 'Twould fright
you, or him either, to behold his own angry Face during the pang of Composure.

He Writes on as Fish-women Rail, without Cessation, or Premeditation; without
Patience to Hear, or Time to Deliberate: and Answers, hit or miss, without
Perusal, letting all the while his Passion boil over, without ever skiming of
the filthy Foam that always arises from the intemperate Heat of in-kindled
Fury.

Erasmus seems to have very well understood the Nature of this Malady amongst
Men, and mentions it as if himself had once had some symptoms of it, when he
saves, Multi mei similes hoc morbo laborant, ut cum scribere nesciant, tamen
ascribendo temperare non possunt. Many (says he) are very sick of my Disease,
and though they can do nothing worthy of the Public, yet they must be
publishing their (hellish) Humors, fouler than the Ink they write with; and
this makes the World abound so with Books. The Teemings of every Term, which
deserves a much severer Tax upon every Sheet then there is imposed upon the
Law, that so it might at once breed less Trouble, and more Profit to the Press
it Plagues.

A Detractor
Is one who knows how to shoot dead your Repute, and yet you never hear the
Report; he has several sorts of Poisons, and but one way to apply 'em, that is
commonly at the Ear: He sometimes whispers like one that discourses through the
Speaking-Trumpet, you shall hear the sound, but not know who utters it, nor
whence it proceeds. He is Traitor to Truth, a Lying Oracle, or the Old Devil of
Delphos, to Abuse the Credulous, Delude the Ignorant, Confirm the Suspicious,
and Inflame the Jealous.

He is a kind of Monster among Men, and has a double Face, a double Heart, and
a cloven Tongue; a Viper that will venture to Bite, though he break his
venomous Teeth out in the attempt. A Proteus in Conversation upon every turn; a
subtle Angler of Secrets, he pretends private impartments of others to hook out
yours; he first finds out (if he can) your inward resentments of others, and
then tickles you either with falacious Encomiums, or detractive Untruths of
them, according as he finds out, or can insinuate into your humor. I like well
the Caution in the Satyr. Fingere qui non visa potest, commissa tacere
Qui nequit, hic niger est, hunc tu, (Roman) coveto.
Who feigns what was not, and discloaks a Soul,
Beware him (Noble Roman) he is foul.


A Worthy Man DESCRIBED.
A Right Bred, or Worthy Man, will scorn to be so base as to Flatter, and hates
to be so Currish as to Bite any any one; so that even his Reproofs seem kind
and generous, and his Wounds do not want their Balsome. You may read his Temper
in his Face; he fleers not at a Reproachful Jeer, but shows his dislike in his
looks; he stands aloof when Men Whisper, and is no greedy Listner after
Privacies; his Tongue never betrays his Heart, and Report can find no Echo in
him. When you Lodge in him a Secret, your necessary Caution locks it safe up,
and your self keeps the Key. It is his Grief to know a Vice of his Friends, and
his Charity he shows in concealing it; he never over-Praises nor Undervalues
any man, for his Prudence instructs, that the one stirs up Envy, and the other
procures contempt. He that can be brought so low as Fear or Flattery, must not
presume once to own the Forfeited name of Gentleman or Christian.

First he cannot lay claim to the Moral Virtues of Justice, Truth, or Civility,
so that he is neither fit to be a Friend or an Umpire in any Affair. Fear and a
little meanacing makes him Faulty to Both; nor is he to be Trusted with another
Man's Reputation, who has not Courage to defend his own, if questioned. A good
Poet says, Defend the Truth, for that who will not die
A Coward is, and gives himself the lie,


He that has a Cowardly fear within him can never be a true Christian, but
like the After-penetent Apostle, he will be apt in time of Trial to give his
own Heart the Lie, and Deny the Lord that bought him. He cannot hold the Truth
till it wax hot in his Hand, or ever endure a Martyrdom for it: But like the
wretched Italian, panting under the hasty Threats of a surprising Enemy, (in
hopes to save his Life) Belched out (as bidden) Horrid Blasphemies, to gratify
the Will of his insulting Enemy; till in the midst of them he Stabs the Naked
Wretch, and then Bragged how he had doubled his Revenge, Destroying Soul and
Body at one Blow. But this only by way of illustration to clear the last
Assertions of the Degenerate Effects of such sure Symptoms of Cowardice and
Unchristianity.

I have not yet done with our Detractor, I must take him a little further to
Task before I give him over; and ask of him, What Amends he can make to the
Party, whose Fame and Repute he has Publicly Traduced and Vilified.

For doubtless if we respect Human Society, there cannot be a more pernicious
Ill atending it; it is a giving up a Man's Name to perpetual Infamy and Reproach;
an irreparable Wrong, toward which the best Amends falls short of
Satisfaction. A Blot never to be razed out, but by writing the whole fair over
again in way of Recantation (Public Confession being ever due to Public
Injuries) and when that is done too, to Retract does not make full Compensation,
since he that does it cannot be sure that he who saw his first, shall read his
last also.

So that he who offends in this kind, does it not only to his Life's, but the
Worlds end in a Book, which cannot Repent; and therefore Reputation once lost
is past Retrieve. An ingenious Poet Cautions well to this purpose: Thy Credit
wary keep, it is quickly gone;
Being got by many Actions, lost by one.


I have read a Fable, how that Reputation, Love, and Death, made a Covenant to
travel over the World, but each was to take a several Way. When they were ready
to depart, mutual Inquiry was made how they might find one another again. Death
said, they should be sure to hear of him in Battles, Hospitals, and in all
Parts where either Famine or Diseases are rise. Love bade them hearken after
him among the Children of Cottagers, whose Parents had left them nothing, at
Marriages, at Feasts, and amongst the professed Servants of Virtue, the only
Bond to tie him fast. They long expected a Direction from Reputation, who stood
mute; being urged to assign them Places where they might find him, he sullenly
answered, his Nature was such, that if he departed from any Man, he never came
to him more. The Moral is excellent to our Subject.

To Display a Man's Malice in Writing, is no less than deliberate Wickedness, a
kind of Civil Murder prepenc'd; chewed Bullets that wrankle where they enter;
the Plague in Paper, which he that would shun, let him take heed how he comes
between the Infectious Sheets.

The Public Breath of Calumny, like contagious Air, is of late become too
Epidemical, though the Infection will not soon taint the sound Constitution of
a solid Judgment. The humming Noise of Fame, and the harsh grating of
Detractiou, are now the ungrateful sounds that so much Disturb this mutinous
Town.

The Obscure envy the Eminent; as Boys cry, Whip Coachman, when they cannot
Ride as well as others. Ingenuity sure never before knew so many Spightful
Spider-Pates, which weave Book-leaves of Antic Cobweb-wit, to Catch the
Roving-headed Butter-flies of this Age in.

Excuse me Sir, if I have enlarged my Letter too much on this Subject; and do
not think I have done it merely to please my own itch of Writing; for I could
never flatter my self into any Opinion of my own Parts, (if I have any:) And be
assured, that above all things I abhor, and most sple^efully laugh at the
Publick-spirited Fop, that is Ambitious of the Name of a Reformer; for I have
seen so much the serious Folly of that too, that I think it much more
fashionable to be of the Laughing than Weeping side of the World; which alas,
the more you strive to amend, still the worse you make it.

Thus we see there is no Curb can keep Men within the Modest Bounds of
Civility, albeit Those (whose care it is) be never so Cautious to prevent the
Inconveniency of putting forth particular Reflections to open Censure, under
the lash of every Licentious Pen and Tongue.

But the Press cannot escape without its Errata's, and Byblows, (as we count
such Books as we have Treated of to be) the obscure Parents sometimes, like
counterfeit Gypsies, coloring their Brats over with a Foreign Imprimatur, with
a Cant to the Typis, as a Guide to the Gibderish it is fraught withal.

And now Sir, if you please, you may communicate this to such of your Ingenious
Acquaintance as are Book-buyers, that they (as well as you) may be made more
sensible of the present Spawn of our Fantastic Fry of Town-Wits, and rest
satisfied without buying any more till this Freake be worn out of Fashion, as I
heartily wish it were. And so, without more ado, (save only to wish a Return of
these Men well to their Wits again) I bid you for this time Farewell.

FINIS.
Books sold by Henry Million at the Sign of the Bible in Fleet Street near
White-Friers.
BIshop Andrews Sermons, Folio. 18. s. Heylins Cosmography in four Books,
containing the Chorography, and History of the World, Folio 1. l. Burges
Reciprocal Refining, or a Treatise of Grace and Assurance: wherein is handled
the Doctrine of Assurance, Folio, first and second Parts. Burges of Original
Sin, asserted and vindicated against the old and new Adversaries thereof, both
Socinians, Arminians, and Anabaptists, in four Parts, Folio. 12 s. A General
Martyrology* containing a Collection of the Greatest Persecutions which have
befallen the Church of Christ from the Creation, to our present times, both in
England and all other Nations, whereunto are added two and twenty Lives of
English Modern Divines, by Sam. Clerk* Folio. 1, l. 6. s. Pious Annotations
upon the holy Bible; Expounding the difficultest places thereof learnedly and
plainly. By the learned and Godly Divine Mr. John Diodat, Minister of the
Gospel. Folio. 18. s. Memoyrs of the Lives, Actions, Sufferings, and Deaths of
those Noble, Reverend, and Excellent Persons that suffered for their Allegiance
to His late Majesty in our late Civil Wars, and continued till 1666. With the
Life and Martyrdom of King CHARLES the First. Folio. 12. s. The Saints
Everlasting Rest, by Mr. Richard Baxter Teacher of Gods Word, in large quarto
8. s. The Reasons of Christian Religion; the first Part of Godliness, the
second Part of Christianity. By Richard Baxter. 7. s. -- His Apology, in
quarto. 6. s. -- His Disputations on the Sacraments, in quarto. 5. s. Look unto
Jesus, or, an ascent to the Holy Mount, to see Jesus Christ in his Glories: 1.
In his Divine Generation. 2. In his Power over the World. 3 In his Power over
his Church in her twofold Estate; 1. Militant. 2. Triumphant. -- At the end of
the Book is an Appendix, showing the Certainty of the Calling of the Jews* by
Edward Lane, Vicar of Sparsholt in the County of South alias Hampshire, in
quarto 4. s.
The Young Clerks Guide, or an exact Collection of Choice English Presidents
according to the best Forms now used for all sorts of Indentures, Letters of
Attorney, Releases, Conditions; very useful and necessary for all, but chiefly
for those that intend to follow the Attorneys Practice, in octavo. 4. s. The
Young Clerks Tutor enlarged, the last Edition, octavo Price bound 1. s. 6. d.
Female Pre-eminence, or, the Excellency of that Sex ahove the Male; A Discourse
written Originally in Latin, and Translated into English, with additional
advantages, by H. C. in octavo. Price bound 1. s. Memorials of Godliness and
Christianity, in three Parts. The first containing Meditations. 1. Making
Religion ones business. 2. An Appendix, applied to the Calling of a Minister;
With a full account of the Authors life, the tenth Edition, corrected and
enlarged, in 12.10. d. The Rule and Exercise of Holy Living and Dying by Ierem.
Tailor D. D. in octavo. Price 5 s. The English Rogue, described in the Life of
Meriton Latroon, a witty Extravagant; comprehending the most eminent Cheats of
both Sexes. 1. Part 2. s. 6. d 2. Part 2. s. 6. d. 3. Part 3. s. The Female
Secretary, or choice Letters fitted, and wholly designed for the capacity and
occasions of Women; with plain, yet full and exact Rules and Directions for the
Inditing, Composing, and Writing of Letters, than any extant; Devoted to the
Service of the fair Sex, by the Translator of Female Pre-eminence, in octato.
1. s. There may be had at Mr. H. Millions several Famous, Approved, and purely
Vegetable Spirits, or Essences, which are of admirable use and benefit, as may
be seen in Printed Papers, peculiarly describing their Virtues, etc. They may
be had in small Quantities, in little Glasses, at reasonable rates. Prepared by
David Hampton, Servant in Ordinary to the Kings Majesty. There is also to be
had an excellent Scorbutic Water, that cures the Scurvy in the Mouth and
Gums, and kills the Worms in the Teeth; fastens the Teeth if loose* and
restores them to their pure whiteness again, though never so black. The
Toothache it cures, and is a great preventer thereof. It is a great healer of
the Running Evil, Scab'd Heads, all breakings out in the Face, the Itch in the
Body. The Dry-Scurvy-Scab, next door to the Leprosy, it wonderfully heals, by
Gods great blessing. And for the benefit of all who are desirous to make use of
this Water, it is to be had in Glass-bottles sealed up, from a lesser quantity
to a greater, at a reasonable rate. There is also to be had a Water that cures
the Gout in old or young, thus applied; Take two ounces, heat it as hot as
possibly you can, and with a linen Rag dipped therein, foment the place
grieved: repeat the application often; be it never so hot, it will not produce
a blister, but through Gods great blessing work a perfect Cure. Mr. John
Pierces Famous and Approved Lozenges for the Cure of Consumptions, Colds, and
all Diseases incident to the Lungs; the Price of a Paper containing a quarter
of a Pound, 2. s. 6. d. You may have at the Bible in Fleet Street, Writing
Paper of all sorts, blank Bonds of several sorts, and the best Ink for Records.
FINIS.

