A DISCOURSE OF THE TORMENTS OF HELL. The foundation and pillars thereof
discovered, searched, shaken and removed.

WITH Many infallible proofs, that there is not to be a punishment after this
life for any to endure that shall never end.

By S. RICHARDSON.

If thou have anything to say, answer me; if not, hold thy peace, and I shall
teach thee wisdom.

Job 37. 32, 33. Printed in the Year, 1660.

To the Reader.
HEre is presented to thy view things new and old, when Christ and his
disciples declared the truth: Some mocked, saying? what new doctrine is this?
Mark 1. 27. What will this babbler say, Acts 17. 18. For thou bring strange
things to our ears, ver. 20. and many of them said he has a devil and is mad,
why hear ye him? John 20. 20. When Christ declared the truth, the Priests cried
blasphemy; the high Priest rent his clothes, saying, he has spoken blasphemys,
what think ye? and they all condemned him to be guilty of death, Mat. 26. 56.
The servant is not above his Lord. They need consider him that endured the
contradiction of sinners against himself lest ye be weary and faint in your
minds, Heb. 12. 3. Christ and his truth, and people are condemned and despised
by the Scribes and Pharisees, and the blind world that lie in wickedness, Acts
24. 14, 15. they that cease from man and his traditions, are signs and wonders,
Isa. 8. 18. Reproach, hazard, and loss attends them; Christ poor, a Carpenter
despised, called a blasphemer, and that came at last to be hanged: how shall his
followers expect better from an ignorant and angry world? sure they need Jobs
spirit and principle, to drink up scorning take water, Job 34. 17. for if you
prove all things, and cease from man and his traditions, will they not say ye
are mad? however, were are to plead for truth, and not flatter one another in
error; the less any truth is known and the more it is despised and opposed, the
more necessity there is of declaring it. No man when he has lighted a candle
puts it in a secret place, etc. Luke 4. 33. What thou see writ in a Book,
Rev 1, 11. It has pleased the father of lights not to manifest all the light
of truth at once, but in several ages and seasons, here a little and there a
little, that each age and season has its present truth, 2 Pet. 1. 12. called
the word of his patience, Rev. 3. 10. it being so much opposed, who can utter
those many things that are said against the truth? and those that plead for it,
sometimes they will not receive truth if not brought to them by the wise and
learned, they do not consider, Mat. 11. 25, 26. Some conceal reproachful
truths, because not willing to bear the reproaches of Christ, the evil spirit in
man says, what shall I get for declaring truth? if only loss present it self,
loss of good name, loss of profit, loss of life, loss of all will follow if
some may have their will; reason says, it is better to be silent and act
Religion by p^litick principles, to avoid the Cross and reproaches of Christ,
though they are great riches, Heb. 11. 26 One generation sowes and another
reaps; this shall be written for the generation to come; whosoever is wise shall
understand these things prudently and he shall know them, Hos. 14. 9 they also
that erred, shall come to understand, Dan. 12. 10 the Lord teach us his truth,
and to receive it in the love of it, and leave us not to our own understanding;
we need pray to God herein, and to give us more thankful hearts for the great
peace and plenty this Nation injoys; indeed these are good days, blessed be
God for the same, although we have not all we desire.

The testimony of the learned, of the proper signification of shheol, Hades and
Gehenna caused a further search, and my descent herein; I allege not the
sayings of men for proof, but for a witness against themselves, because they
are godly learned Teachers and instructers; its like their sayings will weigh
more with some, then good reason, to whose interpretation many give no less
reverence then to an oracle from heaven; also to convince them, that as that I
have said is not without a ground in the word of God, so it is not without
sufficient ground against themselves, from the testimony of the Hebrew Doctors,
learned Rabbis, and the chief of the Protestant Writers, as is expressed, that
they may see that they cannot condemn that which I have said, without
condemning the Scriptures, and their godly and learned devisers and
interpreters.

I have the testimony of my conscience, that the love of truth, and desire to
learn, drew me into this search, and caused me to dissent, not for contention,
but for truths sake; the truth we ought to seek and embrace, though we should
suffer for it; the manifestation of light and love has overthrown many brave
inventions and doctrines of men. I upon often seeking of God, and diligent
search, and from the clearness of the light of the truth herein, am fully and
confidently persuaded that it is the truth I plead for; let others think and
say what they please, according as it is written, I have believed, therefore
have I spoken. I believe, and am willing to stand to all is written by the
Prophets and Apostles, and to hear and learn of any that knows the truth; that
which I see not, teach thou me. Truly the light is sweet, search for it; if
thou have any thing to say answer me, if not, hold thy peace, and I will teach
thee wisdom, Job 33. 32, 33. I will teach thee being in the hand of God, with
the almighty will I not conceal. I know this tends much to the glory of God,
and comfort of all, especially sad, affl^cted, discouraged soul; this is glad
tidings, and as good news from a far Country welcome and savoury; to comfort
those that mourn, is the earnest desire of him, that through the exceeding
riches of Free Grace, does walk, rest, abide, and dwell in the secret place of
the most high, in the Region of love in God, 1 John 4. 8. where all that dwell,
farewell.

Of Christ's descending into hell.
SOme of the learned say, Christ descended into hell, and for proof allege Ps.
16. 10. Acts 2. 27. Dr. Willet says, that those words of Christ (descended
into Hell) is not found in the most ancient Creeds; Dr. William Whitaker says,
I could produce fifty of the most ancient Creeds that have not these words (he
descended into hell) in his answer to Campion, page 215. Mr. William Perkins o^
the Creed says, It seems likely that these words, (He descended into Hell)
were not placed in the Creed at first, and that it crept in by negligence; for
above threescore Creeds of the most ancient Councills and Fathers want this
clause (he descended into Hell) among the rest not found in the Nicene Creed,
nor found in the Romish Church, nor used in the Church of the East.

Also some of the learned say, Christ descended not into hell, yet it is an
Article of their faith; but if you say he did not descend into Hell, they will
say you deny the faith, and are a Heretic and a Blasphemer, and you may be
glad if ye can escape so; themselves interpret hell otherwise then for a place
of torments never to end; Mr. Bucer says, Christ descending into hell is to be
understood of his Burial; Mr. Calvin says, Hell is the sorrow of mind Christ
was in before his death; why have thou for saken me? is Gods hiding his face
when he was upon the cross, (says Dr. Whitaker against Campion, page 211.)
for upon the Cross he said, It is finished, John 9. 30. therefore his
suffering was at an end. Some of the Papists confess Christ suffered not after
his death, Luke 12. 42, 45. Ursinus Catechis. page 350. Mr. Perkins says, Hell
is the inward sufferings of Christ on the Cross: Bernard makes the grief of
Christ's soul his hell.

Doctor Ames, in his Marrow of Divinity, page 65. says, That of the place of
hell, and manner of torture there, the Scripture has not pronounced any thing
distinctly: If so, then the Word of God says not any thing at all of them; for
that which the Scripture speaks, it speaks distinctly, else it could not have
been read distinctly, Neh. 3. 8. That which is spoken expressly, is spoken
distinctly; The Spirit speaks expressly, 1 Timothy 4. 1. The word of the Lord came
expressly, Ezekiel. 1. 3. That which is not spoken distinctly, cannot be
understood, as appears, 1 Cor. 14. 2, 10 17.

Doctor Fulk says plainly, That neither in the Hebrew, Greek nor Latin, there
is no word proper for hell (as we take hell) for the place of punishment of the
ungodly. Fulk Defense Translation, page 13. 87. 89. Is not this a full
testimony against their Opinion of the torments of hell? for if it be not to be
read in the word of God, what have we to do with it? We are not to believe any
thing in Religion unless it be written. How read thou? says Christ:
Revealed things belong to us: Deu. 29. 29. As it is written, I believed, 2 Cor.
4. 13. They confess it is not written; then sure I am it is not to be by any
affirmed nor believed; meddle not with things not revealed, they are but
groundless conceits, fables, and traditions of men.

That the word Hell is not in the Hebrew and Greek Bible; for the word in the
Hebrew, for which the English word Hell is put, is Sheol; the proper
signification of Sheol is the Grave, as all that be learned in the Hebrew do
know. Sheol has its signification of Shaal, to crave or require; therefore it
is one of the four that is never satisfied, Pro. 30. 15. we learn the propriety
of the Hebrew word from the learned Rabbis; says Doctor Fulk, Def. Trans.
Bib. p. 90. the Hebrew Doctors and Jewish Rabbis are for signification of
words faithful interpreters; they say Sheol is the Grave; Rabbi Levi,
according to the opinion of the Learned, expounds Sheol to bethe lowest Region
of the world opposite to Heaven; If I descend into Sheol thou art present. So
Rabbi Abraham on Jonah 2. And David Chimchi, and R. Solomon; read Psalm. 19. 16,
17. Let the wicked be turned into Sheol, that is, Death's estate or deadly bed:
Jonah calls the belly of the Whale Sheol, Jon. 2. 2, 3. Rabbi Solomon Jarchi on
Genesis 37. 35. says, that the true and proper interpretation of Sheol is Keber,
which is the Grave; the hoar head is said to go down Sheol, Genes. 42. 38. In
Numb. 16. it is said, They, their substance, and catt^l went alive to shoolah,
that is, the pit or grave; Our bones are scattered at the very brink or mouth
of sheol; Psalm. 141. 7. Jacob said, I will go down to my son Joseph to sheol:
Genesis 37. 35. The Protestant writers say sheol properly signifies the grave.
Doctor Fulk Answer to the preface Remist. page 22. so also in his Defense, pa.
91. Mr. Beza says, that sheol properly signifies nothing but the grave or pit.
Fulk says, the best of the Hebrews that either interpreted scripture or made
Dictionaries, Jews or Christians, say sheol properly signifies the grave: page
89. and that deliverance from the lowest hell, is deliverance from the greatest
danger of death; so Fulk ans. Remist, page 13. 39. 135. and so the late
Annotation of the Bible interprets it; and Augustine on Psalm. 16. 13. for
lowest hell read lowest grave; and so Doctor Willet, Synop. p. 1049.

The Chaldee Paraphrast retains the word sheol, and translates it the house
of the grave, page 11. 15. they interpret sheol, Keburata, the grave: Job 21.
5. 13, 14. be in the Keburata, the house of the grave; p. 17. 12. Rabbi Abraham
Peristsol joins sheol and keber together, both signifying the grave; and so
does Doctor Fulk in his De^ence, page 91. And so Mr. Cartwright on Act. 2. 27.
Mr. Gradock says, Hell is not mentioned in the Old Testament, but as it is
taken for the grave, in his Good news, page 43.

Sheol enforces not any place of punishment, because it signifies not any
place of punishment; so says Doctor Willet, Synops. page 1055. Also he says,
the word Sheol cannot be translated but for the Grave: there are four words in
the Psalms expressing the same thing in effect that Sheol does, yet none of
them appliable to signify any place of torment; the first is Shacath, fovea,
the Pit, Ps. 36. 9. The second is Bhor, the Lake. The third is Cheber, the
Grave; both these words used for the same thing, Psalm. 88. 3. ^he word is
Sheol, v. 45. the other word used as expressing the former; and all these three
do contain a description of Death and the Grave. The fourth is Tehemoth,
Abyssus Terrae, Thou will take me from the depth of the earth, Psalm. 71. 20. in
all which there is no mention of a place of torment, Willet Synop. p. 1050.

The Greek translates Sheol into Haiden or Haides, of Adam, because Adam tasted
death and went to the grave, Genesis 3. 19. The gates of Sheol is death; Sheol and
Haides are said to have gates, Isa. 38. 10. Psalm. 9. 14. Mat. 16. 8.

The Septuagint express a place generally to receive the dead; the word used
in the Greek instead of the Hebrew word Sheol, signifies a dark place, such as
the grave or pit, in which the dead are laid. Doctor Fulk says, some take the
Greek word for Hell, but it signifies the Grave; Hell it cannot signify in
their speech that believe no Hell: the Greeks say plainly, that their souls
shall vanish like light smoke, or light air; Fulk Def. page 92. also he says,
if the Greek and Latin Interpreters had before us translated amiss, which gave
occasion to diverse Errors, must we (knowing the true signification of the
word) follow them?

The word Hell is not in the Greek; the Greek word for which they put the
English word Hell, is Gehenna; Ge in Greek is the earth, or ground; and Henna
is borrowed from the Hebrew, from the valley of Hinnom: Doctor Lightfoot in his
Epistle of his Harmony, says, It is well known the judgment of Gehinna is
taken from the valley of Gehinna, Tophet, or Gehinnom, are names of the places
of Idolatry, there was the Idol Moloch.

Of Hell fire, Matthew. 5. 22. and the everlasting fire, and unquenchable fire,
Matthew. 25. 41, 46. Fear him that has power to cast into Hell, Luc. 12. 5. The
damnation of hell. Mat. 23. 33.

Ma^th. 5. 22. The fire of Gehinna, and the everlasting fire, etc. how the
Jews understood them, it is evidently to be seen in their writings, that they
understood them of the fire of the valley of Hinnom, so says Doctor Lightfoot
to the Reader in his H^rmony, because of the La^ thou art delivered from the
judgment of Gehennah and Baal-tur, Genesis 1. 1.

The Protestant Writers confess that Mat. 5. 22. Mat. 25. 41, 46. Luke 12. 5.
is to be understood of the fire of the valley of the son of Hinnom, which is
Tophet, so Mr. Carthwrite, Dr. F^lk, Mr. Trap, and the late Annotations of the
Bible, and others, in danger of Hell fire, etc. read in danger to burn in the
valley of Hinnom or Tophet, the damnation of Hell, of Hell Gehinnah, they
interpret these places of the valley of Hinnom or Tophet, which place was near
to Jerusalem, where they offered their children to Moloch, ^osh. 15. 8. King
Josiah defiled ^ophet the valley of the son of Hinnom, that no man might make
his son or daughter to pass through the fire to Moloch, 2 King. 23. 10. Josiah
commanded all the carrion of the City of Jerusalem to be carried into that
valley and burnt there, that the carrion might not annoy the City: thither
(says David Chimchy) was carried all the filth and unburied carkases to be
burned: The Synedrian of the Jews for some offenses sentenced the bodies of
the offenders to lie unburied in that valley to burn with the carrion cast
there, which among the Jews was counted a great disgrace; and for offenses
most criminal they burned alive in that valley; they set the malefactor in a
dunghill up to the knees, and put a towell about his neck, and one pulled it
one way and another an other way, till strangling him forced him to open his
mouth, then they poured scalding lead into his mouth, which went down into his
body, and so burnt his bowels, Talm^d in Sanhedr. Per. 7. Mr. Cartwright says,
the Jews sent thither their guilty to be burned in that valley, and those they
burned there they dealt with as guilty, 2 Chr. 29. 3.

It is confessed by all that Christ speaks and alludeth to the Jewish
practice in their Judicature; therefore the places abovesaid concern them.
Secondly, the speech of Christ was to the Jews by birth and education, they
wrote the New Testament, and though it be penned in Greek, it speaks the
phrase of the Jewish Nation; the Apostle preaching to the Jews used the word
Gehennah, Jam. 3. 6. Christ and his Disciples used known terms, that they might
the better be understood. 3ly, Because the Jews had not power to send them to
the Hell they speak of. 4ly. Because the last of the three sins is said to be
judged to the fire of Gehennah, which if it were to be understood as some would
have it, it will follow, that some sins deserve not hell, and shall not be
punished there, which is contrary to themselves who teach the least sin deserves
hell. Fifthly, Mat. 5. 22. shows the ignorance and severity of the Jews and
Pharisees, that anger without a cause: and Racha a word of disgrace, which
signifies an empty fellow, or wicked wretch, as great faults, as to say Fool,
if not greater, yet punished less; rash anger in danger of the Judgment, Racha
in danger of the Council, if say Fool, in danger of Hell fire, to burn in the
valley of the son of Hinnom.

Of the word Everlasting.
First, the fire of the valley of Tophet, is so called in that it did burn
night and day, and went not out.

Secondly, the word (Ever) and (Everlasting) the Greeks understand it for an
age: ever and everlasting are of a like signification, and is used for a
limited time, a time during life, He shall serve his master for ever, Exodus 21.
6. Lu. 24. 46. that is, until his own or Masters death, longer he could not
serve him: the everlasting Priesthood (Exodus 40. 15.) was but until Christ
came, then it was to ce^se, as appears Heb. 11. 12, 13, 14. it is said they
shall inherit the land for ever; Is^. 61. 21. that ev^r was but a little while,
as appears Isa. 63. 18.

Thirdly, in that fire is durable, and goes not out until the combustible
matter be consumed, may be called everlasting and unquenchable; for the fire
that destroyed the Cities of of Sodom and Gomorrah is called eternal Fire, and
(...) (a word of as large signification) in that it consumed those Cities, for
where no wood is the fire goes out, Proverbs 26. 26.

Fourthly, if Fire were everlasting, it will not follow that which is cast into
it is everlasting; the wicked are compared to Chafe and Stubble, fire is not
long in consuming them, burn the chaff, Isa. 5. 24. If any say chafe will be
ever burning, and never consumed, we know the contrary.

Fifthly, consider that the Scripture sometime use words that exceed their
signification, and are not strictly to be understood according to their letter
and signification of those words, as John 21. 25. The things that Jesus did, if
they should be written, I suppose the world it self would not contain the
things that should be written; A large expression: What! will not the whole
world contain a record of the actions of one man? the meaning is, they would be
too great; so sin and the strength of the Ethiopian army are said to be
infinite, Job 22. 5. Nah. 3. 9. that is very great; for the world and all in it
is finite, Isa. 40. 17. These considerations show how such words are to be
understood, and it may satisfy us herein.

Is it not a very strange thing that themselves should confess that the English
word Hell is in the Hebrew Sheol, and in the Greek Haides, and Gehenna, and that
they are to be understood as aforesaid, that they should for the said words
translate it in English Hell, and then expound Hell for a terrible and
dreadful place of torment never to end; O horrible abuse and blasphemy against
God and his word! and even all men are deluded and deceived thereby: verily,
verily, they deserve the name they give to others of denying the word of God.

The Story of Dives, Luke 16. 30.
Is not any proof of any torments in hell, because it is a parable, not a
history; of a parable we are not to ground a doctrine; the story of Dives is no
more a proof of a punishment after this life, than Judge. 9. 8. is a proof that
trees did walk and speak, though it is said the trees went forth, and said,
etc. The story of Dives is not to be understood according to the letter, for
these Reasons: It says, there was a rich man in hell, yet all confess the
body is in the grave: 2. How could Dives see so far as Abraham's bosom is from
hell? Mr. Leigh says, the great Chaos between Abraham and Dives signify an
infinite distance; which overthrows their seeing and speaking to each other.
3. It says, he saw Abraham; yet they say, hell is a place of utter darkness:
how can any thing be seen in a place of utter darkness? 4. By what means can
Dives know Abraham from another, seeing as all confess, his body is in the
grave until the Resurrection?

Fifthly, How could Dives speak to Abraham, his body being in the grave? can
any speak without the organ of the body?

Sixthly, How shall Dives hear Abraham at so great a gulf and distance as
heaven is from hell?

Seventhly, How comes Dives to have such charity in hell to his Five Brethren,
seeing he had none to them when on earth?

Eighthly, Dives would have Abraham to send to them, which cannot be, because
Abraham knows us not, Isa.

Ninthly, How shall Abraham send, seeing he has no communion with us nor
passage to us?

Tenthly, To what purpose will it be to send? if they will not hear Moses and
the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded if one rise from the dead, ver. 31.
it is therefore a parable, and the scope of it is, as Doctor Fulk says, that
those that will not hear Moses and the Prophets, are not to expect to be
called neither by vision nor aparition, ver. 26. 30. this parable is not done,
but represented, says M. Ca^twright, on Luke 16. 30. the story of Dives in
Hell, is one of their main pillars of hell torments, and by that which is said,
it is shaken and removed.

Of Tophet, Esa. 30. 33.
This place is no proof of hell torments, themselves being judges; they say,
hell is deep under ground, and Tophet is a place above ground, as has been
showed. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that this place shall no more be
called Tophet, nor the valley of the son of Hinnom, but the valley of
slaughter, for in this place will I cause to fall by the sword before their
enemies, by the hand of those that seek their Lives, and their Carca^es will I
give for meat for the fowls of the Heaven, and they shall bury in Tophet till
there be no place to bury in; Jer. 9. 6. to 35. Jer. 7. 33. they confess
Tophet is the valley of the Son of Hinnom, Tophet, hebrew toph, timpanum that
is to say gehinnom, greek gehinna, signifies a tabret, or drum-head, or any
thing that makes a noise, ver. 32. Tophet is ordained of old, hebrew
yesterday, prepared, fitted for the King, and those with him whom the Lord will
there slay for their sins by their enemies, it is deep and large, fit for great
Armies to meet and fight in: Fire and much wood to consume the carcases slain
there; the breath of the Lord like a stream of brimstone does kindle it, not a
stream of fire and brimstone, but like it, the destruction being from God was
great and terrible, or Fire and brimstone shall be sent from heaven to destroy
them there as Eze. 38. 11. Dan. 7. 10. Genes. 19. 24. Tophet is another of
their chief proofs of the torments of hell, and with that which is said, it is
shaken and removed.

Of Isa. 66. 24. They shall go forth and look upon the men that have transgrest
against me, for their worm shall not die neither shall their fire be quenched,
and they shall be an abhorring to all flesh.

This place is not to be understood of any punishment after this life, because
it says their carcases shall lie to be seen, and others shall look upon them;
in hell they will confess the carcases of the wicked are not now, nor hereafter
shall be, for a carcass is without life, therefore not capable of suffering; if
they ^ay at the end of the world; soul and body shall be united to suffer, how
is it then a carcass after the end of the world? how shall they be an abhorring
to all flesh? for then there will be no flesh to go forth to look upon them:
the late annotation of the Bible on Isa. 66. 24. say the carcass are the forces
of Gog, and Magog which shall be slain near Jerusalem, Eze. 29. 4. to 10. and
37. 36. contains, is apparent, for after the slaughter is made of them, they
shall lie along time unburied, and seven months shall the children of Israel
be a burying them, that they may cleanse the Land, Eze. 39. 11. 12. Also the
judgment inflicted upon them show it to be in this life as Pestilence,
overflosting Rain, great haylstones, fire and brimstone, Eze. 38. 11. and the
end why God punished them, show it to be in this life which was that God might
be magnified, and sanctified in the eyes of many nations after the end of the
world, he cannot be sanctified in the eyes of any, much less many nations, the
worm has reference to those that are bred, and fed upon dead bodies as Act.
11. 29. especially such as lie long upon the ground until they rot and become
as dung and carrion; Job 21. 26. Jer. 4. 11. 14. 20. the fire to the burning
those bodies, not fit to be stirred, and removed; but to be consumed by fire in
the place where they lay, Isa. 9. 5. Eze. 39. 6. That lie ro^ing upon the face
of the earth until they crawle all over with worms and magets, the sight of
such is a lothsom spectacle, therefore it is said they shall be abho^ring to
all flesh; the Greek renders it a sight or spectacle, it has relation to
Tophet above said; and the Hebrew Doctors say the same on this place, they
shall go forth out of Jerusalem into the valley of Hinnom, and there they
shall see the carcases of those that rebelled against me, So D. Kimchi; and Ab.
ezr. in loc.

The Worm that shall not dye, and the fire that shall not be quenched, is in
this life, and not as they say in hell, Mark 6. 43. 44. Rev. 14. 10. 11. Eze.
3. etc. Eze. 38. 24. concern the destruction of Gog, and Magog as has been
showed.

Concerning Luke 5. 2. they shall not come out thence till they have paid the
utmost farthing.

This place Mr. Leigh does allege to prove hell torments, and the Papists
allege it to prove their Purgatory, and to as much purpose, for verse. 25. 26.
is Christ's council to avoid differences, and to compose them that fall out
between man and man, in this life to prevent suits in Law, and imprisonment, so
the text sh^ws, and Chrisostom expounds it so; the word in the Greek is an
adversary of the Law, Pro. 6. 3. Luke 12. 38. mention is made of the Magistrate
and Jailer, which are terms and offices properly fitting the bu^iness of this
life, a like place is Mat. 18 34. to understand Luke 5. of their hell, does
imply free will and falling from grace, and that suffering in hell is a
satisfaction, and payment of the debt, they will confess in hell there is no
Jail-deliver nor any redemption, therefore it suits not to their purpose, it
is conceived that hell is deep within the earth, reason concludes it must needs
be dark; the grave is called the Land of darkness, Job 10. 21. 22. the cruelty
of the enemy is called thick darkness, Joel 2. 1, to 14. the Greek Poets say it
is dark, they compare the darkness thereof to a certain Territory, that lies
between Baiae, and Cumae, where the Cimeria inhabit, so environed with Hills,
that the Sun never came to it, whereupon the Proverb comes, darker then the
darkness of Cimeria; but the chief cause is, because they are in darkness
without the light of the word; for darkness is in this life, we cannot order
our speech by reason of darkness, Job 38. 19. where no light is, there is utter
darkness, when the eye is evil, the whole body is full of darkness, Mat. 6. 23.
the d^rk places of the earth, full of cruelty, Ps. 74. 20. ignorant men are in
the dark, and full of works of darkness, Romans 13. 12. that would have others
tormented with cruel tortures and death, because not of their opinion in
Religion; all unconverted men are in darkness, they are of the night, 2 Corinthians. 6 14. Genesis 5. Christ is the light, and Saints are the children of the
light, what communion has light with darkness, 2 Cor. 4. 14. Darkness covered
the earth till Christ the light came, to give light to them that sat in
darkness, Isa. 61. 12. Luc. 1. 79. who has delivered us from the power of
darkness, Col. 1. 13. who has called us out of darkness into his mavelous
light, 1 Pet. 2. 9. The people that sat in darkness saw a great light, and to
them that sat in the region and shadow of death light is sprung up, Mat. 4.
16. ye were sometimes darkness, but now ye are light in the Lord; Ephesians. 5. 8.
The chains of darkness are not material chains, but so called, because they are
fast in darkness and cannot get out; the Law works wrath, when that comes
into a dark and ignorant soul it causes weeping and gnashing of teeth, Luke
13. 28. ^eing sad and comfortless.

Of burning the Tares, Mat. 13. 30.
Is at the end of the world, verse 39. The Tares are the wicked, the Harvest is
the end of the world; by which it appears, the wicked with the earth shall be
consumed by fire, 40, 42. 2 Pet. 3. 7. Is any so weak, as to imagine the earth
will ever burn and never be consumed? I have seen one burned to ashes in an
hour in our cole fire; they say our fire is but painted fire to that in Hell;
if so, then it will of necessity follow, that so much as that fire is hotter
than our fire, so much sooner shall the body be burnt and consumed in that more
fierce and terrible fire. The wrath to come, 1 These. 1. 10. 35. 9.

The late Annot. Bible say, they were to fill up a full measure of their own
and fathers sins, because God intended to sweep them away by the hand of the
Romans, to cut them off by a temporal death, which was the wrath to come, to
fill up their sins; for the wrath is (not shall) come upon them to the
uttermost: 1 These. 2. 16. We are by nature the children of wrath; that is,
liable to wrath inward and outward; Thy wrath lies hard on me, Ps. 88. 7. The
wrath of God is the hiding of his face: Isa. 54. 8. Outward wrath is temporal
destruction; he cast upon them the fierceness of his wrath; Ps. 78. 49.
destroyed them, Deuteronomy. 7. 10. Lev. 10. 6. Jos. 9. 20. and 22. 20. Numb. 19. 40.
Ezekiel. 3. 7. 2 Chr. 19. 10. Psalm. 90. 6.

Of the word Cursed.
It is to be barren; so the Earth and Figtree were cursed, Mat. 11. 2. It is to
be a servant of servants, Genesis 9. 25. Josh. 9. 23. to want prosperity, Deuteronomy.
28. 16, 17, 18, 19. Mal. 22. to die a violent and disgraceful death, 2 Kings
2. 24. Deuteronomy. 21. 23. to be a Fugitive, a Wanderer, Ps. 59. 12. to eat in
sorrow, Genesis 3. 17. to endure pain and hardship, 14. Lev. 11. 42.

Of eternal Damnation.
The word damned, Mar. 16. 16. 2 These. 22. Romans 14. 23. in Greek is judged;
Damnation is Judgment; eternal Damnation is eternal Judgment; a Judgment
is a Sentence, the Sentence is to a second death, called Eternal, because it is
not to be reversed,

The word Reprobate
Is in the Greek of no judgment; a reprobate mind is a mind void of judgment;
see R^. 1. 28. 2 Timothy 3. 8. Tit. 1. 16. See the ^otes in the margin.

Of the word Fire.
Fire is put for fiery trials, 1 Pev. 4. 12. inward troubles, fire in my bones,
Lam. 1. 13. and 2. 4. the tongue is a fire, 2 Samuel 3. 6. and 5. 2. his word is
fire, Ier. 23. 29. Gods Spirit fire, Mat. 3. ^1. bap^ized with fire, 1 Cor. 10.
2. God is a consuming fire, ^eb. 13. last.

Bellarmin, and B^llinger and others say, the fire of Hell is material fire,
kindled with wood, and allege for it Isa. 30. 33. Isa. 66. 24. the fire of
Hell is true and substantial fire, kept under the earth to pu^ish withal,
says Tertullian.

The fire of hell cannot be corporal fire for these reasons.
1. Our fire is corporal, they say our fire is but painted fire, a shadow to
that, therefore it is not corporal fire.

2. Corporal elementary Fire is light, and enlightneth the place where it is;
in Hell they say is utter darkness, if so the Fire of Hell is not corporal
Fire.

3. Corporal Fire consumes speedily all combustible matter cast into it; they
say the Fire of Hell ever burns, and never consumes that cast into it,
therefore it is not corporal Fire.

4. They say the Fire of Hell is invisible, then it is not corporal, for that
which is corporal may be seen.

5. Corporal Fire may be quenched, the Fire of Hell they say is unquenchable,
therefore it is not corporal.

6. Corporal Fire goes out without wood, theirs not; therefore not corporal.

7. They say the Fire of Hell is eternal, if so, it is not corporal; corporal
Fire is seen, things seen are not eternal.

8. They say the absence of God is the greatest torment in Hell, corporal Fire
is a greater torment to the body than the absence of God.

Lastly, corporal Fire cannot work upon a Spirit, the Devils are Spirits,
therefore cannot be tormented with corporal Fire, says Willet Synops. page
1023. to say God is able to make corporal Fire work upon a Spirit, and able to
make to live without food or refreshment to eternity, and to make Fire burn
without wood, is no proof that he will do so, and is as silly a kind of
reasoning, as to say God is able to do all things, with God all things are
possible, therefore he will do all things, men should not build their vain
conceits upon Gods power without his word.

2. Others say the Fire of Hell is not corporal but spiritual Fire; but that it
cannot be neither; for there is no spiritual fire; if it cease to be natural
fire it cease to be true fire; it cannot be spiritual because they say it is
natural; it cannot be natural because they say it is spiritual, it cannot be
neither of them, because they say it is partly corporal and partly spiritual,
the one to burn the body, the other to burn the soul, Hell flames are
material, yet not all material, says Willet Synop. page 1010. if so, there
are two Fires in Hell, Bernard says Fire shall burn thy flesh, and a worm thy
spirit, conscience accusing: Isidore says, their minds burn with sorrow, and
their bodies with the flame.

3. Others say Hell Fire is neither material nor spiritual, nor mixed, but
metaphorical, figurative; so Austin and some of the modern Preachers say:
Calvin thinks that there is no true Fire in Hell, for, says he, the wood and
worm is to be taken metaphorically; but says another, that the Fire is so to
be taken, I utterly deny.

Ten opinions of the Learned of the places of Hell
1. M. Edm Leigh, Hugo, and others say, Hell is a bottomless pit, but there is
no place without a bottom which is the earth.

2. It is generally agreed that Hell is in the lower parts of the earth; but
where these lower parts should be, Mr. Perkins on the Creed says, no man is
able to define the lower parts of the earth, is great abasement says Dr. Fulk
on Phil. 2. 7. the lowest degree of Christ's humiliation, Ephesians. 4. 10. one part
of the earth is not put in opposition to another part thereof, but to Heaven,
Psalm. 103. 13. David says thou have fashioned me in the lowest parts of the
earth, Ps. 139. 15. was David born in Hell?

3. Bish. Bilson, Mr. Wheatly, and others, say Hell is below, but how many
miles it is to Hell they do not say, nor cannot tell.

4. Bellarm. Lyria, and others say Hell is in the earth near the center
thereof; if so, ye may know how far it is to Hell, the earth being round, the
circumference thereof being twenty one thousand and six hundred miles: the
whole consisting of 360 degrees at 60 miles a degree, the diameter of the
terestrial Globe is six thousand seven hundred and eighty two miles, and one
eleventh, so there to the center or middle point is three thousand three
hundred and ninty miles and half at length deep into the earth to Hell; but in
the day of Judgment when the earth shall be consumed with fire, as 1 Pet. 3.
7. where shall Hell be? then it cannot be in the center of the earth when there
is no earth.

5. Mr. Leigh and others say Hell is a lake, the lake is a sea, as appears Luke
5. 1, 2. where the swine were choked, Luke 8. 33. whose common depth is not
half a mile, men seek Hell in the bottom of the sea, because they know not
where to find it, Hell cannot be the lake, because Hell was cast into the lake,
Rev. 20. 14.

6. Others say Hell is in the Air, the Devil is the Prince that rules in the
air, Ephesians. 2. 6. the air then is the Devils hell, says Willet, Synops. page
1018. is so, then all we that are al^ve are in Hell, we do find it is not a
place of so great torment, for almost all men like is well, for there they
desire ^o dwell.

7. Others say Hell is above near the third Heavens, within the view of the
glorious Saints, and allege for it Isa. 66. 42. Rev. 14. 10. if so, it is very
far to Hell: Astronomers say that there are three Heavens above the Firmament,
where the fixed stars are is a hundred and sixteen millions of miles above the
earth, which is so high, that if a stone or weight should fall from thence, and
continue falling an hundred and fifty miles an hour, it would be eithy eight
years, two weeks four days five hours and twenty minutes a falling down to
the earth.

8. Some say the absence of Gods face is Hell, but that is not called hell, but
wrath, Isa. 54. 8. this was Cains punishmen, from thy face shall I be hid, my
punishment is greater than I can bear, Genes. 4. 13, 14. the hiding of Gods
face causes sadness and the breaking of the bones of comfort, Psalm. 5. 81.
Behold his eyelids try the children of men, Ps. 11. 4. if shut they are
troubled, if open they are comforted.

9. Some say Hell is in this life, and is a guilty accusing conscience: Dr.
Willet says, a guilty troubled conscience is a Hell and prison of the Soul;
what may rather be called Hell then anguish of Soul? the Judges Tribunal is in
the Soul, God sits there as Judge, the conscience is the Accuser, fear is the
Tormentor, guilt in the Soul wounds the Spirit, a wounded spirit who can bear?
Prove. 18. 14. they the spirits in prison, 1 Pet. 3. 1, 9. this is the wrath of
God that abides upon him that believes not in the son, Joh. 3. 16. Heaven is
Gods face and presence, and our greatest joy in this life, Exodus 33. 15, 16.
and so will be the next, Psalm. 17. 5. thou will fill me with the joy of thy
face, in thy presence is fullness of joy, Act. 2. 18. pleasures or
pleasantness, that is, pleasant joys at thy right hand, in the full enjoyment
of thee are sweet delights eternal.

Some say Hell is a local place, Augustine says it is not a place; Doctor
Willet says the place of Hell makes not the torments; it is a question, s^ith
he, whether the place make Hell, or the absence of the presen^e of God, Synops.
p. 1056.

10. Another says, it is in the other side of the blew cloud that appears to
us in the air; others say, where the place of Hell is they cannot tell, whether
it be in the Earth, or in the Water, or in the Air, it is not revealed, says
Greenwood, they that have taken pains to find it out are as far from it as
ever; some of the Ministers of France affirms, that Father Co^ton the Jesuit
did enquire of the Devil for a plain place of Scripture to prove Purgatory, so
they are at as great a loss to prove Hell by a plain place of Scripture truly
transla^ed their Hell of torments never to end. Also the learned agree not upon
which Scripture to ground their Hel-torments upon; for that place one of them
allege to prove it, another of themselves deny it, that it is so ^o be
understood, Mr. Ai^sw. on Psalm. 16. 10. says, that place through custom is
taken for the place of the damned, but is not so to be understood, the word
being Sheol; Ma^olat on Apoc. page 282. says, the Fire of Gehenna is the place
of the damned, others of them deny it; M. Leigh says Dives proves it, D. Fulk
and others deny it.

See ye not the great doubting and uncertainty they are at among themselves?
they grope in the dark without light, Job 22. 5. by their Reeling, Staggering,
and Stumbling, that they are so drunk they can find no ground to stand upon,
they understand not whereof they affirm, yet each of them hugs his own
apprehension; It is very strange that in a thing so signal of which they say
they see it in the Word of God, that they can no way agree concerning it. O ye
learned in the 7 liberal Sciences, tell us how to reconcile these things in
point of truth, or tell us in as much as ye speak contraries, as yea and nay,
which of you we are to believe. Have we not all cause to say herein, Where is
the Scribe? where is the disputer of this world? has not God made foolish the
wisdom of this world, 1 Cor. 1. 20. he frustrateth the tokens of liars, and
make diviners mad, and turns wise men backward, and makes their knowledge
foolishness, Isaiah 44. 25.

Mr. Edward Leigh Esquire, and Master of Magdalene Hall in Oxford, presents his
reasons to prove Hell Torments or punishment after this life for some to endure
never to end; let them be considered, Prove. 18. 17. Mr. Leigh says, the
conscience of man has a fear of some pun^shment after this life, prov^s it.

Answ. If they have, that does not prove it; because the consciences of men are
as they are instructed, according to the Proverb, Such Doctor, such Scholar;
h^nce it is that the conscience of a Papist tells him it is not lawful to eat
flesh in Lent, nor of a Friday, And whosoever kills you will think he does God
good service, Jo^. 16 2. that is his conscience, the consciences of some men
are almost, if not altogether, for some evil; therefore that proves it not.

Mr. Leigh. the Heathen held there was a Hell, a being and place for wicked men
after this life.

Answ. Why did ye not say and prove that they hold that they shall be in
torment never to end.

The Heathens do not believe that there is to be such a punishment after this
life, for they deny the Resurrection of the body, therefore they burn the body
and save the ashes in an urn for a memorial, they believe as Pithagoras the
Phi^osopher ^aught that the soul goes from one body into another man or beast,
that some of the Philosophers grew so tender, that they would not kill any
beast nor fowl, for they said, it may be it is my brother or my sister. These
Heathen Greek Poets were long before the coming of Christ; in their treble
division of the world they fain three Gods, Jupiter the god of Heaven, Neptune
the god of the Sea, and Pl^to the god of the Earth, in which they say he keeps
his Court and Palace, (no word of torment, that would make it a poor Court and
Palace) so Homer and Noninus, Greek Poets; Homer wrote of the destruction of
Troy, which was near a thousand years before the birth of Christ; Homer is
one of the most ancient Records extant, it seems in his time there was no
mention of a hell of torments never to end, the said Poets call Pluto Summanus,
as being chief of the Maunes or Spirits below: to pacify these ill spiri^s a
feast was kept in February with wax candles burning to Pluto, called
Candlemas-day, so Mr. Jess in his Almanac, the Cretians are always liars,
Titus 1. 12. the greatest liars in the world that will fancy, fain, and say any
thing; is it a thing possible that wax candles above the earth should give
light thousands of miles into the earth to pacify those ill spirits there? it
seems they are not in any great torment if a little light will pacify them;
the Poets say hell is twice as deep as heaven is high; Astronomers say Jupiter
the second plannet is 72. millions of miles above the earth; if hell be twice
as deep, it is a hundred and fifty four millions of miles to hell which is
Fabulous; so there Cerebrus three heads and Charons boat to row men to Pluto;
so the phantasy of Purgatory did spring first from the Heathen Poets long
before the coming of Christ, as appears by Plato and Virgil, who have described
at large the whole Commonwealth and all the orders and degrees of Purgatory:
these with their Elisium Fields and many other of their barbarisms by long use
became venerable.

Your opinion is fitter for Heathens than for Christians: if the Heathens do
hold as you do, are we to believe in Religion as the Heathen? I pass not what
they nor any else say, unless they can read it me in the Word of God, we cry,
To the Law and to the Testimony: if they speak not according to this word, it
is because there is no light in them, Isa. 8. 20. Mr. Leigh says clear reason
proves it, God is just; many abominable sinners enjoy more prosperity in this
life, than those that live far more innocently, must be punished hereafter
according to the multitude and hainousness of their sins, Psalm. 73. 17.

Answ. I see you are more bold to affirm, than able to prove; does reason deny
the punishment to be just, except it never end? the Scripture you allege say
they have an end, and you say they shall never have an end, that is your clear
reason, to say some are worse than others, therefore they are to suffer a
punishment never to end, so you exclude Mary Ma^dalen and the poor Prodigal,
b^t it is but your bare affi mation without proof, your reason is that God
should show mercy to little sinners, but none to the great sinners, they must
not be saved; but this your clear reason is clear against the will and wisdom
of God who is pleased to s^ve of the worst of sinners, as appears Luke 7. 47. 1 Timothy 1. 19. Acts 9. 13. if some enjoy more prosper ty then others, must they
therefore suffer a punishment ^ever to end? outward prosperity is a great
blessing, and you make it a great curse; if that you say were true, there is no
cause in the day of prosperity to rejoice, Ecl. 7. 24 nor to say O Lord I
beseech thee send me now prosperity, Psa. 115. 25. in saying greater sinners
you judge according to outward appearances both for sin and punishment, and may
be mistaken in both what they are in the inner man; for sin and punishment you
know not, the heart of unbelief and rebellion of spirit in others, nor how God
punishes them in their spirits; sin is punished in this life.

Mr. Leigh says, its just they should suffer for ever, who if they had lived
would have sinned for ever: cast them out of my sight, Jer. 5. 1.

Ans. If it be just we should suffer for ever, it is just our Surety should
suffer for ever.

Do you consider that the Creature was made subject to vanity not willingly,
but by reason of him that has subjected the same in hope, Romans 8. 20.

Cast them out of my sight is no proof that they shall suffer for ever, but
rather that they shall be utterly destroyed, for if they have any being, where
ever they be they cannot be out of the sight of God.

Your justice is not Gods, his is a death; yours is not a death, but another
thing.

Mr. Leigh says Gods intentions from everlasting, was to glorify his justice
as well as his mercy, Rom 9. 21, 23. fitted to destruction.

Ans. Know you any of the intention of God that is not revealed in his word?
Deuteronomy. 29. 29. or does the word say that God does not glorify his Justice,
unless he infl^ct so great a punishment without end; you give neither scripture
nor reason to prove that you say is just, the Justice of God was revealed and
made known in causing the earth to swallow up Corah and his company; they were
vessels of wrath prepared, fitted to destruction, (your opinion denies the word
of God that says they are fitted to destruction) you say they are never to be
destroyed, die nor end. Mr. Leigh says the covenant under which unregenerate
men stand, and by which they are bound over to this wrath is everlasting.

Ans. There is but two covenants, Gal. 4. 24. the old and new, Heb. 8. 13. and
12. 24. the old is no more everlasting then the Priesthood of it, the breach of
the covenant of works is death, therefore not eternal life in misery. Mr. Leigh
says in that torment they curse and accuse one another.

Ans. When you write again, I pray tell us how you know that in Hell they do
so, for the word of God says not so, nor have you been there to hear it, nor
they that told you so; to affirm things in Religion not revealed in the word of
God, is to pre^ume above that which is written, and contrary to 2 Cor. 4. 8.
Romans 15. 4. Sacr^tes an Heathen, was more wise and modest in not affirming
things he knew not, being asked what was done in Hell, said, he never went
thither, nor communed with any that came from thence: yet you and others affirm
with great boldness and confidence things you know not; some say in Hell the
eye is afflicted with darkness, whereas darkness is no affliction to the eye;
also they say their ears are afflicted with horrible and hideous outcries,
their noses with poisonous and stinking smells, (of what I pray?) their tongues
with gally bitterness, the whole body with intolerable fire; the damned shall
prize a drop of water worth ten thousand worlds; cursing shall be their tunes,
blasphemies their ditties, lamentation their songs, and shrieeking their
strains, they shall lie shrieeking and screaming continually. Ye see how men
set their brains awork to invent lies; for all they say is without warrant
from the word of God. One says their torment in Hell is so great, that they
cannot forbear roaring; and you say they curse and accuse one another; so that
one of their vain imaginations contradict another, and all of them the word of
God; they will not deny that those in Hell are in the greatest trouble, and
they in less trouble cannot speak, I am so troubled I cannot speak, Ps. 17. 4.
therefore they cannot curse and accuse one another as you affirm.

Mr. Leigh says, Divines unanimously concur, etc.

Ans. If they do it is not binding to us, for we are satisfied they are not
infallible, There must be errors, 1 Cor. 11. 9. they have the greatest share:
The Priests, Popish and Mohammedan Priests, Baals Priests, and all other sorts
of Priests concur, common consent sooner believed then naked truth, it is
high time to Cease from men, for wherein is he to be accounted of? Isa. 2. 22.
truth, and not number of men, is to be followed, Every one must give an account
of himself to God, Romans 14. 3, 11, 12. Luther said, he esteemed not the worth
of a Rush a thousand Augustines and Cyprians against himself; all Churches
err. Pa^normitan said, more credit is to be given to one speaking the truth,
then to all men in all ages speaking the contrary.

They are like to concur and agree if they take the counsel they give, as not
to question principles; it seems we must take all upon trust, and hearsay,
without trial, they all say it, therefore it is true; but the Bereans would and
did search the Scriptures, to see if things were so as the Apostles preached,
see 1 John 4. 1.

Let it be certainly made to appear that God has said in any thing contrary to
any thing that I have said, I desire with all my heart to submit to it, without
that I cannot yield the sovereignty of my judgment and conscience to the
concurring consent of blind guides, ignorant, and erroneous men, though in
sheeps clothing, and covered all over with the title of Godly, Learned and
Holy Saints, or Presbyters, or Ministers of Christ; the Papists call their
Church Holy Church, and their Priest Holy Priest, and their Order Holy Order,
and all Holy if you will believe them.

Some say the Jews report that in Tophet, the Valley of the Son of Hinnom,
there was a great Ditch which could never be filled, which they called the
mouth of Hell, and that the Chaldeans when they slew the Israclites, threw them
in there: if this report be true which has been brought to prove Hell, then it
will follow, that the mouth of Hell is near Jerusalem; and that God does give
to the wicked power to cast his people into Hell.

How much weight there is in your Reasons to prove a punishment after this life
never to end, let who will judge, I for my part profess I do not ^ee how they
serve to your purpose, your nak^dn^sse appears, and that your opinion has
neither scripture nor reason to support it, and therefore it must needs fall, 2 Timothy 3. 9. you have done all you can, and c^n come to no surer bottom to rest
upon, then supposals and imaginations, wresting Scriptures, and consent of
others, your glory is, that all are of your mind, though without good ground
or reason, as is showed. Also in that you allege reasons to prove Hell
torments, it gives me occasion to believe that in your own judgment the
Scriptures you alledg to prove it, prove it not; for if you believe the
Scriptures prove it, to what purpose serve your reasons? or do you think that
those that doubt of the sufficiency of your proof of it by Scripture, will be
satisfied with your reasons as a full proof of it, if there be any such, they
may be to them of some use.

The Learned contradict themselves, Mr. Bolton says, thou must live in
endless woe in Brimstone and Fire, which thou might so often and easily
escape, which overthrows the Doctrine of Election; also they say the sense of
loss in hell is greater then the sense of pain. So they make the sensible want
of the presence of God the greatest torment in hell, and that is in this life,
I am cast out of thy sight, Psalm. 31. 2. it follows by their doctrine that
the greatest torment of hell is in this life.

Mr. Leigh says, in his Body of Divinity, the sense of Gods wrath, rage of
Conscience, guilt, fear, despair, the soul cannot melt with greater torment; if
so, then this is not a worse torment in hell then is in this life.

Water is so scarce in hell, that Greenwood says, the damned prize a drop of
water above ten Thousand worlds, and yet they affirm those in hell shall
continually weeg, etc. therefore their own sayings agree not.

The first Author of the opinion of the torments of hell never to end, was
Marcion the Heretic, that held that Christ was not a man but in semblance, and
that there was two beginnings, two Gods, one good, one bad; that there was
torments for some in hell, was first invented by him, he determined the reward
of the creature, either in torment or refreshment, to be laid up for them in
hell; he was the first author thereof, by Tertullians confession, as ^aith Dr.
Fulk in his Defense, page 83, 84. see and behold the Original of your opinion
of the ^orments of hell, an evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart
brings forth that which is evil, Luke 6. 45.

The seven pillars of Hell shaken and removed.
The Greek Fathers were the first pillars of Hell Torments; this came to pass
by reason of the ignorance of the Fathers in the Hebrew tongue, their not
understanding the word Sheol deceived them, so says Dr. Fulk in his Defense P.
77.

The second pillar of Helltorments were the writers of the Hebrew and Greek
Copies of the Bible; their defect has put us to a great loss; the original
copy the Apostles wrote is not only unknown to us, but to the learned, we do
not hear of any alive in England, that can produce the New Testament the
Apostles wrote, its not enough that they say that we have books in Hebrew and
Greek, unless we could certainly know that these copies as they call them,
agree word for word with those that were wrote by the Prophers and Apostles;
many boast of Gods preserving the Hebrew and Greek Bible amidst so many
enemies, as God has been pleased to deliver up Christ and his people, so also
the Scriptures into the hands of sinners, to be used at their pleasure; it is
wonderful to consider, what adding and altering the Scriptures have been
subject unto; one Pope publishes what he please for scriptures, as Pope Urban
the 5. and within 2 years after Pope Clement that succeeded him calls them in,
and burns them, and puts out what he pleases and calls it the holy
scriptures, if ye will believe the Testimony of the learned and godly
Protestant Writers, who have not been esteemed Blasphemers nor Heretics, as
Dr. Fulk, M Beza, M. William ^erkins, Dr. Amiss and others; Dr. Fulk says that
some Greek copies are altered; it is not unlike in his answer to the Remist to
the Reader, page 43. And which is more, he says corruption has happened to
all copies, this day extant in his answer to preface, page 11. 15. 16. whole
verses omitted in some copies, as 1 John 5. 7. is not in some copies, nor in
the Syriack, which is ancient as Apostles, read not this verse at all, but is
extant in others, and that there is at least sixteen various Greek copies of
the New Testament, Jus Divinum, page 66. Dr. Lightfoot says Mr. Beza was a man
that always questioned the Text, to see so many differing Copies would put any
one to a stand, which to believe. Master Perkins says it must not seem strange
that words in the Margin have crept into the Text; Doctor Amiss says, Helps
governments in the first of the Corinths 12. 8. are not in the Original, he
supposes it to be done by the Prelates in favor of their Government; the
Preachers, who call themselves Divines, have assumed and challenged Divine
Authority to frame all Copies and Translations, and to expound all Texts
according to their own minds, to maintain their own Doctrine and Practices,
to uphold their Power and standing; hence it is that each differing parties
Translation agree not, that party that would have the Magistrate punish
Idolatry, etc. h^ve made a Text for it, Job 31. 28. to be punished by the
Judges: but these words are not in the Hebrew, but are an addition of their
own, as appears by the Bible printed in LONDON by the Assigns of John Bill, in
the year 1640. and the Geneva Bible differs from this, and from the
translation printed by the Stationers, LONDON; the English Translation has
variety of differences, not without evident contr^dicton among diverse places
that might be instanced; see verse 9. 18. of the seventh of Daniel, in the
Geneva Translation, verse 9. is I beheld till the thrones were set up, and in
the Kings Translation, printed by the Company of Stationers, LONDON, the same
verse is, I beheld till the thrones were cast down, and ver. 18. it is [But
Saints of the most High shall take the Kingdome] and in the Geneva Translation
the same verse is [And they shall take the Kingdom of the Saints;] both cannot
be true, which of these is an English man to believe? some say Luther added the
word only to the text, being asked why he did it, said, he did it to make the
Apostle say more plainly, Faith only justifies; Dr. Fulk defense English
Translation, page 80. says, we follow in our Translation as near as we can the
holy Scripture in such sense, if any thing be doubtful as the proper
circumstance of the place will lead us unto, that we may attain to the meaning
of the holy Ghost; so then it seems if the Translator do think the holy Ghost
means this or that, he may translate it so; is not this a large liberty? the
Jews take no such liberty.

The Ministers of Lincoln Diocese in the abridgement of their grievances
delivered to King James, page 11, 13, 14. say, that the English Translation of
the Bible is a Translation that takes away from the Text, and ads to the Text,
and that sometimes to the changeing and obscuring of the holy Ghost; and Mr.
Broughton the great Linguist, in his Adverisement of Corruption, tells the
Bishops that the public Translation of the Scriptures in the English, is such,
as that it perverts the Text of the Old Testament in eight hundred forty and
eight places, and that it causes millions to reject the Old Testament; and Dr.
Fea^ly D. of divinity, in his Dipper dipped page 1. says, no translation is
simply authentical, or the undoubted word of God; in the undoubted word of God
there can be no error, but in the translation, there are and may be errors,
the B^ble translated therefore is not the undoubted word of God, but so far
only as it agrees with the Original, the writings of the prophets and
Apostles, and in as much as our English translation as he says, is not the
undoubted word of God, what is that preaching worth that is proved by it, the
false glosses, and interpretations which are put upon the scriptures by men
learned in the languages, who have made inconsiderate and bold assertion
without proof, in not keeping to the true and proper signification of the words
thereof, has caused many errors and great trouble and confusion, they put the
word LUCIFER for the day star, Isa. 14. 12. They have forsaken the fountain and
dug to themselves cisterns, as Jer. 2. and we see the people are willing to
give up themselves to a Ministry of fables, 2 Kings 4. 4. 2 Pet. 1. 16. that
makes the scriptures say and unsay, which being interpreted is to make them say
just nothing; the force of education and the custom the countrymen live in,
is such as ordinarily ingageth them to a prejudice and evil opinion against
all principles contrary thereunto, though of divine inspiration; hence the
Papists, Turks, and several sor^s of Protestants cry down and censure each
others judgment and opinion as abominable Error, Heresy, and Blasphemy.

The third Pillar that upholds hell torments are fond Expositors that interpret
sheol for hell torments, so Dr. Fulk calls them in his defense, page 90. I
would know why interpreters understand and translate a hell of torments from
the Hebrew and Greek as is not in them, as themselves confess, as has been
showed: they will take sheol figur^t^vely, and say by Tophet hell is figured,
which is a fancy, a fable, and delusion that is strong in many, that expound
scripture without sense or reason, it is as improper to interpret sheol for a
place of torment, as to interpret the word house to signify a horse; the
scripture is not of private interpretation; a sense arising out of the brain of
an interpreter is a private interpretation, and as the Scriptures are not of
man but of the holy Spirit, so the interpretation of them is not to be of man
but of the holy spirit: oracles signify the answer of God, Romans 3. 2. see John
12. and how read thou, Luke 10. 26. to interpret words figuratively that are
to be understood literally, and words literally that are to be understood
figuratively, is licencious and destructive to the faith of the Gospel; we are
not to interpret any place figuratively unless that figurative sense be
expressed in a plainer place of scripture; if a man will have an erroneous
persuasion whatsoever the scripture says to the contrary, he will have it to
be a figurative sense, they will be left in the clouds of their own persuasion,
so instead of proving their hell of torments never to end by the scriptures,
Ruffinus and others say they that will not believe it shall seal it; which is
no proof, but a mere shift, as very a lie as Nurses use to still children by
telling them of a great Bulbegger, and that a man will come down the chimney
and carry him away; but not any but children and fools will be scared with such
Bulbeggers.

The fourth pillar that upholds their Hell-torment, is the consent of their
Preachers, their learned and godly men agree herein, but their weak, and
various, and uncertain grounds, declare that they have not studied the point,
but when teachers and hearers are ignorant any thing will serve and pass for
truth, the simple believe every word; all sorts of Priests agree and abuse the
people, the Mohammedan Priests blow a powder into their eyes that come to see
Mahomet hang, that makes the^ quite blind, that for ever after they are led
and the Priests say that the glory of the sight of Mahomet is so great that it
takes away their sight for ever after, and about Easter-time for ten days
there is great joy about a great fire for their Priest Mahomet, and those that
cast themselves into the fire and are burnt to death are counted Martyrs, and
once a year the tomb of Mahomet is carried abroad upon a cart, and his Priests
say that those that put themselves under the wheel of that cart and are crushed
to death, they say to dye Martyrs, and some are so simple to do so, that so
they may dye Martyrs, so the antichristian-priests and a^l sorts of Priests
have greatly deluded and deceived the people, blowing something into their
ears that for ever after they are not able to hear and receive the truth; but
as M. Beza did detest the Papists Limbus and purgatory, so do I their dreams of
hell, it being a device of man without scripture, with all their uncertain
brainsick fancies, for the imaginations of men have no end.

The 5. pillar of hell is their wresting the scripture to uphold their hell of
torments; this cozeneth and deceives many under color of divine authority,
when its but humane, though they are not pleased publicly to say so, because
it streams not to their purpose, the Scriptures they allege to prove it, is
above considered, if any say I wrest Scripture, I appeal to the learned in the
Langu^ges, for to them concerns the decision of the signification of words,
who (as I have showed) testify with me.

The sixth pillar of Hell is their Arguments and Reasons they bring to prove
Hell Torments, which have been considered.

The seventh pillar of Hell is a strong Persuasion that is in men that the
believing Heltorments is a great means to leave sin and to live a holy life;
and the not believing Heltorments is a means to commit all sin with
greediness, and to live as they list, for they say men live as though there
were no Hell.

Carnal hearts of men takes offense of every thing, except the Law of Works,
doing to be saved, the Doctrine of Ele^tion, Gods free Grace and Salv^tion only
and alone by Christ, without Wo^kes, Romans 4. 6. is changed to be one of the
greatest Doctrines of liberty to ^in that ever was, and is by the ignorant made
a stumbling block and rock of offense; and a cause of carelessness in many.
Ludovick said, if I be saved, I be saved, If I be damned I be damned; the
Papists say, if good works save us not, to what purpose shall we do them? then
we may live as we list, if we be appointed to life we shall be saved, though we
sin never so much, if we sin we have an Advocate, 1 John 2. 1. not any thing
can separate us from the love of God, Romans 8. if we be not appointed to life,
we cannot be saved though we should do never so much good, ye see how this
truth is turned to wantonness, the Apostle exhorts not to turn this grace of
God into wantonness, Romans 6. 1. 15. the corrupt heart of man is ready to do it,
there are many things in Paul's Epistles which the ignorant, unlearned (that
know not God in Christ) wrest to their own destruction; will any therefore say
that the Doctrine of Election and Salvation by Christ alone is not a doctrine
fit to be taught nor come abroad? if so, the Scriptures must not come abroad.

Moreover, the Doctrine of the Protestant Ministers is charged, not only to be
a Doctrine of liberty to sin, but a blasphemous Doctrine, to teach that the
fall and sin of man was decreed, they say is to make God the Author of evil;
the Protestant Writers say that the sin of man was determined of God; Dr.
Willet, Synops. page 760. he also says the Protestants hold, that the fall of
Adam was both foreseen of God and decreed to be, not permitted only, they
allege Genesis 45. 5, 8. 2 Samuel 24. 1. Act. 2. and Acts 4. 22, 28. should ungodly
lusts, Judge. 18. for the creature was made subject to vanity, not willingly,
but by reason of him that has subjected the same in hope, Rom 8. 20. Dr.
William Whitaker against Campion the Jesuit says, now answer me Campion, do
you think that which any one does, how wicked soever, is done whether God will
or not if you hold that any thing is done against Gods will, what providence or
omnipotency do you leave him? for he that permits that to be done which he
would by no means have to be done, it is certain, that he is not endued with so
great power as that he can forbid that which he would not have done, wherefore
you must needs confess that all things that are done, are done by the will of
God; and page 196. all confess, God could have hindered sin to be if he had so
pleased, but he would not hinder it, therefore it was his will it should be,
the will of God, and not sin, is the cause of Gods decree, and the being of all
things, the will and pleasure of God is the Womb from whence springs every
work of the Creature, Romans 4. 11. God must first will his Creature to stand or
fall before he can do either, Acts 21. 14. Phil. 2. 13. Prove. 21. 4. the evil
actions of men are not only foreseen of God, but decreed, says Mr. Par in his
grounds of Divinity: we are not saved from sin, except we have committed sin,
therefore salvation from sin is not without committing Sin, says Fulk,
page 121. God willed and decreed his glory and man's happiness; therefore he
willed and decreed the means to it: the end and moving cause of his willing sin
to be, is for his glory, which cause it was necessary for sin to be; if sin
had not been, how should the goodness of God in giving man eternal life in
glory appeared, his love in sending Christ to die? if there had not been sin,
there had been no need of Christ's coming, nor of his death and righteousness;
most of the great works of God in this world and that to come, have dependence
or reference to sin; how should we have lived by Faith, exercised the fruits of
the Spirit, or have any happiness or glory in the world to come, if it had not
been for Christ? and Christ had not been, if there had been no sin: he that
wills the end, wills those things that are necessarily referred to that
end; taking away sin was decreed before the world, therefore the being of sin
was decreed; Christ's death was determined before the world; for the end of
Christ was to restore Adam's fall; if Adam had not fallen, there had been no
need of a Christ to restore him: The Saints were chosen to life before the
world; choice has reference to the fall, therefore the fall of Adam was
decreed: If the will of man had been the first and chief cause of the being of
sin, then the will of man should be the cause of Gods will, and so man shall be
the original cause of the salvation of himself, and so much the cause of it,
that without his will it could not have been: and so the determination of God
what to do, shall not be from himself, but from the will of man, which is
contrary to Ephesians. 1. 11. if man should will sin before God willed it, then shall
the will of God depend and wait upon the will of man: as if God should say, If
man will sin, then I will will his salvation: and if God should first will to
send Christ to save man, and leave it to man's will and power whether he shall
fall or no, then it was possible for man to stand, and so to frustrate the
decree of God: for if man had not sinned, Gods decree of sending Christ had
been void and of none effect: Mr. Perkins says, God decreed the fall of Adam;
if the fall was decreed, if man had power to stand, then he had power to
frustrate Gods decree, which no wise man will affirm; and then that saying that
Adam had power to keep the Law, is without truth; if he had, consider Ezekiel. 18.
2, 3, 4. Jer. 3. 29, 36. God wills all things well, he sins not, nor can
sin, because he is under no Law, God commands men to keep the Law, that no man
can do; he commands men to think no vain thoughts, and not to sin; we cannot
but think some vain thoughts, and in many things we sin all; Christ says, No
man can come to me except the Father draw him, John 6. 44, 37. if they be drawn
they come; draw us and we will run after thee, Cant. 1. 4. if I put sufficient
strength to move the earth, motion must needs follow; when men sin they are
beguiled, enticed, deceived, drawn away, they like men have transgressed, Hos.
6. 7.

We are to distinguish between that which follows a doctrine in its own
nature, and that which follows by accident, or rather that a corrupt heart
draws from it, and is not from the nature and working of the doctrine it
self; it is strange to consider men are so set upon the Popish principle to be
saved for their works, that they count all profaneness that crosses their
way; some have burned the Bible; and Doctor Crisps book of salvation by Christ
alone, Mr. Archers, late of All-hallowes London, his Treatise of comfort to
believers, against their sins and sorrow, was burnt by the Hangman; the same
spirit is alive to burn this also; I expect no better from such as are not
taught of God; they condemn those things they know not, and think they do God
service, when they persecute the truth and professors of it.

Take for instance, that the fear of the torments of Hell is no such preserver
against sin, is evident; for those that sin with the greatest greediness, the
greatest sinners, they do believe there are hell torments; for though they be
never so wicked, they hope it does not belong to them; or they hope to repent
and lead new lives, before they die; though they sin for the present they hope
to make God amends for all, as an Arminian being drunk said that he was now in
the state of damnation, but he said he would be in the state of grace to
morrow, so he comforted himself. The lives of many Heathens that have denied
the resurrection of the body, and therefore did not hold a hell of torment
after, have been better then many that seek to escape Hell and get Heaven by
their works.

2. If fear of hell were a preserver against sin, then those that are delivered
from the fear of hell, that believe they shall be saved, they should sin more
then others; but we find the contrary, that none more free from sin then these.

3. Experience teaches, that the fear of hell, though at first it startleth
and frighteth men, yet that is soon over, and is no preserver against sin. I
knew one set before him the the torments of Hell to keep him from sin, and
finding that would not do, he added vows and curses to keep him from sin. I
knew another wished the Devil to take him soul and body, if he did not do the
thing he spoke of; and I knew he did it not: another wished he might sink into
Hell presently if he did the thing he spoke of, yet did do it before he went
from the place; the reason is, because the lusts of men are stronger than the
fear of hell, resolutions and curses.

2. Because men are given up to their own hearts lusts; it may be that they may
find that liberty to sin is the greatest misery and bondage in the world, it
has all misery in it, whether they sin with more or less fear, and could
enjoy all the pleasures of sin for a season, they will find they have made a
bad bargain of it. What fruit had ye of those things whereof ye are now
ashamed? Romans 6. 21. If I sin thou markest me, Job 10. 14. Be sure your sin
will find you out, Numbers 32. 23. In keeping thy commands there is great
reward, Psalm. 19. 11. in breaking them a great punishment, loss of inward peace
and comfort, a guilty accusing conscience, disgrace, affliction, losses,
crosses and death; the bloody and deceitful man shall not live out half his
days, Psalm. 53. 23. I will curse your blessings, Mal. 2. 2. see Deuteronomy. 28.

3. Men sin beeause they are led captive by the Devil at his will, 2 Timothy 3. 6.
and 2. 26. also men sin because they are under the Law; so long as a man is
under the law, sin will have dominion over a man, Romans 6. 14. Sin shall not
have dominion over them that are under grace.

4. Men sin because they have not received power from on high against sin;
until they receive that power, they cannot but sin, Thou have led captivity
captive, and given gifts for men, Psalm. 68. 18. until Christ by his spirit set
the soul at liberty, it is in bondage; and enthralled to base lusts; But if the
son shall make you free ye shall be free indeed, John 8. 36. but not till then;
see Eccles. 8. 11. the punishment of the Magistrates keeps men from abusing
others, more than fear of Hell; men would be exceeding dissolute if under no
Discipline of Superiors.

5. Men go to sin for comfort, sweetness and satisfaction; but when satisfied,
they go not to sin; to act for life is no love to God, nor selfdeniall, nor
any spiritualnesse; nor will it do them good, it is not accepted of God, nor
will it continue; such so restrained, oft-times do exceed all others in sin,
the spiritual soul that lives in the enjoyment of the love of God, needs no
such weights to procure its motion; he acts from a new life and principle to
the glory of God and good of others; and in this work and labor of love is
more sweetness than is in all the pleasures of sin, which are but for a season.

It is great ignorance for any to think that it is in the power of any man to
sin as much as he will; if this be proved, all Objections are answered; and
this the Scripture proves, that without the will of God men cannot do any
thing, not so much as go to a City, unless God will, Jam. 4. 13, 15. God
works, governs, and disposes all things after the counsel of his own will,
Ephesians 1. 11. 1 Ioh, 5. 21. Acts 18. 21. Romans 9. 18. Who has resisted his
will? Gods will is done, Luke 11. 2. Hebr. 2. 4. Ephesians. 1. 5. Ac^s 13. 20. the
measure of men's sins are set^; men cannot do more nor less than their measure,
they fill up their measure always, 1 These. 2. 13 it was determined how often Peter
should deny Christ, Luke 22. 31, 34. wi^h ver. 61, 64. God says, if you will
believe him, The wicked shall do wickedly, Daniel 12. 10. they cannot cease
from sin, 2 Pet. 2. 14. That which is determined shall be done, Dan. 11. 26. he
that restrains the clouds that they drop not down rain, he made a decree for
the rain, Joh 28. 26. and the earth that it bring not forth grass, Deuteronomy. 2.
23. He that stilleth the winds and the tempest, Psalm. 107 29, 30. that says to
the waves of the sea, Hitherto shall thou come, but no further, and ^ere shall
thy proud waves be stayed, Job 38. 11. he r^straineth men from doing their
wills when he pleases; they would go further, but he restrains them, Job 18.
that they cannot do the things they had appointed to do; Genes. 20. 6. and
31. 24. and 35. 5. and 30. 10. Revelat. 20. 3, 12. O Lord, I know the way of
man is not in himself; it is not in man that walks to direct his steps,
Jerem. 10. 23. Psalm 73. Prove. 4. 12. A man's heart devises his way, but the
Lord directs his steps, Prove. 16. 9. The preparation of the heart and the
answer of the tongue is from the Lord, Prove. 16. 1. The heart of the King is in
the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of waters, he turns it whithersoever he
will, Prove. 12. 1. Man his days are determined, Jo. 7. 1. 14. 5, 14. and the
bounds of his habitation, Acts 17. 26. So are his works and sins; surely the
wrath of man shall praise thee, and the remainder of wrath shall thou restrain,
Ps. 76. 10.

Setting aside the opinions and conjectures of men's devised Fables, I am fully
satisfied with the testimony of the word of God (besides their own testimony,
which is sufficient against themselves) with which I see through the thick
darkness of the inventions and traditions of men.

Several Considerations that there is not to be a punishment after this life
that shall never end.
1. We do not find the place of Hell mentioned in any of the Six days work
of God; if it be a place, it is a created place, and so a part of the Creation
of God; the Whale is mentioned in Scripture; if there be a place of Hell, it is
a greater thing, and in that it is not found in the Creation of God, it is a
ground to judge that it is of the creation of man, a vain imagination of man;
for their reasons prove it not, nor do they agree amongst themselves of the
proof of it, neither where it is nor what it is.

2. Solomon [was wiser than all men] 1 King. 4. 36. yet he spoke not any thing
of the torments of Hell, nor of any punishment never to end [he spoke from the
Cedar to the Hysop, he spoke also of beasts and fouls, of creeping things, and
of fishes] v. 33. if he had known of any Hell and torments there, he would have
spoken of that also.

3. The Jews [unto whom were committed the Oracles of God] Romans 3. 2. to give
unto us, they have delivered no such thing to us, nor do they believe any such
thing; for the Hebrew Doctors understand the seventh day of seven thousand
years, which is in the world to come he blessed, because in the seven
thousand years all souls shall be bound up in the bundle of life in the world
to come; Ainsworth on Genesis 2. a Day with the Lord is as a thousand years, 2
Pet. 3. 8. the Jews say, as the world was made in sixd ayes, so it should
continue six thousand years, and no more, and that the seventh day is the
seven thousand years in the world to come, in which all souls shall be
blessed: also they say a good man and a bad man died afterward: one in a
vision saw the good man walking in Gardens among pleasant fountains of water,
but the bad man near a River, and his tongue reaching after water, but could
not reach it. Talm. Jerus. in Chag. fol. 77. Col. 4. in that these things are
received among them for truth, though they be but Jewish Fables, yet by them we
see evidently that they do not believe the opinion of a torment after this life
never to end; the Jews and Hebrew Doctors were great searchers of every tittle
of Scriptures; and if it had been there to be seen, they or their Prophets
should have seen it.

4. The Saints recorded in Scripture did not believe that there was to be a
punishment for any to endure never to end; this appears, because when they
made a confession of sin, and the punishment due to them for the same, they do
not confess to have deserved any such punishment; they confess [to us belongs
confusion of face] Dan. 9. 8, 11. [its the Lords mercy we are not consumed]
Lam. 2. 22. [thou have delivered me from death,] Psalm. 116. 8. 2 Chronicles. 8. 1,
10.

Nor do we find that they did ever give thanks for any such deliverance, if
they had known of any such deliverance, it could not but appear the greatest
deliverance any could enjoy, and that it did require the greatest
acknowledgment and thankfulness; nor does it appear that ever they did pray
for, or express any desire of any such deliverance; in that they express
neither, it is a ground to judge that they knew of no such punishment; and if
there had been any such deliverance, they should have known it, it should not
have been hid from them; they admired the deliverance of saving their lives
from death, as the greatest deliverance, Ezekiel. 9. 13, 14. [the kindness of the
Lord not to die] 1 Samuel 20. 14.

Do you believe that if Moses and Paul had believed that there was so great and
exceeding torment without end, that in the least they would have wished or
desired [to be rased out of the book of life] Exodus 32. 33. and [to be
separated from Christ] Romans 9. 3. to endure the said torment without end? I do
not believe that they were willing so to suffer.

5. Christ when on earth, spoke of the destruction of Jerusalem which was to
come, and wept because they were to suffer that, Luke 19. 42, 44. he would much
more have spoken of a punishment never to end, and wept for them that should
suffer that, if there had been any punishment for any to endure.

6. Because when God does warn any from sin, from the consideration of
punishment, there is no mention of any punishments but of those in this life.
See 1 Cor. 10. 1. to 11. [they shall die of grievous deaths] Jer. 6. 4. 2.
Chro. 19. 10. 1 Cor. 4. 14. death threatened, Ezekiel. 3. 18, 19. and 33. 3. to 14.
Titus 3. 10, 11. [confounded that serve Graven Images] Psalm. 98. a punishment
in this life, Jerem. 9 19. death for Idolatry, Jer. 44. 7. the punishment of
Idolatry set for an example, 2 Pet. 2. 6. [be instructed, lest my soul depart
from thee, and I make thee desolate, because of thy sins] Mich. 6. 13. see Jer.
9. 11. [abomination that makes desolate] D^n. 3. 20. [he turned the Cities of
Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes, condemned the^ with an overthrow, making them an
example] 2 Pet. 2. 5, 6, 7. he that threatened death, would have threatened a
punishment never to end if there had been such a punishment to be infl^cted
upon any.

7. Because Gods punishment of sin is not of so large an extent as his mercy,
for his punishing of sin is but [to the third and fourth Generation] Deuteronomy. 7.
9. [thy mercy is great above the Heavens, and thy truth unto the skies] P^al.
108. 4. by Truth in this place understand the punishing of sin, because the
word Mercy is put in opposition, which lies in forgiving sin; the Heavens
are far above the Skies. Astronomers say the clouds and skies are not above
fifty miles above the earth; but the Heavens are above a hundred and sixteen
millions of miles above the skies, but the mercy-seat above] Exodus 25. 21. his
name is his glory, [his glory above the Heavens] Psalm. 8. 1. Why is it said he
punishes the iniquity of the father upon the children to the third and fourth
G^neration, and not to the tenth and twentieth Generation, but to declare that
his justice is satisfied therewith, and requires not a further punishment? God
does punish sin in the sinner, and upon his children, to the third and fourth
Generation, but because there is not to be a punishment after this life never
to end. 8. Because death and the fear of it is called the [terror of God] Genesis
35. 3. [the King of terrors] Job 18. 11, 14. therefore death is the greatest
punishment and most terrible; but if there were to be a punishment never to
end, not death, but that were the King of terrors; for death is not terrible at
all in comparison of that. 9. Because sin is punished in this life to the full;
if you will believe God, he says, according to their works and doings I
punished them Ezekiel. 36. 18. H^s. 12. 2. and 13. 11. Jer. 50. 25. and 56. 18.
Jer. 9. 9, 11. Job 20. 28. every transgression received a just recompense of
reward Heb. 2. 2. would ye have it to be punished to the full in this life, and
after in the world to come with a punishment never to end? that sin is punished
in this life, see Isa. 65. 3, to 16. Deuteronomy. 10. 17, 18. Mich. 6. 10. Hag. 1. 6.
Lamen. 4. 6. I Will punish the World for their iniquity, they shall fall by the
sword Isa. 13. 11, 15, to 22. outward calamity and death, the punishment of
sin, Lam. 3. 39 1 Pet. 2. 14. [recompence their sin to the ful] Jer. 16. 18.
for the violence of the sin of man when all flesh had corrupted his way, God
says, [I will destroy them with the earth; a flood of water to destroy all
flesh] Genesis 6. 11. 12. 17, to punish sin twice, is as disagreeable to justice,
as to receive the payment of one debt twice.

10. Because there is not a worse thing then the dregs of Gods fury, anger, and
wrath; and these are poured out in this life; God does not only begin to
punish sin in this life, but also finish it in this life; for it is said, He
poured out all his Fierce Anger, he cast upon them the Fierceness of his anger,
wrath and indignation, Psalm. 78. 49. (Death) so it was poured out, Esa. 42. 8.
Ezekiel. 19. 22. Accomplished my fury, Eze 8. 7. 8. it consumed them, Ezekiel. 43.
18. for yet a very little while and mine indignation and anger shall cease in
their destruction, Jer. 10. 25. Wrath past, Job 14. 13. taken away all, Psalm.
85. 3. he has poured out all his Anger, Lam. 4. 10, 11. Zeph. 3: 3. the
punishment of their iniquity is Accomplished, Lam. 4. 22. Ezekiel. 5. 13. and 7.
8. and. 20. 21. the dregs of the cup of my fury accomplished, Ezekiel. 13. 14 15.
therefore there is no continuance of it after this life; for when Aohan was
dead, it is said the Lord turned from the fierceness of his anger, Jos. 6. 26.
but if that they say were true, his death was but the beginning of the Lords
fierce anger. Many infallible proofs that there is not to be a punishment after
this life never to end. Proof I. Because the Scriptures hold forth no such
thing, as has been showed; we ought not to presume above that which is
written; Revealed things belong to us, Deu. 29. 29

Proof II. Their opinion of a punishment never to end, is contrary to the word
of God, in that it does maintain that the wicked shall have eternal life: if
man was to live for ever, why was the flaming sword set to keep the way of the
Tree of Life? Genesis 3. 24. Lest he put forth his hand, and take of the Tree of
Life and live for ever: No eternal life came by the first Adam, eternal life
came by Jesus Christ, who is the Tree of Life, eternal Life promised and given
by Jesus Christ, eternal life by Jesus Christ, Romans 5. 21. and [He that eats
of this bread shall live for ever.] Joh. 6. 58. [Because I live ye shall live
also,] John 14. 19. God sent his Son that we might live through him, 1 John 4.
9. only believers have eternal life, he that believes on the Son has eternal
life, he that believes not the Son shall not see life, Joh. 3. 36. whosoever
believes shall not perish, but have everlasting life, 1 Jo. 3. 14. 15 I give
unto them eternal life and they shall never perish Jo. 10 28. the wicked abide
not for ever, 1 John 2. 17. [if ye live after the ye shall die] Romans 8. 13.
[him will God destroy] in the Greek it is corrupt, 1 Cor. 3. 17. the preaching
of the Cross is to them that perish Foolishness 2 Thessillon. 2. 10. utterly
perish 2 Peter 2. 14. Luke 11. 3. [to their own destruction] 2 Pet. 3. 16
[abideth in death] Rom 6. 21, 23. [they shall be destroyed for ever] Psalm. 99.
7. Joh 4. 20. if they perish and have not eternal life, then they cannot live
for ever: God said, Genesis 2. 17. [if thou eatest thou shall surely die] but the
Serpent said (Genesis 3. 4.) [ye shall not die;] so the Serpent, which is the
Devil, has taught men to say as the Serpent said, Now they have eaten they
shall not die, but shall live for ever, and never die, which is to say, God is
the liar, and that which the Devil said is truth: the Word says, Him will God
destroy, Math. 21. 41. 1 Cor. 3. 17. and 6. 13. they shall be destroyed, 2 Pet.
2. 12. Swift destruction, their end is destruction, Phil. 3. 13. their opinion
says they shall never be destroyed, die, nor end, which is no destruction: The
Word says, (the last enemy is death,) 1 Cor. 15. 26. Their Opinion says, that
is not the last, there is an after that is much worse, never to end: it says
Gods anger is for ever, he will never turn from it, contrary to Jer. 3. 12.
Psalm. 50. 5. and 89. 5. and 78. 18. Mr. Bolton says, they shall suffer so long
as God is God: if so, then they have eternal life (though in misery) whereas
the Scripture does not declare eternal life to be for all men, Joh. 6. 45, 47.
Promised us eternal life, 1 John 2. 17, 25. I give unto them eternal life to as
many as thou have given him, Joh. 17. 2, 3. in hope of eternal life, Jo. 3. 15.
As many as were ordained to eternal life believed, Act. 13. 48. they that have
done good unto the resurrection of life, Joh. 5. 29. If it be granted that the
wicked have not eternal life, as has been proved, it will follow, that they
cannot suffer for ever so long as God is God; and therefore all their building
of a punishment never to end falls, grant the first, and the later must needs
follow.

If Adam had not sinned, he should have died; this is proved, first, because
Adam in his creation had a natural body, 1 Cor. 15. 44. that which is natural
is not eternal, v. 46. (he was of the earth earthly) 57, 48. therefore mortal
and corruptible, 53, 54.

Secondly, Man in his first being was corporal and visible to be seen, things
^een are not eternal Mr. Bolton says, if Adam had stood, he could not have
conveyed to us a body immortal or not dying, in his Treatise of Heaven, page
131. Basil says, if God had given Adam an immutable and unchangeable nature,
he had created a God and not a Man: Augustine in his Book of Confessions says,
because the Lord created man of nothing, therefore he left in man a possibility
to return into nothing, if he obeyed not the will of his maker.

Thirdly, Man in innocence needed food, etc. that which depends upon mutable
and earthly things, is earthly and mutable; we see it in all other creatures
that live upon perishing things, at last perish; and herein man by the first
Adam has no preeminence above a beast: Heaven and Earth were created,
therefore had a beginning; and although they have a much longer life than man,
are to have an end, [Heaven and earth shall be dissolved] 2 Pet. 3. 12.

If Adam had not died (Romans 5. 12.) he should have continued in this world, he
should not have gone to the world to come; therefore by his fall he lost no
happiness nor eternal life in that world; for he could not by that fall lose
more than he had, and was to have; death is according to nature, but to attain
immortality is above nature. Adam being earth and from the earth, his
enjoyment, life, and loss, and punishment, must of necessity be earthly; how
comes he then by his fall to be capable of a punishment never to end, unless
by his fall he could purchase eternal life, which none will affirm? eternal
life cannot be by the first man, much less by Sin.

I deny not but the wages of sin is death, Romans 6. 23. there is a difference to
be put between a natural death and a judicial death; the first is from
nature, the second is from sin, if the common death that all die, Hebr. 9.
27. were the punishment of sin, as most men think, then Christ by freeing his
from the punishment of sin, by bearing death for them, of necessity he must
free them from dying a natural death; but Christ freeth not his from a natural
death, yet freeth them from the punishment of sin; therefore to die the common
death is no part of ^he punishment of sin: for where sin is satisfied, or
pardoned, or forgiven, the punishment is not inflicted; if it be, how is it
forgiven? even men when they pardon inflict not the punishment; all confess,
some men's sins are pardoned, how then comes it to pass that they die for sin,
whose sin is pardoned? [He that keeps my saying shall not see death] John 15.
21. is not to be referred to a natural death, but to perish, a judicial
death, John 3. 16. the Scripture declares that there shall be a Resurrection of
the dead, the just and unjust, Acts 24. 15. the unjust would enter into life,
but shall not, John 5. 20. [Unto whom I swore in my wrath, that they should not
enter into my rest] Psalm 94. 11. Hebrews 4. 7. [and your selves thrust out]
Luke 13. 28. when they rise to judgment at the last day, they shall be
consumed with the earth by fire, that is their end; so that not to enter, to be
thrust out, the second death, and to perish, is one thing, if they live for
ever, and have eternal life, how do they perish? and how is the end of those
things death? Romans 6. 21. if there be no end, to be carnally minded is death,
Romans 8. 6. how is this true if they live for ever, and not die?

Sin being a transgression of the Law is a legal sin, and so is to have a
legal punishment: for some sins is death, Romans 6. 23. inflicted by God, as
Genesis 38. 9, 10. and by man; a legal death is not from nature, but from sin,
and is a second death; if a man for murder be put to death, in dying he dies
the first and second death, for in dying he dies a natural death, and a
judicial death: this later is a second death, in that it is not from nature,
but from sin.

Men put the stresse of the punishment of sin upon the second death, but what
that second death is they cannot agree among themselves; the Ministers in their
late Annotations on the Bible on Revel. 20. 9. (on such the second death has
no power) interpret it not to be destroyed by Antichrist, nor by the Turk, v.
9. so then according to their interpretation it is not a punishment never to
end. Mr. Perkins says the second death is a total separation from God; if so,
it is not a punishment without end, and in that God is every where, Psalm. 139.
7, 8. if they be any where, how are they absent from God?

If the second death be a death, it is not a life of misery never to end; that
is not a death, unless eternal life be a death; they confess eternal life in
misery is worse than death; if so, then it is not a death, but another thing.

The first death is the destruction of the body, a separation of soul and body;
the second death must be like it; the second death is an image of the first,
else how is it a death, and a second death? the second Adam being man, was an
image of the first; the Scripture says, the second death is like the first,
Luke 6. 1. the second is like to it, Matthew. 22. 39. Therefore as the first
death, so the second is a separation of soul and body, else how is it a death
or a second death?

Reuben by going into his fathers bed, deserved a judicial legal death, but did
not die for it, Genesis 49. 3, 4. and 35. 22. 1 Chronicles. 5. 1. (let Reuben live and
not die) Deuteronomy. 33. 6. a judicial or second death: the Jews Onkelos read Deuteronomy.
33. 6. (let Reuben live, and not die the second death) and Jonathan on Isa. 65.
6. (I will deliver their carcasses to the second death) verse. 17. (the Lord
will slay them with the second death) by which it appears, the Jews count the
second death is to be slain; and if so, it is not a life of misery never to
end as some say; the book of the Revelation speaks of the second death; Doctor
Featly and Dr. Ligh^foot, and others say, that book treats of the Church and
things done in this world; and if so, then the second death is a punishment of
this life, they also interpret Heaven in that book to be the Church, and the
late Annotat. Bible, and Mr. Brightman and others on Apo^. 20. 10. say, that
the Devil in that place is the great Turk.

It is their opinion that say the wages of sin is not death, they say it is a
life of misery never to end, which is worse and more than death; therefore
their opinion is contrary to the word that says it is death, filled with all
unrighteousness, haters of God, despitefull, proud, inventers of evil things,
they that commit such things are worthy of death, Romans 1. 31, 32. these are
great sinners, yet the word says not that they are worthy of more then death;
and therefore why should any say they are worthy of more then death? and if the
end of these things are death, Romans 6. 21. therefore there is not any thing to
come after death, 2 Kings 7. 4. the soul that sins shall die. Ezekiel. 18. 14.
26. that is all that sin does bring forth. God in giving his Law did express
the punishment of the breach of it, saying; in the day that thou eatest of that
tree thou shall surely die, Genesis 2. 17. dying thou shall do, that is, naturally
and judicially, not touch it le^t ye die, Genesis 3. 3. to bear iniquity is to dye
for it, Levit. 22. 9. Numb. 18. 22. that one man dye for the people, Joh. 18.
14. the body is dead because of sin, Romans 8. 10. he that is dead is freed from
sin, Romans 6. 7. neither sin nor punish^ent has any thing to do with a dead
man; this iniquity shall not be purged from ye till ye dye, then it is purged
from them, if this iniquity be purged from you till ye dye, we learn that death
acquitteth, Talm. Jerus. Sanched. fol. 27. Col. 3.

After man had sinned, God expounded the punishment of the breach of his Law,
Genesis 3. 14. to verse 20. it is evident that the punishment of the old Serpent
the Devil, and of the woman and of the man for their sin, are only
punishments of this life; there is not the least word of any punishment after
this life, much less of a punishment never to end; so that by that which is
said we may judge of that Mr. Bolton and others say, of being everlastingly in
a red hot scorching fire, deprived of al possibility of dying, or of being ever
consumed in torment eternally; they say the fire of hell burns far hotter
then ten thousand r^vers of brimstone; how know they it, seeing they never felt
it, nor they that told you so? three drops of brimstone will make one so full
of torment that one cannot forbear roaring out for pain, yet it must be born so
long as God is God. O eternity, eternity, eternity! if so, they shall have
eternal life, which is contrary to the Scripture, as has been showed, and is
therefore to be rejected; also they say that the soul of the wicked goes
immediately at death to hell to the Devils, contrary to E^cles. 3. 21. and 12.
7. Genesis 2. 7. H^b. 12. 9. Ez^k. 43. 13, 14, 15. Zach. 12. 1. if the Devils are
in hell in torment as they commonly and vainly imagine; hell is in the wicked;
the devils evil spirits are there and rule there in the children of
disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. 1 Pet. 5. 8. Math. 8. 28. Jud. 14. Math. 25. 29, 30,
31.

Adam in innocence being a natural man, he had the Law of nature written in
his heart; the breach of that natural Law caused a temporal curse and
punishment, and not any eternal; they that think eternal life is to be had
for our works, our well doing, are prone to think eternal life may be lost for
our not well doing; but the way of the Gospel places not eternal life and
ete^nall death in misery upon our doing, Romans 4. 2, 3, 4, 5. Also the Scripture
speaks not of an eternal death, and therefore there is no such thing.

Proof III. Their opinion of a punishment after this life never to end, makes
not sin, but Christ to be the cause of their so suffering: this is evident;
because if Christ had not come, there had been no Resurection, and if no
Resurrection there could be no suffering of any torment after this life: for if
no resurrection they should have perished, in the grave there had been their
end, If Christ be not risen, they which are fallen asleep are perished] 1 Cor.
15. 17, 18. that the Resurrection came by Jesus Christ is also evident; for
Christ says, [I am the Resurrection] Joh. 11. 75. by man, that is, Christ came
the Resurrection, ver. 21. [Therefore it is called the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ] 1 Pet. 3. 21. [His Resurrection] Romans 6. 5. Philippians 3. 16. 1 Pet.
1. 21. Christ is called the first fruits, because he first rose from the dead,
after him others; if Christ had not risen, no man should ever have risen from
the dead, therefore it is said [They came out of their graves after his
Resurrection] Matthew 27. 5. and in that Christ is the Resurrection and the
cause of it, in that it came by him, sure none will deny, that if there had
been no Resurrection from the dead, there could be no suffering after death, so
long as God is God, therefore it follows, if any shall so suffer, Christ is
the cause of it; for without him they could not have lived for ever, and
therefore not suffer for ever; and is it not very hard and unreasonable, and
contrary to the word to charge Christ to be the cause of their so suffering?
seeing Christ came [in love to the world] John 16. 36. [to save, not to
destroy] Luke 9. 59. and 19. 10. not to make any miserable, [he came to save
sinners] 1 Timothy 1. 15. Lu. 4^ 18^ [he rose again for our satisfaction;]
therefore, if none can so suffer unless Christ be the cause of it, there is no
such punishment for any to endure never to end.

Proof IV. The Scriptures declare what Christ came to do, namely, to deliver us
from the hand of our enemies, Luke 1. 74 [to taste death for every man] Hebrews
2. 9. See Lu. 4. 18. [the last enemy is death, he abolished death] 2 Timothy 1. 10
he has promised deliverance from death and grave; I will redeem thee from
death, Hosea 13. 14. that keeps my sayings shall not see death, John 8. 51, 52.
O death where is thy Sting? O grave where is thy Victory? 1 Cor. 15. 55. I will
ransom thee from the power of the grave; he says not from the torments of
hell, nor from the punishment never to end: O death I will be thy plagues, O
grave I will be thy destruction, Hos. 13. 4. so that if there be a punishment
after death and grave, there is no mention of Christ's delivering us from that;
and in that the Scripture says [He is able to save from death] Hebrews 5. 7.
is as much as to say, salvation from death is sufficient, and that there is no
farther thing to be delivered from than death and grave, if there were
deliverance from them had not been satisfactory, because not sufficient; for if
there is to be a punishment after death, who shall deliver us from that? Christ
delivers from death and grave, no further deliverance from any thing is
mentioned: therefore he has not delivered his from more, and therefore there
is no further thing to be delivered from; so that ye may see that their opinion
makes void Christ's suffering, and the Saints comfort; for if a punishment for
ever be due to man for sin, Christ must for ever suffer that torment to free
us from it, or we must suffer it; the Protestant Writers confess, that the way
and means that Christ freeth us from the punishment of sin, is by his suffering
that punishment we were to suffer: to this the Scriptures agree, Galatians 3.
13. Isaiah 53. 4, 5, 6, 7. so that if Christ our surety has not suffered the
said torments for ever, then has not Christ suffered enough; namely, that
which we were to suffer, and so not delivered us from the said punishment. That
Jesus Christ has not so suffered is evident, and confessed by the Protestant
Writers; some of the Protestants say the repro^a^es in ^ell suffer the w^nt of
the v^sion or sight of God for ever, final rejection. 2. They shall be
perplexed with the horror of a guilty C^nscience. 3. Deprived of the gifts of
the holy Spirit. 4. Instead of Virtues, they are defiled with Wickedness,
Indignation, Desperation; Christ suffered none of these, says Willets
Synopsis, page 1010. far be it from us so to conceive, p. 1014. also they say
in Hell is inward and outward darkness. 2. A l^ke of Fire and Brimstone. 3.
Fire unquenchable. 4. Worm and prick of Conscience. 5. Malediction. 6.
Desperation, second death; Christ suffered none of these, therefore Christ
suffered not the torments of Hell to be ever, in these in that place, they will
not say Christ is how in; if Christ had suffered the pains of the damned, yet
unless he suffer them without end, Christ suffered not the punishment of the
damned in Hell, which they say we were to suffer; also they say, they suffer
not those torments without sin and desperation; will any say Christ so
suffered also? they say in Hell they shall see the story of their sins before
their eyes, the wrath of God lying upon them for their sins, cruel
indignation, horrible outcries, blasphemies, fretting for horrible torments,
endless pains, without all hope or comfort; who dare say Christ suffered any
of these? some that are for the torments of Hell, confess that it stands not
with the dignity and worthiness of Christ's person, nor with the holines^e of
his nature, nor the dignity of his office to suffer in that local place
eternally: final rejection with desperation, with the worm of conscience,
agrees not to the holiness of his person; final rejection Christ suffered
not, nor eternal flames, nor the second death: for Christ to suffer these,
were to destroy the work of our Redemption; Christ could not be subject to
destruction. Willet. Synops. p. 1009. Christ suffered none of these
punishments, therefore he suffered not the torments of Hell. Christ was heard
in that he feared. Christ did not fear the torments of Hell, therefore he did
not partake with us, nor deliver us from them. Christ did not deliver us from
any thing which he suffered not; eternal fire in Hell: he suffered not: nor are
the pains of this life the pains of Hell therefore if there be any such Hell
or punishment, Christ suffered it not, and therefore we must suffer it; see ye
not whither this their Doctrine tends? to overthrow the sufficiency of Christ's
suffering and our comfort, in leaving us to suffer the said torments our
selves. Christ leaving his suffering an example, if we suffer with him, etc.
Romans 8^. 17. Must we suffer the torments of Hell? I believe Christ has born
the whole punishment of sin; in it I am saitisfied, and desire no more; but
how Christ suffered the torments of Hell, I nor them selves see not: they say
Christ being God, made an infinite satisfaction, paying at once upon the
Cross, that which we should have been ever a paying: I grant Christ is God;
but the Godhead did not, nor could not suffer; if the Godhead of Christ was to
make satisfaction to God, is to say, God satisfies God; and if Christ as God
was to make satis^act^on, to what purpose was Christ to be made man and die? if
ye say Christ was to make satisfaction in both, his Godhead and Manhood: does
the Godhead need the help of the Manhood to make satisfaction? It is not proper
to say God was to be satisfied: for he was never unsatisfied; God is perfect,
infinite, happy, unchangeable; how is he so, if he were ever unsatisfied? to
say God is, or ever was unsatisfied, is in effect to deny the being of God, to
say he is not happy; for satisfaction and content belong to happiness; where
there is no satisfaction, there is no content, because no perfection: God is
one to us, there is but one God; God was in Christ recon^iling the world to
himself, 2 Cor. 5. 21. that is, Father, Word and Spirit, God is one; not one
Divine Nature in Christ satisfying, and another in the Father satisfied, but
the Father in the Son, God in Christ: the essence of God is one and the same,
reconciling the world to himself; God was never unreconciled to the world: its
only man that is at enmity and unreconciled, therefore it is said, he
reconciled them to him; the change is in the Creature, not in God, Mal. 3. 6.
if the Manhood of Christ was to make satisfaction to God, how can man that is
finite, satisfy that which is infinite, unless you will affirm the Godhead of
Christ did suffer? there was not any thing to suffer, but the Manhood of
Christ; can the suffering of man satisfy God? man is finite, so is all he
does, sin is a transgression of the Law, sin is a disorder of the Creatures
first and chief being, which stands in righteousness, and is an eclipse of the
glory of man. Sin is a defect and discovery of the weakness and mutability
of the reasonable Creature; sin cannot impeach God: If thou sinnest, what do^st
thou against him? or if thy righteousness be multiplied, what do thou unto
him? if thou be righteous, what give thou unto him, or what receives he at
thy hand? thy wi^kedness may hurt a man as thou art, and thy righteousness
profit the Son of Man, Job 34. 6, 7, 8. God has all satisfaction in and from
himself, not from any thing without or besides himself; God gave not a Law to
himself to satisfy, but to man, the Law belongs only to the humane nature,
therefore Christ was a man: He took on him the form of a servant and became
obedient to death, the death of the Cross, Phil. 2. 7, 8. a body, Heb. 10. 10.
obedience belongs to the humane will; The man Christ made a curse for us; he
was bru^sed for our iniquittes; and with his stripes we are healed, Isa. 53. 5,
10. it was blood that washed away our sins, Rev. 1. 5. therefore it is said,
By the obedience of one [man] we are made righteous, Romans 5. 10. the word
says, not by the obedience of God, nor of God Man, God is satisfied; but by
the obedience of one man we are made righteous, the man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.
5. the worthiness of Christ's person did not abolish the equity of the Law of
God, and exempt him from suffering that he ought to suffer, Luke 24. 25. Some
say the suffering of Christ was infinite, but the Word says not so; the
punishment of sin is death, he tasted death, he died for us; it is no infinite
thing to die: they reply, the sin of man is infinite, because against an
infinite God; to say sin is infinite, in a strict sense, is to attribute too
much to sin, and too little to God, to give that to sin which is proper to
God; to equal sin with God, is in effect to deny the being of God, because
there can be but one infinite; also to say sin is infinite, is to make all sin
alike equal: for there is no degrees in that which is infinite; sin not being
infinite, needs not an infinite satisfaction: they say infinite Majesty
offended, infinite punishment imposed: but it is but their say so, because it is
without and besides the Word of God: the punishment of sin is not to be taken
from the in^initenesse of God, but from the penalty expressed in his Law for
the breach of it, which is death, Genesis 3. 3.

Proof V. The word says, Gods fury is like fire; in the fire of his jealousy
he shall make a speedy riddance of all them in the day of the Lords wrath,
Ezekiel. 1. 18. but to contiuue in torment for ever, is no speedy riddance:
therefore there is no such punishment to be: the pouring out of the fiery anger
of the Lord, is a day; Zeph. 1. 15, 18. Romans 6. 17. Ezekiel. 13. 14. and 22. 22.
James 2. 21. Isa. 13. 9, 13. the day of the Lord is at hand, Deuteronomy. 33. 34, 35.
Job. 20. 28. a punishment never to end, no- way a grees to a day: therefore
there is no such punishment to be.

Proof VI. The opinion of the torments of Hell never to end, has and does
daily cause much sin: For,

First, it causes fear: fear has punishment, 1 John 4. 8. He that fears
is not perfect in love, 1 John 4. 18. a servile and a slavish fear is sin.

2. It causes many evil and hard thoughts of God.

3. Fear troubles the hearts of many of the Lords people, and makes them sad
with their lies; this God complains of, Ez^k. 13. 22. their lies cause them to
err, after which their Fathers walked, Amos 2. 4. Christ says, ^et not your
hearts be troubled, Joh. 14. 1. the fear of hell does greatly trouble the
hearts of many; it is Gods will to comfort the sad; to release those that are
bound, Isa: 61. 1, 2, 3, 4. and 40. 5, 9. a word fitly spoken, is like apples
of Gold in pictures in Silver, P^ov. 25. 11.

4. Fear distracts, and greatly discourageth the soul, hinders faith, that
which freeth the soul from fear, fits the soul to serve God without fear, in
holiness and righteousness, all the days of our lives, Luke 1. 74.

5. Fear unfits and disableth the soul to every good work to God or man; fear
unfits for any outward occasion; fear is a weight that depresses the soul, and
makes it weak, it straitneth the heart, but hope comfort and enlarges it.

6. The opinion of hell torments, provokes the soul to envy and unbelief, and
hinders subjection to God; if the soul apprehends it self liable to so great
and everlasting punishment, it cannot submit to God (nor be quiet) This caused
Francis Spira to wish he were above God: the light of this truth causes the
soul less to sin, and less to be troubled, to have less hard thoughts of
God, and less to fret against the Lord.

7. Their opinion causes an exceeding and unreasonable trouble of mind and
melancholy; such trouble is sin, John 13. 1. [a merry heart does good, Prove.
17. 22.] the knowledge of the truth herein eases the fearful mind, and causes,
as it were, a Heaven upon Earth.

8. Their opinion has caused many to murder themselves in taking away their
own lives by poison, stabbing, drowning, hanging, strangling and shooting
themselves, casting themselves out of windows, and from high places to break
their necks, and by other deaths, that they might not live to increase their
sin, and increase their torments in Hell.

9. Their opinion provokes to the greatest sins, as despair: also to the
wickedness that the world lies in, namely, working for life, to do duties to
escape Hell and get Heaven, which is to tread under foot the blood of Christ as
an unholy thing, Heb. 10. 29. in seeking to be justified by the law of works,
and not alone by the perfect righteousness of Jesus Christ, Rev. 1. 5. Jer. 23.
6. Heb 10. 10, 14.

10. Freedom from fear causes love; love causes service; the love of Christ
constrains; it tends to the comfort of many that through weakness of faith
give way to Satan's temptations; to fear the torments of Hell causes a feeble
mind; comfort the feeble mind, 1 These. 5. 14. its a comfort to many whose
children and friends die and leave no testimony of their conversion, the fear
that they are to suffer so great and endless torment has greatly sadded and
troubled the heart of many a parent and friend.

Proof VII. The Reason that God gives, that he will not contend for ever, nor
be almayes wroth: for the spirit would fail before me, and the souls I have
made, Isa. 57. 16. man is not able to dwell with everlasting burning, Isa. 33.
14. to be in so great a torment as they speak of without end, ease, and
refreshment, the spirit must needs fail (a small thing will make the spirit
fail) if so, then the reason is the same against the being of a punishment
never to end.

Proof 8. It is not agreeable to the God of nature, to go contrary to the law
of nature, that he has written in mankind; there is planted in man an
universal love to man, especially to their Offspring, be they obedient or
disobedient; what bowels of love is there in Parents to their Offspring, when
in misery, and to others in misery and want? sure no man does desire any man
nor creature to endure the torment they speak of one year, much less their own
offspring; how then may I, or can I, think so of God, to be less pitiful,
less merciful then cruel man (Jer. 50. 24. and 6. 23. Hos. 4. 1.) to his
Offspring? we are all his Offspring, Acts 17. 28. sure God exceeds man in
goodness; if ye which are evil know how to give good things to your children,
how much more shall your heavenly Father give good things to them that ask
him? Math. 7. 8, 9, 10, 11. thou Lord art good and do good, Psalm. 119. 68.
Math. 5. 45. though they were evil, and did evil, God did good and gave rain,
Act. 14. 17. They say the fire, Dan. 3. 21. is nothing to Hell, and that the
greatest torment man can devise, is scarce a shadow to that in hell, by which
they declare God to be more cruel than man.

Proof IX. If man had deserved so great punishment, why may not God show that
mercy as not to inflict it, as well as to let his Sun to shine, and his rain to
fall on them that no way deserve it, seeing he could (if he so pleased) hinder
it? we do see men show more kindness to a rebellious and disobedient child
then he deserves; may not God do the same, so much as God is greater than man,
so much greater is his mercy, love and goodness, than that in man, yea than
that that is or ever was in all men; all that came from him, and all is but the
least drop to that great sea and ocean of mercy and love that is in him; how
little a portion is heard of him? Job 24. 14. All nations before him are as
nothing, and they are counted to him less than nothing, vanity, Isaiah 40. 12,
15, 17, 22. O how great is he that hangs the earth upon nothing! Job 24. 7.
he can and will do for the worst creature far above that which it is able to
ask or think.

Proof X. Because Gods general goodness in the creation of the world is to all
his creatures, and also in his ordinary dispensation is toward and for the
whole Universe of mankind; he has provided room enough for all men and
creatures, and all good things for all; the profit of the earth is for all,
Eccles. 5. 9. God has commanded us to do good to all, he that has two coats
is to impart to him that has none, and he that has meat must do so likewise,
Luke 3. 11. all which does hold forth Gods good will and care to mankind, he
that would not have them suffer the torment of misery and want, that takes
care to prevent that little and short misery, will not impose a far greater
never to end.

Proof XI. Their opinion lesseneth the goodness of God, and limiteth to a few,
whereas the Scripture declares it to be to all, Romans 5. the creature it self
shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty
of the sons of God, Romans 8. 19. the whole Creation and every creature is
Angels and men, Jews and Gentiles, verse 20. Mark 16. 15. in bondage to
corruption, subject to vanity, Idolatry, and delusion of the Devil, that know
not, nor partake of the glorious liberty of the sons of God, shall be delivered
from this bondage into the said liberty; for God was in Christ reconciling the
world to himself, 2 Corinthians 5. 19. this is spoken to persuade them to be
reconciled to God, verse 20. which shows it to concern mankind; the
Protestants in Poland understand by every creature, Angels and men; they say
there will come a time when the Angels and wickedest men shall be freed.
Origin, one of the Fathers, held, that at last all should be saved, men and
Devils; the generality of the Fathers held, that all souls shall be purged by
fire of the last Judgment, and so pass to salvation, Moulin, page 135. see
Romans 11. 22, 23, 27. [All flesh shall see the salvation of God] Romans 8. 19.
see 1 Timothy 2. 3, 4, 5. Isaiah 47. 17. [The glory of the Lord shall be
revealed, and all flesh shall see it] Isaiah 40. 5. the times of the
restitution of all things God has spoken by the mouth of his holy Prophets
since the world began, Acts 3. 21. they shall in time be delivered from their
bondage, for which deliverance they groan; are not all Angels and men, obedient
or disobedient, the creation of God? if so, the worst shall partake of the
liberty of the Sons of God: as the whole creation came from God, or rather is
in God, for in him we live, it shall be taken up into the same glory; a good
the larger it is the better, if it be good to show mercy to some, is it not
more good to have mercy on all? Romans 5. 18. Plato could say, God being a
supreme good, there was no envy in him to any of his creatures, but rather a
desire that all might be made like him: this is so great and glorious a
discovery of God, and that all men are in God; for in him we live, and move,
and have our being, as certain also of your own Poets have said, for we are all
his offspring, Acts 17. 28. I have wondered how the Heathen Poets came to know
this truth; sure God did manifest it to them: if all men are in God all men are
in Christ; for Christ says, [I and my Father are one] John 10. 30. also if all
men are in God, for in him we live and move, etc. if so, then all men are in
Christ; for God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, 2 Corinthians. 5.
9. all confess that all that are in Christ shall be saved [as in Adam all die,
so in Christ shall all be made alive] 1 Corinthians 15. 22. I see God is good,
and does good, and that it is suitable to the being of God to do good to all,
and that no such torment of such continuance any way agrees to the mind and
will of God.

Romans 5. puts the second Adam in opposition to the first in saving to his
sinning; if all Nations be blessed, as Genesis 22. 18. every p^rticular is
comprehended in the general word All; it is a great lessening of the greatness
and glory of the fullness and riches of Gods grace, to say that God has made
this world for all who are many, and the best world to come but for a very few;
shall the fruit of Christ the Son of Righteousness be more narrow and confined
than the Sun in the firmament, whose excellency is, that its bright rays and
beams are dispersed into every corner of the Universe?

Proof XII. It does no way agree to the spirit of a Saint; we may know the mind
of God by the mind of a Saint, [we have the mind of Christ] 1 Cor. 2. 16. He
that is turned to the Lord is one spirit, 1 Corin. 1. 17. God is in them of a
truth, 1 Cor. 14. Christ in us, Coloss. 1. 27. Stephen when stoned, cried [Lord
lay not this sin to their charge] Acts 7. 58. [Saints they are ever mercifull]
Psalm 36. 17. [The desire of the righteous is only good] Prove. 11. 22. such
torment, of such continu^nce, in the least agree not to the gracious mind and
merciful heart of a Saint; he desires not any man nor creature to be in such
torment an hour: therefore it does no way agree to the mind of God; we find the
more the Lord manifests himself in any, the more their minds and spirits are
humbled, the more loving and merciful they are, even to their enemies, and can
do them good for evil.

Proof XIII. Such tormen ^s do not in the least agree to the mind and will of
Christ; Christ is full of love and mercy to the worst men; it was truly said of
Christ [He was a friend to Publicans and Sinners] He, the best friend to them
that ever was; when they crucified him, he said [Father forgive them] Luke 23.
34. when the Disciples would have had fire to come down from Heaven to consume
Christ's enemies, he rebuked them, Luke 9. 54. he that will by no means suffer
his enemies to suffer a short death by fire, will not inflict upon them a more
terrible fire never to end; ye may know the mind of God by the mind of Christ,
for Christ is God, a like equal, Acts 28. Heb. 1. 3. and as one [I and my
Father are one] Joh. 10. 30.

Proof XIV. Such punishments agree not to the fruits of the holy and blessed
God; [the fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, goodness, etc.] Galatians
5. 22, 23. the fruit of the spirit is in all goodness, Ephesians. 5. 9. [The words
of the Lord are pure words] Ps. 12. 6. [The words of the pure are pleasant
words] Prove. 15. 25. good words, comfortable words; the holy Spirit is cal^ed a
Comforter, not a tormenter, the pure spirit of love sends forth only love and
sweetness.

Proof XV. No such torment no way agrees to the nature of God; God is love, 1
John 4. 16. it is his nature, there is no anger nor fury in love; fury is not
in me, Isa. 27. 4. God wills us to love enemies that abuse, wrong and hate us;
God will do so much more, love his enemies, Luke 6. 35. if God should only love
them that love him, do not the Publicans the same? Mat. 5. 46. all that is in
God is God, is infinite; God is love, love is infinite without bounds and
limits; though we in our shallowness and n^rrowness, have often set bounds and
limits to infiniteness; there was never any beginning in God, therefore no
beginning of his love; the infinite blessed God is one and ever the same; I am
the Lord, I change not, Mich. 3. 6. this love delights in mercy and love, and
not in punishing of sin: that is his strange act, Isa. 28. 21. Christ died to
answer the Law we brake.

Christ did not purchase the love of God; he loved us before the world began,
and ever will, Joh. 13. 1. God was never without his love, nor is ever out of
that love; Christ says, thou have loved them as thou have loved me, Joh. 17.
23. at what shall God be angry or unsatisfied? for God was never angry with
Christ nor his people, nor at the being of sin, nor at Christ taking our sins
upon him; for he laid them on him, the iniquity of us all, Isa. 53. 6.

Proof XVI. It is not suitable to the mercifulness of a father to his child,
of a Creator to his Creature, the work of his hands, to impose so great a
punishment without end, upon any of them; that were worse then to forsake the
works of his hands, and is contrary to Ps. 148. 8. Your heavenly father is
merciful, Luke 6. 36. rich in mercy, Ephesians. 2. 7. the Lord is gracious, of great
mercy, the Lord is good to all, and his tender mercies are over all his works;
all thy works shall praise thee, and thy Saints shall bless thee, Psalm. 145.
8, 9, 10. he is good to all, he despises not any, Job 36. 5. no Respecter of
persons, Acts 10. 34.

Proof XVII. Sin cannot overcome his love; where sin has abounded, grace
abounds much more, Romans 5. 20. this declares the mercy of God to be greater
then sin: if so, the grace of God is to all, to the worst; for sin abounds in
them most; and where sin abounds, grace abounds much more; if so, then all
their sins shall be forgiven; and if any were so to suffer, how has grace
abounded to them much more, where sin has abounded? answer this if ye can:
with the Lord there is mercy, Psalm. 130. 7. the Lord is good to all: therefore
to the worst of men, his tender mercies are over all his works; therefore to
the worst of men also, for they are the work of his hands, Job 34. 14. Isa. 64.
8. therefore there is no punishment for any to endure never to end: he that
bids us not to be overcome with evil, but to overcome evil with good, he will
not be overcome with evil, but will overcome all evil with his infinite
goodness: that which is finite, cannot possibly overcome that which is infinite.

Proof XVIII. God he is just, therefore he will not do any thing but that which
is just and right: the greatest punishment of the breach of his law is death;
he will not inflict another, much less a worser punishment then he has
expressed in his Law: Justice is in number, weight and measure, God requires
things equal; ye may see the mind of God in his command in forbidding any thing
to be done but that which is equal and suitable to the fact, as eye for eye,
tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot, stripe for stripe, Exodus 21.
24, 25, 26. How much she has glorified her self, and liv^d deliciously, so
much torment and sorrow give her, Rev. 18. 7. what measure you mete to others
shall be measured to you again: murder, an horrible and grievous sin, yet it is
punished with an equal punishment in this life, life for life; he that shed
death man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, Genesis 9. 6. life for life is
equal, but to lose life for life, and also to suffer so great torment never to
end, is not equal.

Proof XIX. It is no profit nor pleasure to God for any to suffer such endless
torment [he has no pleasure in the death of any] Ezekiel. 18. 31, 32. much less
can it be any pleasure to him for any so to suffer, [he desires mercy and not
sacrifice,] Mich. 6. 6. if so, he desires not any should be so sacrificed in a
torment never to end. God abhors cruelty, Amos 1. 3, 6, 13. and casting off
pity.

Proof XX. It is not for the glory of God to impose such a punishment upon any;
glory lies not in imposing great and terrible punishments, that belongs to
cruelty, is abhorred by the light of nature; Glory lies in great mercy and
forgiveness, Exodus 34. 6, 7. the greater mercy and forgiveness, the greater is
the grace, and the more is it to the glory of God; love covers all sins,
Prove. 10. 12. he that covers transgre^sion seeks love, Pro. 17. 9. if man
his glory is to pass over transgression, Prove. 19. 11. it is for the glory of
God to do so much more: God made all things, and does all things for his glory;
he seeks h^s glory in his exceeding greatness and riches of his grace, Ephesians.
2. 7. it is more for his glory to save all, then to save a few; the
righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men unto justification of
life, Romans 5. 18. sin could not hinder Manasses, Mary Magdalen, persecutors and
wicked prodigals to find mercy: I cannot admit to think any thing that is cruel
to be in God in love, whose goodness is unsearchable, past finding out, far
above all we can ask or think: there is such a confused noise among men of the
grace and love of God, so many several voices that we are in confusion, and
know not what to make of it: look above and hearken to the sweet voice above in
the Region of love, what is the voice in Heaven, they agree in one, there is no
voice comes from Heaven but love, peace, and good will to man; let men say what
they will, I rest satisfied in the voice above, that is only a voice of love
and good will; its enough to satisfy any in this doubt: and suddenly there was
with the Angel a multitude of Heavenly Hosts praising God, and saying, glory be
to the highest, on earth peace, and good will to men, Luke 2. 13, 14. not only
to some men, but to all people, v. 10. this is glad tidings indeed, good news
from Heaven, the best news that ever was, that God has good will to men; there
is no ill will, all is good will to men; this causes peace and praise, glory
be to the highest for his sweet peace and good will to men, to all people.

Conclusion; in reading the Scriptures we are not to understand any text in
such sense as is not plain in Scriptures, or contrary to Scriptures, or
contrary to the Law of nature, or against the general goodness of God to
mankind, or to lessen the goodness of God, or contrary to the gracious spirit
and mercifulness of a Saint, or contrary to the mind of Christ which he
declared when on earth, or contrary to the fruits of the blessed Spirit, the
nature of the love, goodness, and mercy of God; or that shall tend to
contradict or lessen the glory of God, or lessen the greatness and riches of
his grace: for it is not to be imagined that God who is only wise should do
and teach contrary things.

Sure I am, from hence arise no inconveniency to the Gospel, nor is it any
dishonor to God, nor any grief, nor hinders faith and love in any good man,
nor any discouragement to any in serving of God, that there is not to be a
punishment for any to endure that shall never end. There is not any thing more
plain then that which has been said to him that will agree to truth; some
will not agree to any thing, though never so plain and certain, if contrary to
the tradition of their Fathers; this their way is their folly, and their
posterity approve their saying, Psalm. 49. 13. [who has believed our report,
and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?] Isa. 53. 1.

Some believed the things that were spoken, and some believed not, Acts 28. 29.
they make a man an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that reproves
in the gate, and turn away the just for a thing of naught, Isa. 29. 21.

O God the Lord, the strength of my salvation, thou have covered my head in the
day of battle, Psalm. 140. 7.


