THE Civil VVarres OF ENGLAND BRIEFLY Related from His Majesty's first setting
up His Standard 1641.

To this present Personal hopeful Treaty.

WITH The lively Effigies and Eulogies of the chief Commanders, who like
Stars in their courses have fought against the Romish Sicera, or the great
Scarlet Whore, with whom the Kings of the Earth have committed Fornication.
Rev. 17. 2.

Together with the distinct appellations, proper motions, and propitious
influences of these memorable Stars, Chronologically related from Anno. 1641.
to Anno. 1648.

Collected by JOHN LEYCESTER.

Ecce triumphales Anni! Quoque Sydera fausta.

LONDON, Printed for John Hancock, at the first shop in Pope's Head Alley, next
to Cornhill. 1649.



Of all the Gifts of Gods most sacred Spiret.
The Gift of Tongues being of much precious merit.
By which, Man, mainly, differs from a Beast.
And all rare Knowledge richly is increast.
How much, to our Industrious Ricraft, then.
Is due, for his great Pains and useful Pen*
Who, thus, has made so Copious a Collection
Of the Orient Characters for fair Direction
So learn those Songues. A Work most Excellent.
And, of more Worth than Pearls most Orient.
For which, with grateful heart, give God the Praise.
And Crown Grave Ricrafts Brows with fragrant Bays.
I: Vickers Scrip^st.
W. (...)

A SURVEY OF ENGLANDS CHAMPIONS AND Truths faithful Patriots OR A
Chronologicall Recitement of the principal proceedings of the most worthy
Commanders of the prosperous Armies raised for the preservation of Religion,
the Kings Majesty's Person, the Privileges of Parliament, and the Liberty of
the Subject, etc.

With a most exact narration of the several Victories, as also the number of
Commanders and Soldiers that have been slain on both sides since these
uncivil civil wars began.

With the lively pourtraitures of the several Commanders.

By JOSIAH RICRAFT.

Published by Authority.

Psalm. 44. 5. Through thee we have thrust back our adversaries, by thy name
have we trodden down them that rose up against us.

London: Printed by R. Austin, and are to be sold by F. H. in Popes head Alley,
and in Cornhill near the Royal Exchange 1647.

TO THE Honor and Glory of the Infinite, Immense, and Incomprehensible Majesty
of JEHOVAH THE Fountain of all Excellencies, the Lord of Hosts, the Giver of
all Victories, and the God of PEACE.
IF that one Star in vast circumference,
so much exceeds the globe of earth and seas,
and if the soul more vast by intelligence,
exceeds the magnitude of Pleiades.
What admiration then to him belongs,
what trembling joy, what duty, love and fear
What exaltation in all psalms and songs?
that tongue or pen objects to eye, or ear,
Who has so many millions of souls,
and stars created, stretching forth
The heavens on the Axis turning into Poles,
terminated in the South and North?
Who without quantity is only great,
and without quality is only good,
More perfect than perfection, more complete,
then can by Seraphims be understood,
To this Jehovah-jireth, who unfolds,
all close contrivings against his little flock,
To this Jehovah-Nissi, who upholds,
his Church on's powers everlasting Rock
To this Jehovah-Shallom God of Peace
that twice has made our civil wars to cease
(Maugre open force, and secret fraud.) To this
Ocean without bottom, or bank of bliss,
First let the Rivers of our praises run,
and first ascribe all glory to this sun
Of righteousness, which makes these stars to shine
but with his frown great Potentates decline.
By J. O. LEY. A small crumme of mortality
September. 23. 1648.
To the Impartial Reader.
I Present to thy view no Astrologicall predictions, limiting divine providence
to the necessity of secondary causes, a work savouring more of Luciferian
pride than piety, nor yet the Apples of Sodom, specious lies, such as
Mercurius, Aulicus, Pragmaticus and diverse others of that gang, have baited
their hooks withal to catch silly simple souls; but an historical relation,
and naked narration of our late warlike exploits, the persons by whom, the
times when, and the places where, being satisfactorily expressed and explained.
All which have not a color, but a reality of true notions, but in the
^eightiest motive to reading as will make the ^ost clamorous Malignant as
silent as a Seriphian Frog. But howsoever all humane knowledge is imperfect,
and therefore no writing can be so exact in every point and circumstance, as to
be accounted infallible (for that Epithet is peculiar only to the sacred
Scriptures, and to no other book in the world) yet I am sure this book is
much more truer than that Aulicus by whose help Prince Rupert routed the
Parliaments Army at Long-Marston, for joy whereof Bonefires were made at Oxford
in an. 1644.

As for these Metaphorical, or Mystical resplendent stars whose aspect has
been as sadly ominous to the foes, as benevolous to the friends of Gods Truth,
and true Religion, I hope that I have so kept within the circle of modesty and
reason, in the expression of their merits and the accommodation of their due
praises, that none but such to whom goodness in others seems miraculous, and
to whom no blood or condition of estate is acceptable, but those who are
stamped with Caesar's Image (who if there were such a peace concluded as they
could wish, were as fit to receive the mark of the Beast as before) can justly
repine at it. But to my own judgment I seem rather to have transgressed by
diminishing, than enlarging their high deserts by my weak industry. But if it
be lawful and equal to calumniate, slander and disgrace an enemy (which is
Cavaliers practice, not my tenet) then by the rule of contraries it is lawful
and equal to praise and commend a friend, especially such friends, who have
preferred the life of Religion, Laws and Liberty before their own lives, and
fair estates. But it is very comicall to consider how prettily the Malignants
terms of contempt do jumpe with their contemptible fortunes, for they called
that gallant soldier General Brown a Woodmonger, a term very suitable to
their sufferings, for they know very well, that this Woodmonger has oftentimes
cudgelled their Militia from the Generalissimo to the Corporal, and made them
run almost to every point of the Compass.

I could recount many others of our worthies here inserted grossly abused, and
traduced by the obstreperous goosse-quill of Phaetons Sycophants and his
followers, but Crimine ab uno discite nunc omnes.

As for the Historical part of this book, which I have drawn in this method,
first the chief heroicke actions of our Noble Generals and Renowned
Commanders are particularly described, then follows in Order a List of all
the several Victories and Encounters, the names of the Cities, Towns and
Castles taken by storm or surrender, with the names of the Earls, Lords,
Knights, Generals, Colonels, Lieut. Col. Majors, Capt. and Gentlemen of
quality slain in this unnatural war on both sides, with the number of common
Soldiers; to which is added the Commissioners names employed in this present
Treaty with His Majesty, which the Lord grant may be effectual that
righteousness may take place, and peace and truth may meet together, so shall
our Kingdom flourish and we become a happy people by continuing in the Bond of
Unity.

(Courteous Reader) if you meet with errata (for I am conscientious to my self
of my own insufficiency (I entreat you to impute them to the Diurnalls my
best Intelligencers, And as for other slips not suiting with thine affection
(yet, per^it judicium cum res transit in affectum) I must conclude with Lypsius
his deprication, Mihi quidem men's ubique bona; and si alibi humana haec lingua,
aut calamus hic titubavit, ne aspere quaeso minus luam; To close all as I
prefixed to this short Epistle a Doxalogie, so I shut it up with the Psalmists
thankful acknowledgment, which that renowned Conqueror Hen. 5 commanded to be
sung in his Camp after the famous Victory at Agin-Court, Not unto us, Lord,
not unto us (not to our Parliament, not to our Armies, not to our Navy, nor to
London) but to thy name give the praise, Ps. 115. 5.

By John Leycester.

Robert Earl of Essex his Exellence Lord General of the Parlints: Army etc:
lately deceased

CHAP. I.
Upon the illustrious and right honorable, ROBERT Earl of Essex, sometimes
General of England, lately deceased. The Earl of Essex was in his friendships
just and constant; and would not have practiced foully against those he took to
be enemies. No man had credit enough with him to corrupt him in point of
loyalty to the king, whilst he thought himself wise enough to know what treason
was. But the new doctrine and distinction of allegiance, and of the king's
power in and out of parliament, and the new notions of ordinances, were too
hard for him, and did really intoxicate his understanding, and caused him to
quit his own to follow theirs, who, he thought, wished as well, and judged
better than himself. His vanity disposed him to be his Excellency; and his
weakness, to believe that he should be the General in the Houses as well as in
the field, and be able to govern their councils, and restrain their passions,
as well as to fight their battles; and that by this means, he should become the
preserver, and not the destroyer, of the king and kingdom. With this
ill-grounded confidence, he launched out into that sea, where he met with
nothing but rocks and shelves, and from whence he could never discover any safe
port to harbor in. When he took the command of the parliament army, he was
better qualified than any man in the kingdom for that post; but was soon
eclipsed by a new race of soldiers, who, if not his superiors in the art of
war, went far beyond him in spirit and enterprise. He died the 14th of
September, 1646, and his death helped to open a way for the ambition of
Cromwell.#

Brightest Star of the whole constellation
Of warlike Worthies, sending influence
Of vigor to an old collapsed Nation,
Divided, not by Romish negligence:
Had not thy courage cop'd with bloody men,
Thy Conquests had not been so got with blood:
But, destruction needs must follow, when
Their cruelty threatening (like a swelling flood)
Life and Laws, with an imperial rage;
Providence by thy prowess did assuage
That furious torrent, leaving the crimson ground,
Edg-hill and Newb'ry Marsh thy fame to sound.
For in those fields thou did triumphantly
Conquer the enemy, and got'st the victory:
Therefore thou had instead of passing Bells
The Drums and Cannons thunder forth thy knels.
THis our never sufficiently honored English The due desert of Englands
deceased General the Earl of Essex.
General, his Excellency the Earl of Essex deserves a record written in
letters of gold, and a tomb carved out in precious stones, with this
inscription upon it, for after Ages to read;

Here Is entombed Robert Devereux,
Brave renouned Earl of Essex,
Who was in English men's account,
The Phoenix Peer, Lord Paramount:
A friend to Truth and Peace he was,
God loved him well, that was the cause
That he away from hence was sent
Into the highest Firmament.
Where I leave him amongst the Angels and glorious host, and descend from his
celestial, to this terrestrial actions, in some measure to speak of what he
did most gallantly perform in the time he was late Lord General of England,
which was in the year 1641. and upon the third of July in the said year his
Excellency rode through London The Earl of Essex made General of England in
the year 1641.
to take a view of his voluntary Citizens and Apprentices of London that had
listed themselves under him, and were met to be mustered in the new Artillery,
whither their renouned General no sooner came, but was entertained with shouts
of joy, flinging up their hats into the air, and crying with a loud voice, (We
will live and die with you my Lord;) and he answered, And I by the help of God,
am ready to do the like with you. Never was General better beloved by his
Soldiers then he was, many of them to this day with heavy hearts shake their
heads and cry, Adieu brave Devereux adieu; This renouned General had no sooner
received his instruction from the Parliament, but he marched into the field,
and hearing of the Kings Forces near Worcester plundering and spoiling the
Country, he marched up to them fell suddenly upon them, and utterly routed
them, the 12. of September, The Kings forces routed, and Worcester taken
1642. and afterward took the City of Worcester, and hearing the Kings
scattered Forces got a head near unto Shrewesbury in Shropshire, he marched
after them and drove them before him until they saw their own advantage of
time and place, pitched there maine body upon a place called Edgehill, near
Keynton, where our noble Edge hill sight.
General drew up to them, and most gallantly charged them in his own person,
and after a fierce battle, the Enemy were wholly routed, and most confusedly
retreated with great loss, where was taken the Kings Standard, the L.
Willoughby, Sir Prisoners taken
Edward Stanley, Col. Vavasour, Col. Lunsford, with many hundreds more; in
which sight was slain the Earl of Lindsey, the Kings General, the L. Aubeny,
Sir Edmond Verney the Kings Standard Bearer, with diverse other Officers of
quality, and many hundred common soldiers, October. the 22. 1642. in this
battle the Earl of Essex fought so gallantly, showing so much courage and
fidelity, that his very enemies did acknowledge it. The winter was no sooner
over past, that Artillery might be drawn, but his Excellency again took
field and marched up to Reading and straightly besieged it, and after a small
time took it, April the 18. 1643. and afterward Reading taken, April 18.
1643 Gloucester relieved. Cirencester taken. Newbery sight.
marched to Gloucester, and relieved it, then to Cirencester, and took it, and
drew up the whole Army, and gave the Kings Army battle at Newbery, and utterly
routed them, killed five Lords and many hundreds more; in this fight our noble
General did in his own person charge the enemy, to the great encouragement of
his Soldiers, and after he had performed this service, he marched for the
relief of the oppressed West Country, and beat up the enemies quarters before
him, took the town of Barnstaple in Devonshire, and the Castle of
Taunton-Deane with all the ammunition, the 22. of June 1644. and afterward
marched up to Mount Stamford and took it with all the ammunition, as also the
town of Plympton, with the Garrison of Saltash and Launceston, with four or
five more small Garrisons. And again he marches forward and takes
Greenvill-house, and Newbridge with all the ammunition, the 14, of July 1644.
and afterward took Tadcaster in Cornwall, and Foy, with many Ships in the
Harbor: These with many more, did this renouned General his Excellency the
Earl of Essex perform, always bearing a tender respect to his soldiers to
see them well provided for: And this was and is noble Essex's honor, that he
was merciful to man and beast, himself free from cowardice, or covetousness,
pride, or contention.

His Exellence Alexander Lasley General of the Scotch Army

CHAP. II.
Upon the right Honorable, Alexander Lesley, Earl of Leven, General of the
Scots Army. Alexander Lesley, earl of Leven, acquired the highest reputation as
a soldier, under Gustavus Adolphus, king of Sweden, who appointed him governor
of Stralsund, which he bravely and vigilantly defended against the
Imperialists. He was also governor of the cities along the coast of the Baltic;
and afterward "felt-marshall over the army in Westphalia." He had the supreme
command of the Scottish army when it invaded England, and was, upon the
cessation of arms betwixt the two kingdoms, created an earl; and about the same
time made governor of the castle of Edinburgh. He also commanded the army that
marched into England in 1644; and which had so considerable a share in the
battle of Marston Moor, the greatest that was fought during the civil war. Soon
after the defeat of the royal army at this place, general Leven, the earl of
Manchester, and Fairfax, with their combined forces, sat down before York,
which presently surrendered upon terms. They soon after divided their armies;
and Leven returning into the North, took the rich town of Newcastle. Zachary
Hamilton, preceptor to the Pretender's son, told lord Hailes, that Lesley was a
soldier of fortune, and that one day on a march in Scotland, he said to an
officer, "There is the house where I went to school." -- "How, General,"
answered the officer, "I thought you could not read." -- "Pardon me, I got the
length of the letter G."#

The great Commander of our warlike Friends,
And Brethren, is this noble valiant Scot,
Whose sincere heart's free from selfe-seeking ends,
His love and labor must not be forgot.
York, Newcastle, and her Marquess knows,
Their conquered State, and his sad overthrowes;
Digby, and Langdale too, may wail their loss,
And that rebellious Army of Montrosse.
IF art could invent, or wisdom delineate The due praise of Alexander Lesley
Earl of Leven.
the height of perfection that is to be found in the most noble parts of
military Discipline, then renouned Lesley would be the admiration of all the
world, who now has the commendation of the greatest part of Europe, the
Low-Countreyes, and diverse parts beyond Seas, at this day echo forth his
praise, and with a sorrowful look and pale face bid him Adieu brave Lesley
adieu; but the love he bare to Religion, his King, and Country, engaged him to
steer his course toward these Kingdoms, and coming to the Court of England,
was courted Lesleyes salutation and courting at the Court of England.
and consulted withal, and being found neither knave nor fool, was presently
discountenanced and so departed into his own Country of Scotland, and was
there received with much triumph and joy; they knowing he was free from
cowardice, or covetousness, (which is often the loss of Armies, and
Garrisons, if I be not mistaken, Oxford, Banbury, and Bristoll will witness)
yet neither profit or penury could incline him or decline him from doing or
suffering to his uttermost in the cause of Religion: Lord-Bishops, and all that
depend upon their Episcopal Hierarchy, will remember renouned Lesley, who was
under God the two-edged Sword that cut them, and their wild branches off at the
root; witness the year 1640. in which time he entered England with an Army of
twenty thousand men, and upon the first entrance routed the Queens Regiment of
Horse and Foot, and all the rest fled, finding a pair of heels to be of more
use for security, then a pair of hands: but notwithstanding this advantage,
our Brethren were desirous to treat with His Majesty, who condescended
thereunto, and hearing the reasonableness of their Propositions, condescended
thereunto, and so in peace they did depart not long after; but in the year
1642. a civil War arising amongst our selves, and the Parliaments Army not
able to suppress the enemy, were necessitated to desire the assistance of our
Brethren of Scotland, who were as ready to help us as we were ready to desire
their help; their sensiblenesse of our misery was expressed in tears, as may
appear by the relation of our Messengers, the Lord Wharton, Sir Henry Vane, M.
See their Speeches in print.
Solicitor S. John, M. Marshall, and M. Buroughs, and that which puts a seal
of confirmation to these, and other relations of their love, and willingness
to help us, is their coming into England so suddenly after, and at such an
unseasonable time as they did, it being mid winter that they marched in snow
and water to the mid leg for a hundred miles together; and their noble General
his Excellency the Earl of Leven most resolutely fell to the work, although in
an enemies Country, having before him the Earl of Newcastle, with an Army of
20 thousand strong, yet he drove them before him, killing and taking prisoners
many of them daily, and upon a sudden he wheeled about with his Army, and took
Cockit Island, with the town, Jan. Cocket Island taken, Ian. 20. 1643.
20. 1643. and afterward marches up to the enemies quarters, and beats them
up, taking in also the strong Garrison of Alnwick, Febr. 14. 1643. and
afterward hastened his march further into the enemies Country, and takes in the
Town of Morepeth, Febr. 22. 1643. and marches again up to the enemy, and beats
up his quarters, and takes the strong Garrison of Tinby, March 19. Tinby taken,
March 19. 1643.
1643. and afterward marches forward and takes Sunderland, with great store of
Ammunition; Newcastles rage being risen, draws up his whole Army, as intending
to give battle to the Earl of Leven, but no sooner did he draw up, but
Newcastles popish ragged Regiments ran away, and our Brethren of Scotland
marched forward, and took the strong Garrisons of Durham, and Lomby, April
14. and 15. 1644. they Durham and Lomby taken, April 14 and 15 1646.
marched yet forwarder, and beat several parties of the enemies, and took
Morepeth Castle, with all the Ammunition, the 2. of June, 1644. and having
notice of the renouned Earl of Manchester's marching up toward them, they with
much rejoicing hastened to meet him, whom they longed to see the face of, and
having met him, with much joy saluted him, and so joined both their Armies
together, and drove the Popish Earl of Newcastle and all his Army into York,
and there besieged him, Prince Rupert York besieged.
being at that time in Lancashire, hastens to raise their siege, making his
boasts how he would beat the Scots, and would know of what mettle those
fresh water soldiers were made, which (e're he departed) he very well knew to
the dear price of 4500. men's lives upon the place, called Marston-Moore never
to be forgotten by The battle at Marston-moore.
Prince Rupert, nor the Earl of Newcastle, and after the spoil of the battle
was taken, they marched up to York and took it, York taken.
with all the Ammunition, and when this was performed, the Earl of Manchester
marched Westward, and the Earl of Leven Northward, and took Gateshead 12. of
August 1644. and straightly besieged Newcastle Newcastle besieged.
upon Tine, prepared mines, and all accommodation for storm, offered fair
terms but were not accepted, then stormed the town and took it the 20. of
October, Newcastle taken October. 20. 1644.
1644. with much Arms and Ammunition, and afterward took Tinmouth Castle,
marched up to Carlisle and took it also, and Carlisle taken.
afterward besieged the strong Castle of Scarborough, and took it, with the
Castle of Rabi, and the Castle of Canon-Froome; and since have been assistant
in the taking of Newarke: And for the gallant service Newark taken by the
assistance of our brethren of Scotland.
of this noble General the Earl of Leven. let true-English-men give him true
honor and praise, let that tongue cleave to the roof of that mouth, that is so
ungrateful, and uncivil, as to foment divisions betwixt us and these our
Covenanted-Brethren.

The Right Honble. Robert Earl of Warwick Lord Rich of Leeze and Lord High
Admiral of the Seas

CHAP. III.
Upon the right honorable and noble Patriot, Robert Earl of Warwick. The
Earl of Warwick, who assisted in the king's council, was not much wondered at
for deserting his royal master, whom he had never well served; nor did he look
upon himself as obliged by that honor, which he knew was conferred upon him in
the crowd of those whom his majesty had no esteem of, or ever proposed to
trust; so his business was to join with those to whom he was indebted for
promotion. He was a man of a pleasant and companionable wit and conversation;
of a universal jollity; and such a license in his words, and in his actions,
that a man of less virtue could not be found; so that one might reasonably have
believed, that a man so qualified, would not have been able to have contributed
much to the overthrow of a nation and kingdom. But with all these faults, he
had great authority and credit with those people who, in the beginning of the
troubles, did all the mischief; and by opening his doors, and making his house
the rendezvous of all the silenced ministers, in the time when there was
authority to silence them, and spending a good part of his estate, of which he
was very prodigal, upon them, and by being present with them at their
devotions, and making himself merry with them, he became the head of that
party, and got the character of a godly man. When the king revoked the earl of
Northumberland's commission of admiral, he accepted that office from the
parliament, and never quitted their service; and when Cromwell dissolved that
parliament, he betook himself to the protection of the Protector, married his
heir to his daughter, and lived in so entire a confidence and friendship with
him, that when the Protector died, he exceedingly lamented him. The earl of
Warwick died April 19, 1659, aged 71, and lies buried in Folstead Church,
Essex. He left his estate, which before was subject to a vast debt, more
improved and repaired, than any man who trafficked in that desperate commodity
of rebellion.#

A third bright star within our Hemi-Spheare
Of Reformation, is this noblest Rich;
Richer indeed, then can to men appear,
Because his aims on noble ends do pitch.
This trusty Pilot waits upon the Ocean,
Watching both foreign and domestic Foes:
Then to the land; thus in their restless motion
Are pious souls, whom God does here dispose
To honor him and do his will on earth,
And them he honors with a second birth,
Which begets in Warwick prudence and love,
A lions heart, yet harmless as the dove.
IT were great ingratitude to let pass, or The due praise of Robert Earl of
Warwick.
bury in oblivion the many glorious things that this our high Admiral of
England Robert Earl of Warwick has performed both by Sea and Land, since the
year 1642. which both his and our adversaries at home and abroad know to their
grief; he was unto our Kingdom (under God) as a bulwark of defense, a rock
of refuge, a castle and tower to fly unto; a strong and mighty wall to defend
us from the malicious pride and cruelty of France, Spain, Denmark, and all the
world beside; and had not brave renouned Warwick stood to us and guarded our
coasts, we and our Kingdom had long e're this been a prey to our enemies at
home and abroad; But God be praised, The E. of Warwick made high Admiral of
England in the year 1642.
who put it into the hearts of our Parliament-Worthies, to make so good a
choice, and they had no sooner made choice of him in the month of June, in the
said year 1642. but he went forth with a godly zeal into the mighty deeps, and
there secured The Navy at Sea secured.
the ships and took them into his own possession, for the preservation of our
Religion, and defense of the King, Parliament, and Kingdom; and he was no
sooner settled, the ships rigged and tacklings mended, but he had notice of a
ship near Falmouth under the command of Sir John Pennington, to whom he sent
one of the twelve Whelps, to fetch her in, which was performed accordingly, and
the men brought prisoners; another party of Ships containing a Squadron, he
sent to guard the Channel near Hull, where were diverse Vessels taken and
secured, and many Harbors possessed by the said Ships, as also a Pinnace of
the Kings shot through and through, and sunk by this Squadron of Ships, the 28.
of June: and afterward they took diverse barques laden with Cavaleers near
Hull, the Earl with a party of Ships surprised a ship coming from France, with
diverse Commanders, July the 3. The Neptune and two Whelps more took diverse
ships that were coming from Holland to assist the King, July 26. 1642. and in
August his Excellency the Earl of Warwick sent a Squadron of ships, which
secured Portsmouth and diverse other Harbors, with many ships in the Harbors,
August 24. An Irish ship with many Irish soldiers was taken, and the men
secured, as also a Frigot taken about the same time that was laden with
Ammunition going to the King, September. 26. 1642. Captain Ketelby and diverse
other Commanders were taken in two ships by the Earl of Warwick near
Tinmouth, October. 15. 1642. Portsmouth by the assistance of this noble
Portsmouth taken.
Earl at Sea was taken, November. 8. 1642. Three ships pretended to be laden with
Pippins coming from France, upon search, were found to be laden with Arms, but
covered with Pippins, which were taken 24. of December. 1642. A Dunkirk ship taken
in the Harbor of Arundell, Jan. 5. 1642. A Bristoll ship laden with Arms was
taken in the Harbor of Liverpoole, Jan. 8. A ship also taken that was
sometimes under the command of Sir John Pennington, Febr. 7. 1642. valiant
Captain Swanley, with a Squadron of the Earls ships being in North Wales,
suddenly secured Milford Haven, and beat off 12. ships of Irish Rebels that
had intended to land there; the noble Lord of Warwick took a Welsh ship laden
with Arms and Ammunition intended for the Lord Hopton, March 26. 1643. one of
the Kings best Men of War was taken by the Earl of Warwick, April 28. 1643.
And in the month of May, this faithful and religious E. took Holy Island with
the Castle and Works. Two Lin ships taken by the Antelop that were laden with
Ammunition for Newcastle, June 26. 1643. Three ships more taken by our noble
Admiral that were going to the King with Arms and Ammunition, 18. of July. The
Fellowship one of the Kings great Men of War was taken with much Arms and
Ammunition, August 9. 1643. The Lion with a small Pinnace laden with powder,
was taken by this faithful Earl of Warwick, August 22. 1643. Four Flemish
vessels taken, with some Letters of dangerous consequence, September. 12. 1643. A
great ship taken in Dartmouth, laden with ammunition, the 14. of October: and
five small vessels taken at Wareham in Dorsetshire the 24. of November. Also a
great ship laden with Ammunition going to the King, taken by the Earl of
Warwick, December. 25. 1643. Four great Bristoll ships likewise taken by our
noble Admiral, Jan. 12. 1643. and five ships of the Kings beaten at Milford
Haven, and two small vessels taken, Feb. 1643. Also two great French ships
taken near Waymouth laden with ammunition for the King, March 8. 1643. The
Endeavor a great ship taken going to the King with three more near
Sunderland, and a great ship laden with Ammunition going for the relief of
Carlisle, March 1644. Melcomb-Regis re-taken, April 16. 1644. and Carmarthen
Carmarthen Casurprized by the Earl of Warvvick.
Castle surprised by the Earls ships, May 19. 1644. Lime and Pembrokeshire
relieved, and three ships surprised in the month of June 1644. Also five ships
taken in the West and his Excellency the Earl of Essexe's Army relieved by a
Squadron of the Earl of Warwicks ships July 1644. Also a ship taken laden with
Arms from Holland going to the King, August 1644. Also three ships taken in
Liverpoole by the Earl of Warwick, Septem. 1644. In South Wales eight ships
taken with much Ammunition, October 1644. Likewise a ship taken near Portsmouth
going to the King in November. 1644. Three ships also taken near Newcastle,
December. 1644. Also four small Barques with ammunition taken by the Earl of
Warwick in Jan. 1644. And a great ship with three other small vessels taken
near Padstow in the month of Febr. 1644. Five small vessels taken near
Scarborough, and three others near Weymouth, by the noble Earl of Warwick,
in March 1645. Diverse ships beaten that came with relief to Sir John Winter,
and some sunk, in the month of April 1645. Likewise a ship coming from France,
laden with arms, intended for the King, taken in May 1645. Also a great ship
taken by the noble Earl of Warwick upon the Irish Coast, laden with
Dunkirkers, and Irish Rebels, in June 1645. Likewise four ships taken near
Carlisle by the assistance of our loving and faithful Covenant-keeping
Brethren of Scotland, in the month of July 1645. In the West at several times
there has been taken nine ships, August 1645. Also two ships taken near
Scarborough, with three small vessels in Wales, laden with ammunition, and
Pembroke relieved, in the month of Septem. 1645. Haverford West by the
assistance of the Earl of Warwick was taken, October. 12. 1645. A great Barque
laden with Kerseyes going toward the King to cloth his soldiers, was taken
near Plymouth, the 20. of Novem. 1645. Likewise a great ship laden with
Ammunition taken in the North Coasts by this noble Earls ships, in December.
1645. Also he took a ship laden with Deal and other timber, that came from
Normandy, and two Irish Frigots laden with Irish Rebels in the month of Jan.
1645. Likewise six ships beat, and one sunk, that came to relieve Pouldram
Castle, also Plymouth relieved, and three small vessels taken near Dartmouth,
with two near West Chester, in the month of February, 1645. A French Ship
also that was laden with arms and ammunition taken, and a Dunkirk ship also
taken, laden with arms near Felford Haven, by the noble and renouned Earl of
Warwick, in the month of March, 1646. There were likewise many small ships,
pinnaces, shallops, hoyes, boats, and other vessels taken in several
Harbors, Havens, and Roads in the West, in April 1646. Likewise a small ship
taken near Axmouth, the 23. of May, 1646, and two ships taken near
Dorsetshire the 15. of June, 1646. As also three small Pinkes taken in
Cornwall with the shallop that relieved Pendennis Castle, and some great
Commanders prisoners, in the month of July, 1646. Likewise a gallant ship taken
that came from Bordeaux, laden with wine and meal, intended for the relief of
Pendennis Castle, August 25, 1646. Also a ship of the Dunkirkers manned by
Irish Rebels, set upon two of our English Merchants, and surprised them: and
by the vigilance of this our noble, active faithful Admiral, were both
re-taken, and the Dunkirk ship also with thirty Irish Rebels in it that were
thrown over board, as a just recompense or Reward, for their former villainy,
in the month of September, 1646. These with many more gallant pieces of
service, has this renouned Worthy performed, for which England is engaged
thankfully to remember, and highly to honor him, who God has thus wonderfully
honored, Robert Lord Rich, Earl of Warwick, Lord high Admiral of England.

The right Honble: Edward Earl of Manchester etc: major General of the
Association

CHAP. IIII.
Upon the right Honorable and religious Earl of Manchester. Edward earl of
Manchester, a nobleman of many great and amiable qualities, was a zealous and
no less able patron of liberty; but without enmity to monarchy, or the person
of the king. He was one of the avowed patriots in the house of peers, and the
only member of that house who was accused by Charles of high treason together
with the five members of the house of commons. In the civil war, he had the
charge of seven of the associated counties; and with his usual activity and
address raised an army of horse, which he commanded in person. Soon after he
entered upon his command, he forced the town of Lynne to submit to the
parliament, and defeated the earl of Newcastle's army at Horn Castle. In 1644,
he took Lincoln by storm, and had a principal share in the victory at Marston
Moor. After the battle of Newbury, he was suspected of favoring the king's
interest; was even accused by Cromwell of neglect of duty, and by the
self-denying ordinance deprived of his commission. He had been bred up in the
court under the favor of the duke of Buckingham, a lady of whose family he had
married, and had attended upon the prince when he was in Spain; was called to
the house of peers in the lifetime of his father, which was a very
extraordinary favor. Upon the death of the duke of Buckingham, his wife being
likewise dead, he married the daughter of the earl of Warwick, a man in no
grace at court, and looked upon as the greatest patron of the Puritans, because
of much the greatest estate of all who favored them: after this second
marriage, lord Manchester totally estranged himself from the court, and entered
into all the politics of his father-in-law; but at last, he heartily concurred
in the restoration of Charles the Second, who appointed him lordchamberlain of
his household. He died May 5, 1671, aged sixty-nine.#

The bright propitious star to Church and State
Is this approved Peer, in peace and war;
In hostile actions always fortunate,
But the influence of this excelling star
Was wormwood always to his Countries Foes,
Witness their frequent routs, defeats, and blows:
Horn Castle, Winsby, Marston-Moor know well,
How thrice the imperial forces fled and fell
Before this brave General, conquering
The Idolizers of a mortal King:
Therefore the rose of Sharon does thee greet,
And makes thy name and same on earth smell sweet.
THis bright star of Englands Horison The due praise of the Earl of Manchester.
had no sooner girt his sword about him, but whole Troops, Regiments and Armies
out of the associated Counties of Essex, Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridge, and
Huntington were ready to attend him with their lives in their hands, and at his
first sight they gave him such a shout as made the air to echo, to the
admiration of standers by: and no sooner had he saluted his gallant Army, but
presently falls to action, and marches to Lin Regis in Norfolk, where he
straightly besieged them, and with much hardship and valor gained the town in
the month of June, and afterward marched toward a potent Army, as any was in
England, commanded by the Earl of Newcastle, but no sooner had he entered the
enemies Country of Yorkshire, but a Brigade of the enemy engaged with him,
whom he totally routed and triumphantly marched forward toward the maine body
of the enemy, who were near Horn Castle, whom this noble and renouned Earl and
his Army had no sooner espied, but with a resolute concurrence fell to charge
them in the Van, Flank, and Rear of their Body, who were presently brought
into a confused rout, in which fight there was taken of them 55. Colors, 200.
Horse, Colors and prisoners taken.
and 1500. Prisoners, all this was performed in the month of August, 1643. and
in the month of September, this noble General pursued his victory in taking
of the enemies strong Garrisons, as Horn Horncastle, Gainesborough and Lincoln
taken.
Castle, the City of Lincoln, the strong town of Gainesborough; by this time
the enemy begins to get a head, which this religious and renouned Earl no
sooner heard of, but with speed he hastened toward them, and in his march took
Croyland and Burleigh-House, and after a hard march, yet courageously
encountered the Popish Army near Winsby, and utterly routed them, and took 22.
Colors, 1100. Foot, and 500. Horse, and much Ammunition: and after all this
hard service, yet was this noble Earl so desirous to put a period to our
miseries, that notwithstanding the coldness and unseasonablenesse of the
weather, it being in January, the worst of the winter season, even at that time
he does march the major part of 100. miles to relieve the oppressed Country of
Lincolnshire, and finding Lincoln to be the nest or cage of those unclean
birds, it being re-possest by them, he there besieges them and by a fierce
storm re-takes the City, and not long after the Castle, and in it seven piece
of Ordnance, 200. Knights, Colonells, and Commanders, 800. prisoners, 3000.
Arms, and presently hereupon having intimation of another Northern Popish
Imperial Army, marches backward and drives many scattering parties before him:
but no sooner had our most loving Brethren of Scotland heard of this our Star
of the East, come out of his own Horison of the Associated Counties, to give
light to a Northern dark beclouded Country, and by his bright beams to dispell
a black and dark cloud, but they had a desire, according to which they
conjoined, with a triumph of joy, the two most noble and religious General,
saluting each other, fall presently to the work, and besieged Newcastle, and
all his ragged Regiments in York, of which York besieged.
Prince Rupert having notice, inforceth all the Countries before him to march
for the relief of York, the which our Army understanding did admit of his
entrance for other advantages, the Prince being with pride puffed up, said he
would try what mettle the Scots were made of, which e're he departed, he did
very well know, and his 4000. slain upon the place might testify; in which
fight our noble Brethren, and this renouned Patriot, the Earl of Manchester
did take 1500. prisoners, and within three or four days, got the famous City
of York, and after York was surrendered, the Armies parted, and our prosperous
and religious Earl of Manchester toward the West retreated, and by the way he
took Tickell, Shelford and VVelbeck taken.
the Garrisons of Tickell, Shelford, and Welbeck-house, and in the month of
October gave the Kings Army a meeting at Newbery Marsh, where in the height of
the pride of their Western victory, this noble General utterly routed them,
took 9. piece of Ordnance, 3000. Prisoners, and 500. Arms, and in the next
month of November took Farrington, for his farewell; and however some
unseasoned words came from some black mouths concerning this most honorable,
pious, and prudent Peer, let such be assuredly satisfied, that his fame and
honor will live, when they and all the generation now living, are dead.

The right Honorable the Earl of Calender etc:

CHAP. V.
Upon the right Honorable Earl of Calender, General.
Ranked among these Heroes of renoune,
Is the honored chieftaine Earl of Calender,
A strong opposer of the triple Crown,
Who calls that holy, which is civil War;
But this brave Scot with an impartial eye
Looks on the Faiths Professors misery,
Carlisle, Gateshead, and Coquet Island, still
As Trophies stand of his unfain'd good will.
THis renouned, religious Earl, famous The due praise of the Earl of Calendar.
in Church and State, as were most of his Ancestors, himself being of the same
* James Levingston, earl of Calendar, who descended from the house of
Linlithgow, was formed as a soldier, in the wars of Bohemia, Holland, Sweden,
and Germany, and acquired a great reputation in his military character. He was
a gentleman of the bedchamber to Charles I. who created him lord Levingston of
Almont, in 1633, and earl of Calendar, 1641. Upon the eruption of the civil
war, he took the side of the parliament, but afterward attached himself to the
king. He marched into England, soon after the battle of Marston Moor, with ten
thousand men, to assist the earl of Leven in reducing York. He was
lieutenant general of the Scots army that attempted to rescue Charles from his
confinement in the Isle of Wight. His most signal exploit was the taking of
Carlisle, in which he found a seasonable supply of arms and ammunition. He
freely confessed to Charles I. upon what errors and mistakes he had been
corrupted, and by whom, and pretended so deep a sense of what he had done
amiss, that it was believed, he would have taken a command in the king's army;
which he declined, as it might have been penal to him in Scotland by some
clause in the Act of the Pacification, but especially upon pretense it would
disable him from doing him greater service in that kingdom; whither, shortly
after the standard was set up, he repaired, with all solemn vows of asserting,
and improving his Majesty's interest in those parts. The earl of Calendar died
in October, 1672.#
blood and bone, and inferior to none that went before him, as he has made it
evident in Scotland, and also in England, since our uncivil wars began,
first in his willingness to assist us, notwithstanding the lowness of our
condition, the height of our enemy, and the unseasonablenesse of the weather;
Secondly, in his activenesse, having the command but of a small Brigade, most
of them raw, untried, and unexperienced men in Martial affairs; (yet did he
perform valiantly with them.) Thirdly, his perseverance, notwithstanding the
large proffers the enemy made to the Army, if they would withdraw, or
withold. And besides, the many reproaches, sleightings, and calumnies (that
Army did patiently undergo) by a factious party amongst The hand of God
carrying on our brethren of Scotland.
our selves, had not the hand of God guided and carried on noble Lesley, and
renouned Calender, with the rest of those worthy, pious Patriots, our condition
had been miserable before this day, and we weltering in our own blood: our
wives defloured, our children massacred, our houses rifled, our lands
confiscated, our goods divided amongst a generation whose Religion teaches
them Rebellion, whose Faith is Faction and Division, whose mere Mercy is
Cruelty. Having past through the grounded evidences of this noble, religious
and faithful Peers willingness, activenesse, and perseverance in assisting
us, I shall also particularize some of the most material passages he has
performed since his first entrance into England, which was with much courage,
his Army being put to great straights, with hunger, cold, and often skirmishing
with the enemy, whom he drive before him, and fell upon Carlisle, and Carlisle
taken.
took it with all the Ammunition, marched again, and beat up Newcastles Army,
and by the assistance of the Earl of Leven, and the Earl of Manchester, with
the Lord Fairfax, and his valourous son, the truly honorable Sir Thomas
Fairfax, besieged Newcastle in York, withdrew and York taken.
gave battle to him, with Prince Ruperts Army, and routed them both, after
took York; and afterward this noble Earl of Calender marched Northward, and
took the strong Garrison of Gateshhead near Newcastle, with much Arms and
Ammunition, and returned and assisted in the taking Newcastle by storm, with
all the Arms and Ammunition therein, much more has this faithful General
performed which is here omitted, his own worth speaking for him to all that
know him more than I can here express.

Henry Gray Earl of Standford Lord Gray of Groby Bonvile etc:

CHAP. VI.
Upon the right Honorable Earl of Stamford.
This noble slip not of the last edition,
Of ancient stock, and formidable name
To Englands foes of old, when Spains ambition
Against Queen Elizabeth, did mischiefs frame;
Heroicke Stamford (not degenerate)
Is true and loyal unto Church and State,
Exeters defense, and Lord Hoptons flight
At Modbury field, declare his heart is right.
A Renouned worthy amongst the rest, The due praise of the noble E. of Stamford.
is this gallant Peer the noble Earl of Stamford, whose former generations
have been a terror to Englands enemies, as he himself has been, since the
time he was * Henry, lord Gray of Groby, married Anne, daughter and coheir of
William Cecil, earl of Exeter; in whose right he was possessed of the castle,
borough, and manor of Stamford, whence he took his title. He was colonel of a
regiment in the parliament army, under the earl of Essex, and was very active
in their service, particularly in Herefordshire and Cornwall. In the "Mercurius
Rusticus," is an account of his sending captain Kirle to plunder the house of
Thomas Swift, vicar of Goodwich, in the county of Hereford, who was supposed to
have been plundered oftener than any other person during the civil war. He was
grandfather of the celebrated dean of St. Patrick's. The earl of Stamford died
the 21st of August, 1673.#
made General of South Wales, with the four Counties of Gloucester, Worcester,
Hereford, and Cheshire, upon the 10. of December. 1642. he marching from hence
toward them was received with much joy, and a considerable party ready to
march along with him; he delayed no time to be in action with them, but
forthwith marched toward Cornwall, and coming to Newbridge, and finding the
bridge pulled down, and a strong Garrison in the town, forced his passage
through the river, with a hot dispute on both sides: at last beat the enemy,
took much Ammunition, and marched forward, and beat the Lord Hopton from
Bristoll toward Exeter, joined with the Devonshire men, and still pursued him
from holes to holes, like a fox; brought those malignant Counties into a good
condition, securing and taking many Garrisons; and had he had money and
ammunition, those parts in all appearance had been sooner gained; but where the
fault lay, my Lord himself best knows, and it may be in time, will manifest
it to others (if I be not mistaken:) I could wish great men, prosessing
Religion, would lay aside Religion a cloak for covetousness
covetousness, and underhand dealing, and be no longer like Watermen, rowing
one way, and looking another: I presume this noble Earl of Stamford is
sensible of some particulars, which I here omit, it is and has been the
nobleness of his disposition to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of
peace, being free from the spirit of faction, and division, which breeds
confusion; from which good Lord deliver us.

Basil Feilding Earl of Denbigh etc:

CHAP. VII.
Upon the right Honorable Earl of Denbigh.
Lo, here a gemme of honor casting forth
Resplendent beams of magnanimity,
But words too weak are to describe his worth,
Who's more enobled, then by Progeny;
His pious soul shows that a righteous cause
Is dearer to him, then a Monarchs I awes:
Ches. Shrop. and Staffordshire may well express
Their love and valor, and their thankfulness.
I Eealousies arise amongst some sort of The due praise of the noble E. of
Denbigh.
men without cause, as sometimes there did of this noble Earl of Denbigh: I
must confess, had his fathers blood and his been * Basil Fielding, son of
William Fielding, earl of Denbigh, was an officer in the parliament army, at
Edgehill, where his father fought on the part of the king. In 1644, he took
Russel House in Staffordshire, and by that means opened a communication between
Coventry and London; and afterward, with a small number of men, routed three
thousand of the king's forces, sent to the relief of Dudley Castle, which he
was then besieging. In 1643, he succeeded to the peerage by the death of his
father, in consequence of several mortal wounds he had received in a hot
engagement, near Birmingham. Upon the new modelling of the army, he resigned
his commission, together with the earls of Essex, and Manchester, but still
continued to act in concert with the republican party. The earl of Denbigh was
the chief of the commissioners sent to treat with the king in the Isle of
Wight, and when his majesty was about to deliver to him his answer to the
parliament sealed; he told him, "That though they had no authority to treat
with him, or to do any thing but to receive his answer, yet they were not to be
looked upon as common messengers, and to carry back an answer that they had not
seen:" and, upon the matter, refused to receive it; and said, "they would
return without any, except they might see what they carried." -- The king,
conceiving their return without his answer would be attended with the worst
consequences, told them, "that he had some reason for having offered to deliver
it to them in that manner; but if they would give him their words, that the
communicating it to them should be attended with no prejudice to him, he would
open it, and cause it to be read," and thereupon he opened it, and gave it to
one to read. The earl of Denbigh died November 28, 1675.#
of one and the same putrified temper, we might all have had just cause to fear
a piece of treachery, but I hope, God has molded his heart in his own hand,
and framed it according to his will, as has evidently appeared hitherto by his
proceedings; First, in standing to the Parliament, and taking the most solemn
League and Covenant for Reformation, and rooting out of Bishops, and all other
erroneous and factious persons, which if brave Denbigh once decline, I shall
recall what I have and hope to affirm of him. Secondly, his taking up Russell
Hall and Oswestree taken.
arms and adventuring his life in the high places of the field, as was evident
at his taking of Russell-Hall the 29. of May, 1646. as also routing the Kings
Forces near Dudley, the 10. of June 1646. And taking by storm the strong
Garrison of Oswestree the 22. of June, 1646. with Chomley-House: and many more
I omit for brevity sake, intending to speak more at large hereafter, and as
time shall make evident.

The most Noble Ferdinand Lord Fairfax General of the Northern Countyes

CHAP. VIII.
Upon the right Honorable Ferdinando Lord Fairfax.
This happy heart, heated with heavenly fire,
Stands up against the Rampant Lions paws,
Frustrates the haughty hope and vast desire
Of Popish regulating Lives and Laws;
Discovers Protean Hothams treacheries,
Preserves engaged Hull from foes surprise,
Routed and rooted out Lycaons brood,
Of wolvish natures, loving native blood.
Shine on resplendent Fairfax, or Faire-Torch,
To friends a light, to foes a fire to scorch;
Thou and thy fellow-Stars, in Englands night,
When neither Sun nor Moon do shine, give light.
HEre is a right Noble in blood and actions, The due praise of the right
honorable L. Fairfax.
deserving to be ranked amongst the most noble of our Peers and Patriots, for
his good and faithful service for Church * Ferdinand lord Fairfax, at the
commencement of the civil war, received a commission from the earl of Essex,
generalissimo for the parliament, to command all the forces of Yorkshire, and
the adjacent counties in chief; by which, in less time than could be reasonably
imagined, he was enabled to draw together an army of five or six thousand horse
and foot; so that York was in danger of falling into the hands of the
parliament. But the earl of Newcastle marched quickly to its relief, and having
left a good garrison in Newcastle, and fixed such small garrisons in his way,
as might secure his communication with that port, to which all his ammunition
was to be brought, he entered York, and though the lord Fairfax kept Selby, and
Cawood, the earl of Newcastle was absolute master of the field, and totally
routed Fairfax, at Adderton Moor, in June 1643; but he and his son sir Thomas
gained a complete victory over colonel Bellasyse, governor of York, at Selby,
the eleventh of April 1634, for which the parliament ordered a general
thanksgiving. -- After sir Thomas Glemham had surrendered York, and the earl of
Newcastle had retired beyond the seas, he succeeded to the government of that
city, and of the northern counties. He died at York, March 13, 1647-8.#
and State, as may evidently appear by his former gallant actions in the North
of England, which it were great ingratitude to omit; I shall only point at the
chief, which (by the Arm of God assisting) the noble Lord Fairfax performed,
and deserve to be written in capital letters for after Ages to read, etc. At
his first being made General of the North, there was a great Army in the
field, a malevolent Country the greatest part being Papists and Athiests; the
Parliament sending down the Covenant to be taken in those parts, himself first
began, and some of the godly party followed, The Covenant taken in yorkshire.
and no sooner had he set the Covenant a foot, and got together a small Brigade
of 3. or 4000. men, but he marched into the field, drew up to the Earl of
Newcastle, gave him battle (being four to one) Newcastle routed near Tadcaster.
near Tadcaster, and routed him, took much arms and ammunition, December. 8.
1642. and after having eased those parts of that enemy, he drew more up into
the heart of the Country, in which space the Earl of Newcastle again
recruited his Army, and besieged Leeds; my Lord Fairfax raised his siege and
beat him; and not long after met again with him near Bradford, and there fell
upon him, utterly routed him, and Newcastle again routed near Bradford.
took much ammunition, Jan. 3. 1642. afterward besieged and took Wakfield,
May 27. 1643. and the Popish Earl having again recruited, besieged Hull, the
which the Lord Fairfax no sooner heard of, but with speed hastened, and did
rout the Popish Army, raised the siege, and afterward marched to Whitby, and
took it, VVhitby, Cawood, and Axholm Island taken.
with Cawood Castle, and Oxholm Island; Again, he marched to clear the field.
and finding a strong party near Selby, fell in upon them, charging fiercely in
the Flank and Rear, suddenly routed them, and took much ammunition; and after
this sight this noble Lord joined with our loving Brethren of Scotland, and by
joint assistance they beseiged the Marquess of Newcastle in York, and finding
it to be advantageous to draw off, and let Prince Rupert relieve it, they got
ground, and engaged with the Prince and Newcastle at Marston Moore, and routed
them; took many prisoners, and killed multitudes upon the place, and within
three or four days gained York; in all which service this noble Lord Fairsax
did most gallantly, for which unto God be the glory, and brave General
Ferdinando Lord Fairfax the praise.

The right Honorable the Lord Roberts

CHAP. IX.
Upon the right honorable Lord Roberts.
Behold a true Nathanael without guile,
Such are the Nobles of an heavenly race,
For bold sincerity regards no smile,
Nor frowns of fortune, nor a Princes face.
Let Cornish choughes be caught with gins of praise
And promises; this Cornish Eagle ways
To baseness shuns, therefore that Skellum base
Greenvill, and's Army he did rout and chase.
I Shall not need to speak much in the The due praise the right honorable L.
Roberts.
commendations of this most noble, religious, and pious Lords behalf, whose
virtues speak forth his praise, whose valor * John, lord Roberts, had the
command of a regiment under the earl of Essex, and at Newbury led the
parliament forces to the charge with great gallantry, and by his courage and
conduct routed the royal army. He, with part of his brigade, defended Plymouth
against the combined force of the enemy, and several times repulsed them to
their great loss. He was a leading man in the councils of the patriotic junto,
and had afterward a principal hand in the restoration. He had much learning,
but it was mixed with the pedantry of the time of James I. and was of a morose
and splenetic temper. He was appointed lord lieutenant of Ireland by Charles
II. in 1669, in a time of confusion, when the various claims to the estates in
that kingdom was to be adjusted. His parts were by no means equal to this
government, at so critical a juncture; as he had a genius rather for starting
than solving difficulties. He treated the Irish nobility with haughtiness and
contempt, and was himself treated with much less ceremony than he expected. The
king found it necessary to remove him from this employment; and, soon after his
return to England, appointed him president of the council, and created him earl
of Radnor. He was observed to puzzle business, and retard the dispatch of it,
more than any man that had ever been in the great offices which he enjoyed. He
died in the year 1685. His daughter, Letitia Isabella, who was first married to
Charles, earl of Drogheda, was afterward the wife of Mr. Wycherly, the dramatic
poet.#
renowned Plymouth and malignant Cornwall will acknowledge to this day; his
constancy and perseverance in the Cause of God, and maintenance of his and the
National League and Covenant, is too high above my expression in way of
commendation; yet to let pass in silent so worthy so deserving and so renowned
a Patriot of his Country, were great ingratitude; therefore I shall in part
particularize some of his most noble exploits by him performed since these
unnatural wars began, and that which in the first place crowns all his
actions, was the fierce and famous fought battle at Newbery, where this noble
Lord lead on the battle in his own person, charging the maine Body of the
Kings Army The King routed at Newbery sight.
with such resolution, as did inliven the London Brigade, to second and relieve
them suddenly: yet notwithstanding this noble Champion stood to the fight, and
lead up other soldiers, and encouraged them, and so continued until the enemy
retreated with great loss of men and arms; afterward he (with his Brigade)
marched with his Excellency the Earl of Essex into Cornwall, where in his
march he assisted in the taking of fifteen Garrisons mentioned in the Lord
Generals List of Victories, he encountered treacherous Skellum Greenvill, 15
Garrisons taken in Cornwall.
and beat him with his Cornish choughes from place to place; and had timely
relief been sent, this noble Lord (with the Lord General) long before this (by
the help of God) had subdued that malignant Country: but being prevented, and
enforced by necessity to give way to the spoilers, they retreated, and this
noble Lord with part of his Brigade made good Plymouth against all the power of
the enemy, and several times beat them off, to their great loss: having thus
gallantly performed, and his trust discharged, and by an Ordinance being home
called, out of obedience thereunto, his Commission he surrendered, and into his
place he returned, to act by his Council what before he did by the sword.

The right Honble: Robert Lord Brook etc: was shot at Lichfeild

CHAP. X.
Upon the right honorable Lord Brook, slain at Lichfield, 1642.
This branch of honor, and of Martial sprite,
In whom the hopes of many thousands lay,
And whom the love to truth did first invite
To take up Arms, too soon was snatched away
B' untimely death; yet conquering lived, and di'd
Over sin, and death and many sons of pride,
And left behind a gallant Soldiers name,
But his piety does augment his fame.
IN warlike posture this noble Brook was The due praise of the right honorable
L. Brook.
first who by grim death had his days shortened, and the expectations of many
frustrated, who expect more from him then * Lord Brook was one of those
patriots who so ardently longed for liberty, that he was determined to seek it
in America, if he could not find it at home. He, and lord Say, had actually
agreed to transport themselves to New England: but the sudden turn of affairs
prevented their voyage. Having reduced Warwickshire to the obedience of the
parliament, he advanced into Staffordshire. On the festival of St. Chad, to
whom the cathedral of Lichfield is dedicated, he ordered his men to storm the
adjoining close, whither lord Chesterfield had retired with a body of the
king's forces: but before his orders could be put in execution, he received a
musket shot in the eye, by the hand of a common soldier, of which he instantly
died. It was the opinion of some of the royalists, and especially of the Roman
Catholics, that the bullet was directed by St. Chad. It is observable, that the
same man who was by one party looked upon as a monument of divine vengeance,
was by the other reverenced as a saint. Baxter has placed him in heaven,
together with White, Pym, and Hampden. His death happened in 1643.

It was reported, that lord Brook, in his prayer the morning of his death (for
he used to pray publicly though his chaplain were in his presence), wished,
that if the cause he was in was not right and just, he might presently be cut
off.


God would suffer him to perform: in the time God afforded him he was not idle,
as may appear by his gallant service near Southam, where he killed and took
many of the Kings soldiers prisoners, as also his keeping of Warwick Castle
against all the Kings forces, and likewise his valor at Lichfield, where in
the month of March 1642. this noble Lord was killed by a musket bullet, etc.
his death was much lamented by his soldiers, and many thousands more than knew
him.

The right Honorable the Lord Willoughby of Parham etc.

CHAP. XI.
Upon the right honorable Lord Willoughby of Parham.
Nor is this Patriot of the last impression
Of aulick Nobles, which adore the beast,
But with his sword has made a good profession,
And against unjust dominion does contest.
It is no circling pomp, nor spells of praise,
That faithful Willoughbies affections swaies,
It is the truth, for which this Baron bold
Did take up Arms, and will to death uphold.
TO eclipse the worth of brave Willoughby, The due praise of the honorable L.
Willoughby of Parham.
or to be silent in setting forth his due desert, were great partiality: great
men good, are like apples of gold in pictures * Lord Willoughby, of Parham,
greatly distinguished himself in taking by storm at midnight the strong
garrison of Gainsborough, in July, 1643, and in it the earl of Kingston and
many gentlemen and common soldiers. He afterward besieged and took the castle
of Bolingbroke, with a considerable quantity of arms and ammunition; and
signalized his courage on many occasions. But a little before the restoration
of Charles II. he left the parliament, and secretly transported himself into
Holland; and arrived at Rotterdam, when colonel Bamford returned from the
fleet, and went to wait upon the duke of York at the Hague. Bamford delivered
such a message from the fleet as he thought would hasten the duke's journey
thither; and told him, "the seamen made great inquiry after the lord
Willoughby, and much longed to have him with them;" insinuating to the duke,
"that he had much contributed to that good disposition in the seamen, and was
privy to their revolt, and had promised speedily to come to them, and that it
would be the most acceptable thing his highness could do to carry him with him
to the fleet, and make him his vice admiral." The duke made all imaginable
haste to Helvoetsluys, and immediately went on board the admiral; where he was
received with the usual marks of joy and acclamation. He declared the lord
Willoughby his vice admiral, and appointed some other officers in the several
ships, and speedily made ready to be out at sea. Lord Willoughby accompanied
the fleet sent to convey the king from Holland to his native country, in 1660.#
of silver, so rare, so hard to be found, that they are almost Phoenix-like,
hard to be heard of; but since our faithful Willoughby is one of those
Worthies, that to manifest his unfeigned affection, love to Religion and
resolution to keep his Covenant, adventured himself in person in many
desperate pieces of service by him performed, as first in taking by storm at
midnight the impregnable Garrison of Gainesborough, Gainesborough taken.
and in it the Earl of Kingston, and 30. Knights more, at least 300. common
Soldiers, July 16. 1643. and from thence marched into the enemies quarters,
beats them up, and takes many prisoners and afterward besieges and takes
Bolingbroke Castle, with all the arms and ammunition. These with many more
gallant exploits, has this noble Lord performed, which are here omitted for
brevities sake.

The most Exellent Sr Thomas Fairfax Captin General of the Armies etc:

CHAP. XII.
Upon the illustrious and most valiant Knight Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, now
Generalissimo of the Parliaments Forces. Sir Thomas Fairfax was formed as a
soldier under Horatio, lord Vere, in the Netherlands, and was at the taking of
Bois le Duc from the Spaniards. He was one of the first characters of his time
for integrity and military accomplishments; but his natural simplicity was so
great, that he was ever the dupe of Cromwell, who had only the appearance of
it. He was a very useful instrument in the hands of that aspiring man, who
quickly reaped the fruit of all his victories. Sir Horace Vere, his master in
the art of war, was remarkable for doing great things with few men; and
Fairfax, with the loss of few. When the parliament determined to carry the war
into Scotland, Fairfax, who had hitherto worn the name of general, declared
positively that he would not command the army against that country. The
Presbyterians said, "It was because he thought the war unlawful, in regard it
was against those of the same religion;" but his friends would have it
believed, that he would no longer fight against the king. Hereupon Cromwell was
chosen general; which made no alteration in the army, which he had modelled to
his own mind before, and commanded as absolutely. But in all other places he
grew more absolute and more imperious; he discountenanced and suppressed the
Presbyterians in all places, who had been supported by Fairfax. Sir Thomas
(afterward lord Fairfax) has written memorials of himself; and it is much to be
wished that every great general had done the same; though he had not, like
Caesar, been equally dexterous at using the pen and the sword. He versified the
Psalms of David, and other parts of Scripture, but it is probable that they
were never thought worth printing. He died Nov. 12, 1671, aged sixty.#

Thy Victories for number and short time
Unparalleled, do make so loud a noise,
That not t'extoll thee were no less a crime,
Then to deny thee to be the Arrow choice
Of Gods King deliverance, not shot, until
Tyranny was ripe, fit for Astroeas strokes,
And by thy puissant hand, and Martial skill
Given often unto the sturdiest Oaks
Of hostile enmity, is tumbled down,
Maugre the Vassals of the Triple-Crown:
Thus by the aspect of this Northern star,
Darting his luster both at home, and far,
The fascinations, magic spells are marred,
And the enchantment's done, that did retard
Our hopes. But his victorious success,
And virtues, Volumes are more fit to express.
TO illustrate this gallant Generals fame, The due praise of his Excellency
Sir Thomas Fairfax.
were but to light a candle against the sun; therefore I shall only point at
some particulars of his gallant proceedings before, as well as since he was
made General of the Parliaments Army; Yorkshire may remember Sir Thomas
Fairfax, who with a handful of men (in comparison of the Popish Army) did
withstand and many times foil Newcastle and his Army, with this small party
took Leeds, Jan. 26. 1642. and in May 1643. he took Wakefield, and afterward
marched into Cheshire, and relieved oppressed Nantwich, and totally routed the
Lord Byron, and took Biddle-House, Byron routed at Namptwich.
and afterward he marched into the North again, and took Cawood Castle,
Axholm Island, and routed the Kings Army near Selby, April 13. 1644. and in
July most gallantly acted his part in the routing of the Popish Earl of
Newcastle; and for this his valiant and faithful service in the North was by
the Parliament made General of their new modelled Army, which the enemy
promised themselves victory over; but at that never to be forgotten and gallant
fought battle of Naesby they found Naesby fight.
the contrary, in that field did this gallant General charge bare-headed, and
after that he had there took their Foot, and most of their Ammunition, he
marched to Leicester and re-gained it, and afterward marched to Hieworth and
took it, relieved Taunton-Deane, and regained Ilchester, routed Gorings
Gorings Army routed at Langport.
Army at Langport, and took the said Town with the Town of Borough,
Bridgewater, and the City of Bath; having performed all these gallant pieces of
service in the months of June and July 1645. he marched into Somersetshire,
and suppressed the unruly clownish Club-men, who without fear or wit stood in
opposition to his proceedings, and after he had secured the Ringleaders of
that rabble rout, he marched to Sherborn Castle, and took it with Sherborn
Castle and Bristol taken.
Nunney Castle, Porshot-Point and the strong City and Castle of Bristoll; and
in the month of September, he took the town and castle of Devizes, with
Farleigh castle, and Cardiffe castle, Lacock-house, Barkley castle and
Chedwick, in the month of October, 1645. Thus our noble General went on
prosperously, in the taking of the City of Winchester, Holt Church Garrison,
and Langford House, with the Garrison of Tiverton; and in the month of
November, 1645. he took the town of Fulford near Exeter, and marched from
thence in the month of December 1645. and took by storm Chibington-house,
relieved Plymouth, took Pouldram-house, and in the month of January he took
by storm Canterbury Fort, and Budex Church, with Sir Francis Drake's house; as
also the town and castle of Dartmouth, the castle of Belvoir, and the town of
Torrington, and afterward in the month of Febr. 1645. he took Launceston,
Listoll, and Saltash, with Wardbridge, Temple-Guard, and in the month of March
1645. he routed the Lord Hopton, took Dennis Hopton routed.
castle, Felford Haven, and the Fort of Axmouth, with Inch-house Hilford Fort,
in the month of April 1646. this gallant General took Exeter, Barnstaple,
and Ilfordcomb-Fort, Exeter, Barnstaple, Oxford, Farringdon and Wallingford
taken.
with Michaels Mount, in May, 1646. he also took Woodstock Manner, and
Radcot-house, with Bostoll-house, Sherborn, and the City of Oxford; and in the
month of June he took Farringtone and Wallingford.

These, with many more victories and successes has God been pleased to honor
this noble Champion with, for which let God have the glory, and noble Sir
Thomas Fairfax due praise and respect from all that wish well to the peace of
these Kingdoms.

Sr. William Brereton Major Gen: of Cheshire Staffordshire and Lankashire

CHAP. XIII.
Upon the religious and magnanimous Knight Sir William Brereton. Sir William
Brereton gave abundant proof of his valor in the time of the civil war. He, in
a sharp skirmish, defeated sir Thomas Aston, near Nantwich, and soon after gave
battle to the earl of Northampton, in Staffordshire, where that gallant and
loyal nobleman was unfortunately slain. He presently after took the town of
Stafford by stratagem; and next defeated lord Capel; and, aided by sir Thomas
Fairfax, forced lord Byron to raise the siege of Nantwich. On the 18th of
August, 1645, he gained a memorable victory over prince Rupert, in Cheshire. In
November, the same year, he in a fierce battle totally routed a large party of
the king's army in conjunction with all the Welsh forces under the command of
sir William Vaughan, which composed a body of six thousand men. He also took
several castles, the town of Rippon, and the cities of Chester and Lichfield.#

Thus restless souls tend to eternal rest,
And active spirits in a righteous way
Find peace within, though much with war oppressed,
This bravest Brereton of his name could say,
And now triumphs, maugre those Nimrods fled,
Aston, Capell, Byron, and Northampton dead.
The slaughtered Irish, and his native soil
Now quiet, show his courage love and toil.
COnstancy and stability with much perseverance The due praise of Sir William
Brereton.
is brave Breretons badge of honor, and since the time of his taking up of
Arms for the defense of King, Parliament and Kingdom, he was never found to
betray his trust, or decline his proceedings, as Cheshire, Sallopshire,
Lancashire and Staffordshire can well witness, and for his prosperous
proceedings, I shall insert the particulars; at his first coming into Cheshire,
many well-affected to the Parliament appeared, some had arms, some he armed,
to the number of 2000. and hearing of the Kings Brigade under the command of
Sir Thomas Aston drawing up, he did prepare to give him battle near the
Nantwich; the which the enemy hearing of, prepared all the power possibly they
could, and engaged their Army with Sir William Brereton, who in an hours fight
routed the enemy, took 100. foot, and 100. horse prisoners, Jan. 28. 1643. and
afterward marched into the Country, and relieved many oppressed people, by
taking off the heavy taxations that lay upon them, and hearing of the Earl of
Northampton marching that way, gave him the meeting near Stafford, and by the
assistance of noble Sir John Gell, gave him battle and routed him, killing
upon the place the said Earl of Northampton E. of Northampton slain.
March 26. 1644. and presently afterward took the strong town of Stafford by
a stratagem, and from thence went to Wolverhampton, and took it with all the
Ammunition, and then retreated toward his own Country of Cheshire, and by
the way took Whichurch, and afterward marched up to Eckelsall castle, and
took it with all the ammunition, June 26. 1644. and coming into Cheshire was
there received with much joy, and many Volunteers listed themselves under him,
with whom he marched to Houghton Castle, and took it with much ammunition,
July 22. 1644. and afterward marched toward the Lord Capell near the Nantwich,
and gave L. Capel routed.
him battle, routed his whole Army, took many hundreds prisoners, and
presently marched up to Holt Castle and besieged it, and by Composition took
it, with much Ammunition, November. 21. 1644. and marched after to Harden Castle,
and took it, with the ammunition, with the Town of Rippon, December. 3. 1644.
The Lord Byron having a strong and potent Army, marched up to the Nantwich, and
besiged it, the which the noble Sir William Brereton understanding the
greatness of his strength sent to Sir Thomas Fairfax for help to raise the
siege, which noble Sir Thomas did no sooner hear of, but did hasten up to Sir
William Brereton, who The gallant service of Sir W. Brereton.
when they were joined, marched up to the Lord Byron, and suddenly fell upon
him, and after a hot fight raised his siege, and routed him, took 152. Knights
and Gentlemen, 126. Commanders, 160. common Soldiers, 120. Irish women with
long skeanes, Feb. 14. 1644. and having relieved the Which Sir William parted
with Sir Thomas, and marched up toward Chester, and beat up the enemies
quarters, and straightned the town, the which Prince Rupert hearing drew all
his Forces upon Sir William and gave him battle near Tarum, who quickly made
the Prince retreat with the loss of 450. men, August 18. 1645, and presently
having notice of a great party were going to relieve the Prince, he sent out a
Brigade that fell upon them, and dispersed them, took 175. common Soldiers, 15.
Commanders, August 27. 1645. and after he had performed this gallant piece of
service, he marched toward Chester, and meeting with a great party of horse
fell suddenly upon them, routed and dispersed them all, took 35. Commanders,
420. Prisoners, 450. Arms, September. 24. 1645. and presently after closely
besieged Beeston Beeston Castle taken.
castle, and took it with all the ammunition, October. 15. 1645. The Kings
Forces under the command of Sir William Vaughan joined with all the Welsh
Forces, being 6000. strong drew up toward Sir William Brereton, and gave him
battle, and after a long and fierce battle were routed, and 400. foot taken
prisoners, with 600. horse, and killed 250. upon the place November. 28. 1645.
and having cleared the field, he Chester, Lichfield, and Dudley Castle taken.
went again before Chester, and closely besieged it, and took it with much
Arms and Ammunition, Jan. 29. 1645. and afterward marched with his Army to
Lichfield, and took it with all the Ammunition, March 5. 1645. and from thence
to Dudley castle, and took it, May 12. 1646. These with many more victories
has this valiant Knight performed, which will to after ages stand as monuments
of his due praise.

Sr William Waller Major Gen: of Surry Sussex and Hampshire

CHAP. XIIII.
Upon the valiant and religious Sir William Waller. Sir William Waller, son of
sir Thomas Waller, constable of Dover Castle, and Margaret, daughter of Sampson
Lennard, lord Dacre, served in the Netherlands, in the same camp with sir Ralph
Hopton; and was in the army of the confederate princes against the emperor. He
was one of the most able and active of the parliament generals, and was for a
considerable time victorious, and therefore called William the Conqueror. He
was defeated at the battle of Lansdown, near Bath, and afterward totally routed
at Roundway Down, near the Devizes. Hence, with a little variation, it was
called Runaway Down, and continues to be called so to this day. Sir Arthur
Haslerig's cuirassiers, well known by the name of the lobsters, were among the
fugitives. Cleveland says, that they turned crabs, and went backwards. The
conqueror's fame sunk considerably from this time; but he afterward had the
honor of defeating his former fellow-soldier, the lord Hopton, at Alresford.

The Presbyterians caused sir William Waller to be named for deputy or
lieutenant of Ireland; and at first Cromwell did not oppose the motion but
consented to it, being very willing to be rid both of Waller and all the
officers who were willing to go with him, who he knew were not his friends. But
when he saw Waller insist upon great supplies to carry with him, he changed his
mind, and set his instruments to cross such a supply of men and money as he had
proposed, and caused Lambert to be appointed to that office. -- Sir William was
author of a book of "Divine Meditations," which was published after his
decease. He died Sept. 19, 1669.



Exactly view our English Hanniball,
Or rather view with an admiring eye
Victorious Waller, whom we well may call
The unwaller of Foes strength, and policy;
As dreadful to insulting Cavaleers,
As Hannibal was once for sixteen years
To Rome; four Armies routed in the field,
More Towns and Forts surpised adorn his shield.
IF praise be due to any, much more to The due praise of Sir William Waller.
this gallant spirit, whose activity, valor, and constancy speak him to be
one of our English Patriots, who (according to his solemn League and Covenant)
has endeavored (by his sword) to maintain the Kings Honor, the Parliaments
Privileges, and the Subjects Liberty, with the Union of the Kingdoms, as may
appear by his gallant activity in the time of his public employment, which in
part I shall insert: At his first going forth Westward with a small Brigade in
the Counties of Hampshire and Wiltshire, by the interest he had in the good
affections of the people, and by his stratagems upon the enemy raised his Army
to 5000. and then marched up to Portsmouth, took it with the Castle Portsmouth
taken.
and all the Ammunition, the 5. of September. 1642. and from thence marched to
Farnham, took it with all the Ammunition, October. 15. 1642. afterward marched
into the field, and on a sudden wheeled about, and by a sudden assault took the
Town of Madbury, October. 26. 1642. and hearing of the great oppression of
Hampshire by the Kings Forces he to them in have marched, and suddenly fell
upon the Kings Forces, utterly routed them, and took much booty, November. 12.
1642. and no sooner had he performed this, but presently he marched to
Farnham-castle, and took it, with all the ammunition, November. 24. 1642. and
afterward took the strong City of Winchester, with the castle, December. 13.
1642. with the castle of Arundell, December. 19. 1642. and the city of Chichester,
with all the Ammunition, December. 29. 1642. having gained so many Garrisons, and
the Kings Forces not daring to relieve any, was yet a further encouragement,
whereupon this noble and renowned Sir William Waller marched into the field,
beat up their quarters, took many prisoners, and by storm gained the strong
Garrison of Malmesbury, with all the Arms and Ammunition, March 17. 1642. and
presently afterward gave the Kings Forces battle near the Forest of Deane,
utterly routed them, taking many prisoners, April 3. 1643. and afterward
surprised three Troops of Horse, and took the Town of Monmouth, April 9. 1643.
with the Town of Higman, April 17. 1643. and the Town of Rose-bridge, April
22. 1643. as also the Town of Chipstow and Hereford, April 25. 1643. with the
Town and Castle of Sherborn, April 29. 1643. and having thus prosperously
conquered and carried all before him, he yet further proceeds and marches up
to Lemster, beseegeth and takes it, with all the ammunition, May 13. 1643. and
from thence marches up to the Kings Forces near Wells, most resolutely
charge them in the Van and Rear, on a sudden utterly routeth them and takes
much ammunition, June 14. 1643. and by many skirmishes, hard seeges, and fierce
battles have much need of recruit, this valiant Commander came to London,
which ere long he was recruited, and again into the field he marched, and gave
the Lord Craford battle near Alton in Surry and totally routed him, December. 14.
1643. and afterward took the Town of Alton, with all the ammunition, December.
18. 1643. and Arundell Arundel Castle taken.
Castle Jan. 28. 1644. and afterward marched into the field, and hearing of
the Lord Hopton near Alsford, drew up to him, and gave him battle, and in a
little time utterly routed him, took much Ammunition, and many Prisoners,
killed the Lord John upon the place, March 26. 1644. and having thus gallantly
performed, and the Country cleared of the enemy, he marches up to the strong
castle of Shudly, and beseegeth it, and in a small time gains it, with all the
Arms and Ammunition, June 8. 1644. and having thus gallantly performed is by
Order of the Parliament recalled, to whose commandment this valiant Commander
obeyed, and as a Member of that House sits to act and finish that which his
sword began, viz. the preservation of Religion, defense of the Kings Person and
Honor, the Parliaments due Privileges, and the Subjects due Liberties, with
the Contents of the National League and Covenant, from which those that either
love peace or truth will never revolt.

Edward Massey Esquire. Major General of the west

CHAP. XV.
Upon the right valiant and faithful Commander, Major-Generall Massey.
Major General Massey, a Presbyterian, and a soldier of fortune, offered to
enter into the king's service before he was retained by the parliament, which
he served with a fidelity that was greatly applauded. He was governor of the
city of Gloucester, which he held out with invincible resolution against the
flower of the royal army, till the earl of Essex could be supplied with a
sufficient body of forces to raise the siege. The defense of this city is one
of the most signal instances of bravery in the whole course of the war. He was
set aside by the Independents upon the passing of the self-denying ordinance;
and shortly after volunteered his service in the cause of king Charles the
Second, who, from the time that he had recovered any authority in Scotland,
granted a commission to the duke of Buckingham to raise a regiment, which
Massey was to command under him, and to raise another regiment of foot; and the
English which should resort thither, of which they expected great numbers, were
to list themselves in those regiments. And there were some who had enlisted
themselves accordingly; but the discipline the Scots had used to the king, and
their adhering to their old principles, even after they seemed united for him,
had kept the king's friends in England from repairing to them in Scotland.
Massey had got a great name by his defending Gloucester against the late king,
and was looked upon as a martyr for the Presbyterian interest, and so very dear
to that party; and therefore as soon as they came within the borders of
England, he was sent with some troops before and was always to march at least a
day before the army, to the end that he might give notice of the king's coming,
and draw the gentry of the counties through which he passed, to be ready to
attend upon his majesty.

In the beginning of the night, when Massey was going for Gloucester, a troop
of the parliament army beset the house where he was, and took him prisoner, and
putting him before one of the troopers well guarded were proceeding to a place
of security. But that tempestuous night had so much good fortune in it to him,
that in the darkest part of it, going down a steep hill, with woods on both
sides, he, either by his own activity, or the connivance of the soldier, found
means to disentangle himself from the man, and to effect his escape into the
woods, and got clean off.



What Mass of honor on the name attends
Of valiant Massey that Commander brave?
O! what a stay was he to fainting friends,
When Gloucester was designed to be a slave!
Nor from the walls alone, but from the field,
There Massey made three Armies fly, or yield,
Once P. Rupert knows; and the groaning West
Partly by Massey's manly deeds find rest.
IF the outside of a portraicture could decipher the inside of a most valiant
and The due praise of Major General Massey.
heroic Commander, then virtue, honor, and valor, would be brave Massey's
Effigies: but because such graces cannot be so explained by the Art of the
rarest Artist, it shall therefore satisfy me that some would, but could not
sufficiently set forth, as in a mirror, so much, so rare, and so transcendent
deserts as are due to this trueborne English Patriot; yet to bury in oblivion
his gallant actions and unparellelled proceedings were the masterpiece of
ingratitude, the which that I may convince both friend and foe that I am not
guilty of, I shall as formerly, in part set forth the most material actions (by
the hand and assistance of God by him) performed since his first taking up of
Arms, which was in the month of June 1642. at which time he marched forth
with our renowned General the Earl of Essex, and at Worcester gave the Kings
forces battle, and beat them to a disorderly retreat, September. 12. 1642. and
from thence followed them to Edg-hill, where they and the Kings Army had a most
fierce fight, but at the latter end of the day, the Enemy with great loss
retreated, October. 22. 1642. presently after this fight this faithful,
reliligious, and valiant Major-Generall Massey was made Governor of Gloucester,
who had no sooner set the Garrison in a posture of defense, but falls to action
and marches into the field, and by the assistance of Sir William Waller routed
the Kings forces under the command of the Lord Herbert, and took many
prisoners, March 30. 1643. at which good service, the Kings Forces being very
much enraged, and the Council of Oxford by Gods good providence infatuated,
determined to besiege Gloucester with their whole Army, the Parliament at that
time having none in the field, were necessitated to recruit the Lord General
who had long wanted recruits, in the interim of time Gloucester was strongly
besieged, desperately assaulted, and gallantly defended; many large proffers
were made unto the faithful and truly religious Major-Generall Massey, but by
him rejected, and finding him to be no Subject to be wrought upon by large and
plausible promises, they fell to proud and daring threatenings, and upon an
arrow shot into the Town these words,

These are to let you understand that your God Waller has forsaken you, and
has retired himself to the Tower of London; Essex is beaten like a dog, yield
to the King's mercy in time, otherways if we enter perforce, no quarter for
such obstinate trayterly rogues.

From a Well-wisher.

To which presently upon another arrow was shot this ensuing Answer.

Waller's no God of ours, base rogues ye lie,
Our God survives from all eternity;
Though Essex beaten be, (as you do say)
Romes yoke we purpose never to obey:
But for our Cabages which ye have eaten,
Be sure e're long ye shall be soundly beaten.
Quarter we will ask ye none, if we fall down
K. Charles will lose true Subjects with the town.
So says your best Friend if you make timely use of him, Nicolas Cudgel
you well.
My purpose is only to make a very succinct mention of these particulars, and
to proceed, the town being by the noble Lord General the Earl of Essex
relieved, September. 5. 1643. Major-Generall Massey marched again forth into the
field, fell upon a party of the Kings Army near Tueksbery, routed them, and
took many prisoners, October. 16. 1643. and not long afterward beat Colonel
Vavasor from Teuksbery, December. 6. 1643. as also Sir John Winter from Newnham,
and did afterward dissolve and dismantle the Garrison of Wotton, December. 14.
1643. and hearing of some scattered forces near Gloucester, drew forth upon them
and took most of them prisoners, March 20. 1643. and afterward hearing of Sir
John Winter at Newnham, drew up to him, and by a train of powder did him much
harm, and took very many prisoners and much provision, as also the same day
defeated the Kings Forces at Little Deane, took the Town with all the arms
and ammunition, May 7. 1644. having cleared that part of the Country, he
marches up to Beverstone-Castle, and takes it by storm, with all the
ammunition, May 27: 1644. and with the like success took the Town of
Malmesbury, May 30. 1644. as also the Garrison of Chippenham, having cleared
the Country, he took the Garrison, and secured what before he had got; a party
of the Kings Horse and Foot under the command of Colonel Mynne entered those
parts not long after, and this renowned Major-Generall Massey hearing of him,
went again forth into the field with a small party, and near Kidmarly entered
fight with them, killed their General Mynn, took many prisoners and much
ammunition, Aug. 12. 1644. afterward marched up to the Castle of Monmouth, and
took it, September. 26. 1644. as also defeated the Enemy at Betsly Sconce in the
Forest of Dean, and took much Ammunition, Sept. 30. 1644. and presently
afterward marched toward a strong party of the Kings Forces commanded by Sir
John Winter, encountered them near Beechly, and routed them, taking many
prisoners, Aug. 12. 1644. having thus gallantly dispersed the enemy, he did
endeavor to secure the Frontier Garrisons under his Command, which he did
accordingly, in which interim of time, Sir John Winter again recruited, and
came up toward the Forest of Deane, (where he had been before beaten) the
which renowned Massey no sooner heard of, but drew forth his strength, and did
with much courage and gallantrey march toward the said Forest, and gave them
battle, and in a small space had utterly routed them, taken and killed many,
Febr. 26. 1644. and not long afterward having intelligence of a party of the
King's horse coming out of Bristoll for the assistance of Prince Maurice, were
met by this noble General, and upon a sudden routed, and many taken prisoners,
March 24. 1644. presently afterward he marched toward the strong Garrison of
Evesham, and besieged it, upon a fierce storm took it, with all the
ammunition therein, May 27. 1645. having thus gallantly performed, not to be
parallelled, considering his strength, yet some who were no well-wishers to
Honor, nor Religion, did murmur and complain of this noble General, whose
honor will stand to perpetuity upon Gloucester walls, and in all true-borne
English men's hearts; and although some thought his sudden taking off from that
service would have dis-ingaged him from all service, it is well known by the
West that after he was made there General, he did most gallantly, and was
indeed (as I may so say) the very wall to defend Sir Thomas Fairfax's Army from
the incursions of the enemy, brave Massey led brave Fairfax the way into the
West, witness the daily skirmishes he was in for five or six weeks together,
beating the enemy to retreats at least 120. miles, taking and killing many,
notwithstanding the enemy was four to one, yet some said (whom I will not here
name) that the enemy was but a small strength, but when Sir Thomas Fairfax was
to fight with them within two days of the same time, the same party said they
were a great Army, and it was dangerous in fighting, I name this passage not to
dishonor any who deserve praise, but to show how and by what ways some use
sleights to under-value those better then themselves, to set up themselves;
much more may be spoken in time convenient, when brave Massey's honor will
burst forth like the Sun from under a cloud, and stand for after Ages so long
as the Sun and Moon endure.

Phillip Skippon Esquire. Major General of the Army etc:

CHAP. XVI.
Upon the most renowned Soldier, Major General Shippon. Philip Skippon was
sergeant-major-general of the parliament army, major general of the London
militia, and governor of Bristol. After the passing of the self-denying
ordinance, he was preferred to the same post in the army that he held before;
to which he was thought justly to be entitled on the ground of his merit. He
was president of the council of war, under the earl of Essex; and, both in the
cabinet and the field, approved himself an excellent soldier. He commanded the
infantry at the battle of Naseby, where he exerted himself with his usual
intrepidity. "Magnanimous Skippon," says May, "was grievously wounded, yet
would not forsake the battle; but with all possible endeavors discharged his
part, till the victory was obtained." He was a zealous republican, and indeed
went the greatest lengths with that party. His name frequently occurs as a
member of the house of commons in the Interregnum. He was also one of
Cromwell's council of state. He had 1000 l: a year in lands of inheritance
assigned him by the parliament, for his services. The duke of Buckingham's
estate at Blecheley, in Buckinghamshire, was given to him, on that nobleman's
forfeiture; but at the Restoration it reverted to the real owner. Walker says,
"he was heretofore waggoner to sir Francis Vere;" but if he were a waggoner,
which is extremely improbable, it adds much to the greatness of his character,
to have been able to raise himself to such eminent posts in the army and the
state, under every disadvantage of education.#

More things to make a soldier complete,
Are required then a valiant heart;
Time, travail, art, experience great,
And scarrs, make up the whole of every part
Of warlike worth; these requisites, and more
Stout Skippon had, and piety good store;
Which made him to slight death at Nasby field,
Which he deserted not till foes did yield:
Edg hill, Newbery marsh, and Cornish ground,
This Champions fame for evermore will sound.
OF all the gallant Commanders England The due praise of Major General Skippon.
ever bred, renowned Major-Generall Skippon may have his name enrolled in that
golden Beadrow, both for his faithfulness, valor, and constant perseverance,
he never yet was known to turn his back upon the proudest enemy, he never
was cried up and Idolized for things he never performed, he always was ready
to act the part of a valiant Champion, and to let the praise redound to those
that expected applause; he amongst all the rest, is the man (if I may so say)
that has gone through good report, and bad report, through threats, promises,
and earnest solicitations, and yet by all these is not (as too many are) shaken
in his steadfastness, and to give gallant Skippon his due praise, he is one of
the prime military men (at this day in command) in England, as may appear by
the many gallant exploits by him performed since his first taking up of Arms,
he first encountering the enemy near Worcester, September. 12. 1642. and putting
them to flight, and from thence marched to Edgehill, and drew the Army there
into Battalia, charged the enemy resolutely, and after a fierce and bloody
fight, the enemy retreated with great loss, both of men and horse, October. 22.
1643. Reading also taken by the assistance of valiant Skippon, April 18. 1643.
as also Cirencester taken, and the Kings forces totally routed at Newbery
fight; having performed this gallant service according to command, he retreated
with his Infantry to Winter Quarters, but hearing of a house fortified, leaving
open the rode, which did much mischief to the City of London, he undertook
with a small Brigade to bring it in obedience to the Parliament, which he did
most gallantly perform, taking the Garrison, called by Grafton-house taken.
the name of Grafton-house, with all the Arms and Ammunition, and great store
of plunder, which was the soldiers booty, December. 20. 1643. and having
performed this gallant piece of service, he came back to London for further
instruction, and so soon as the valiant General the Earl of Essex was
provided, he marched forth with him Westward, and took Barnstaple, with
Barnstaple and Taunton taken.
Taun-Deane, 22. of June, 1644. and from thence marched more Westward, and
took Mount-Stamford, Plimpton, Saltash, Launceston, Greenvill-house and
Newbridge, and from thence marched further into Cornwall and took Tadcaster,
and Foy, the Kings Forces drawing upon them, and taking them in that narrow
creek, put them to great streights, both for provision for men, and much more
horse, so that his Excellency by a Council of War was advised to force a
passage with his horse through the Kings Army, which he accordingly did, but
this heroic Skippon was allotted to stay behind, and make his terms as good
as possible he could in this case with the King, and finding no fair terms
from them, he encouraged his soldiers to stand to it, which accordingly they
did, and fought with the Kings whole Army for some seven or eight days
together, not giving any ground at all, but rather gaining upon them, so that
then the King thought good to grant them terms more reasonable then before they
would hear of, least they might have wasted their Forces, or relief might have
com, which drew near them, and in this piece of hot service, General Skippon
did so gallant service, as made both friends and foes much admire him: and
because there were many in London who murmured and complained, endeavoring
with much earnestness to foment jealousies and bring in disgrace men of worth
and eminency, as the Lord Roberts, Sir Philip Stapleton, and some others, who
were not of their opinion in Religion, viz. men of confusion in Church and
State, even these men cry out of plots and designs, of carrying the Army into
the West, but had the Army prospered, Oh then how London would have sounded of
-- -- -- -- -- who had done the work, though there had not been 20. in the
whole Army: And these, and such like, are and have been the practices of some
against them that are not lovers of their abominable doings, these their
designs are like the fine designs of the -- but God in due time will deal
with this Generation of selfe-exhorters, truth-destroyers, and
Covenant-revolters, I shall give them no other epitome at present, and as for
those worthies of England, viz. the Earl of Essex, the Earl of Manchester,
the Lord Roberts, the Lord Willoughby, Sir William Waller, Sir Philip
Stapleton, Sir Samuel Luke, M. Genesis Poyntz, Major-Generall Massey, and
Lievtenant-Generall Skippon, with the rest that are Covenant-keepers, as our
Brethren of Scotland, who have borne with patience what the height of malice
could invent against them; this will one day be their comfort, that they have
been reviled, and have not reviled again, and that they have suffered all
manner of wrong and reproach for Gods sake, his causes sake, and their
Covenants sake: I shall say no more at present for them, but descend to the
rest of the valiant actions of this religious Commander, who was upon the new
Model of the Army listed in the like office he formerly executed under brave
renowned Essex, Englands faithful Lord General; valiant Sir Thomas Fairfax
being created General in his stead, did upon recruit march forth with valiant
Skippon, and gave the Kings Forces a dismal battle at Naesby-field, where the
Kings Forces were utterly routed, June 14. 1645. and afterward marched up to
Leicester, and regained it, and this may stand to perpetuity, as a crown of
honor upon religious Skippons head, that he encountered the enemy in field and
Garrisons 125. times, and never turned his back in the height of an assault,
storm, or battle, upon the adverse Party; to describe all the particulars, I
shall refer the Reader to the Table of this book, and the actions of the two
Generals, viz. the Earl of Essex, and Sir Thomas Fairfax, and conclude
exhorting to give God the glory of this Champions actions, for he alone was the
supporter of his heart in the day of battle, and this great God was unto him a
buckler, a helmet, a tower, a fort, and a rock of defense to him in the time of
danger, and so he was, is, and will be to the end of the world, to all them
that put their trust in him, rest on him, and keep Covenant with him.

Sr John Meldrum

CHAP. XVII.
Upon Sir JOHN MELDRUM Knight, deceased. Sir John Meldrum, a Scotsman, when he
entered into the service of the parliament, joined himself to sir William
Waller, and first displayed his military talents in the West, particularly at
the taking of Portsmouth. When the earl of Newcastle besieged Hull a second
time, he made a bold sally from that fortress, beat the earl and his whole army
from their works, and raised the siege. Upon this success, he, with the
assistance of sir Thomas Fairfax, took the strong town of Gainsborough, Dec.
20, 1643, and a few weeks after the isle of Axholm. He next defeated a body of
forces under the command of the lords Byron and Molineaux, near Ormskirk. The
most signal of his actions was the taking of the town and castle of
Scarborough. It is said he was mortally wounded in taking this castle; but
bishop Kennet informs us, that he received his deathwound at Ailresford, in
Hampshire, and that he was buried in Westminster Abbey; but his body was, in
1661, taken up, and, with several others, buried in a pit, in St. Margaret's
churchyard.#

Nere was there in a man more self-neglect,
Nor more contempt of lawful rest and ease,
Then in courugious Meldrum, whose defect
(If any) was excess of zeal to please
His God, and to redress his countries wrongs;
For which heroic acts, both pens and longues
Shall Meldrum mellifie; and for the expense
Of all his labors, heaven has taken him hence.
SInce debts of honor are due to such The due praise of Sir John Meldrum.
valiant Champions (as renowned Meldrum deceased,) thus neither words nor pens
can sufficiently express honor enough for future Ages to read, but since it is
(by Gods providence) my lot, I shall endeavor to revive to posterity the dying
memory of our English, and Brother-Scottish Peers and Patriots due valor, and
faithfulness to maintain Religion, the Kings Honor, the Parliaments
Privileges, the Subjects Liberties, and the firm union betwixt both Nations
according to the sacred Covenant: one of the first that with valor and courage
stood up for the Parliament, was this thricehonorable Scottish Patriot, who was
as sensible of Englands distemper, as if it had been his own, and therefore
out of a godly zeal he begirt his sword about him, and with a courageous and
gracious spirit went forth, and by a heavenly hand conquered his enemies as I
shall make it appear; At his first going forth, he joined with Sir William
Waller, and was assistant in the valiant service of the West, and in
particular, he was very courageous and prosperous in the taking of Portsmouth
in Hampshire, as also the raising of the siege at Hull, July 22. 1642. and not
long after, the Earl of Newcastle again besieged Hull, and this noble and
renowned Sir John Meldrum issued out, beat the Earl with his whole Army out of
their Works, took nine piece of Ordnance, and much more Ammunition, October. 13.
1643. and having beaten the enemy and raised their siege, he marched into the
field, and by the assistance of noble Sir Thomas Fairfax, took the strong town
of Gainsborough by storm, with all the men, arms, and ammunition therein,
December. 20. 1643. and afterward he took the Isle of Axholm with all the
Ammunition, Febr. 4. 1643. and from thence marched to his own County, of which
he was (by the Parliament) made General, viz. the County of Lancashire, where
he was no sooner come, but he had notice of a great Brigade under the Command
of the Lord Byron, and Lord Mollenaux near Ormskirk plundering, to whom he
hastened, and coming within sight of them, they presently prepared to battle,
and charged once, and then ran quite away, being utterly routed, and having
lost at least 1000. horse, and the Lord Byron himself hid in a Cornefield, or
else had been taken prisoner, Aug. 20. 1644. having cleared the field, he
again marched toward the Isle and fort of Jarmouth, and in a short time took
it, with many ships in the Harbor, closely begirt the Castle, and by a most
bold and resolute assault, received his deaths wound, the which his soldiers
took much to heart, making most sad lamentation for him, and they alone did not
lament his loss, but the Parliament also, and many thousands more in the
Kingdom; and although his person be taken from us, yet his name will stand to
perpetuity, and our after-Ages will speak to brave Meldrums praise.

Sr. William Balfore etc:

CHAP. XVIII.
Upon the valiant and faithful Knight, Sir William Balfour Sir William
Balfour, though he had great obligations to the court, made no scruple of
attaching himself to its most virulent opponents. He was turned out of his
office of the Tower, a little before the breaking out of the civil war, and was
succeeded by colonel Lunsford. He afterward served in the rebel army, as
lieutenant general of horse under the earl of Essex, and commanded the reserve
at the battle of Edgehill, with which he charged so vigorously, that he soon
dispersed the king's best infantry, and seized his artillery. He also greatly
distinguished himself in the taking of Newbury. Shortly after the earl of Essex
had relieved Lyme, and advanced with his forces into Cornwall, he found it
expedient to his safety to quit the army in order to escape to Plymouth; on
which occasion sir William Balfour contrived to pass through the whole of the
king's army under command of lord Goring, and continue his march even to
London, with less loss or trouble than could have been imagined; passing all
the king's garrisons in his way, through the supineness and neglect of Goring,
who had intelligence of their rout, but received the notice when in one of his
jovial exercises, and neglected the opportunity of intercepting the enemy till
they had passed his quarters, and it was too late to pursue them in any time.
Nor was any man called in question for this supine neglect; it being not
thought fit to make severe inquisition into the behavior of the rest, when it
was so notoriously known, how the superior officer had failed in his duty.#

That providence that made thee first a cause
Of preservation of the innocent,
Called thee to preservation of his Laws,
And the destruction of the violent
Opposers of just rights and Liberties;
Therefore the List of Worthies does comprize
Valiant Balfour, whom fames relation
Sounds an honor to the Scottish Nation.
IF there were not in the Commonwealth The due praise of Sir William Balfour.
some men of public spirits Balfour-like, to lay a side places of honor and
profit, to promote the public, as he did, our Commonweal would become a
common woe, to all that have habitation therein, or relation thereunto, but as
we and our children after us have cause to bless God for accomplishing our
war, so we and our children also, will have just cause to honor the persons in
the memorial of the gallant actions of our English and Scottish noble
Commanders and Soldiers, one whereof here speaks as much honor to the
Kingdom of Scotland, as any one this day in Europe of his rank and quality;
brave Sir William Balfour by name, some of whose brave actions I shall insert,
as so many everlasting monuments of his praise, and for his gallant service he
performed under his Excellency, Englands faithful Lord General, the deceased
renowned Earl of Essex, I shall omit for brevities sake, and only speak
breefly of those his gallant exploits performed in the taking of Newbery, with
all the arms and ammunition therein, and afterward cleared those parts of an
oppressing Adversary, and not many months afterward marched further Westward,
according to order, and took Weymouth, and in it 27. pieces of Ordnance, with
all the rest of their Ammunition; and having settled that Garrison and cleared
those parts, he marched with all speed toward Taunton-Deane, and took it with
all the Ammunition therein; many more exploits and valiant actions he
performed, still eyeing the public safety more than his own or private
interest, persevering in all his actions, standing to his Covenant principles,
viz. the advantage of Reformation in Church and State, and the rooting out of
Popery, Prelacy, Schism, and Heresy, that as there is but one God so there
might be one faith, one truth, and one way of worshipping this one God in
newness of heart and affections.

Major General Poyntz

CHAP. XIX.
Upon the courageous Commander, Major-Gen. Poyntz, Knight. Major General
Pointz, a man of courage and activity, gained a very considerable name, by his
vigilance as well as his valor, in the north and north-west, where he, in
several skirmishes, had the advantage of the royalists. He commanded a large
body of the parliament forces, with which he harassed the poor remains of the
royal army, after the battle of Naseby. His most signal exploit was routing the
king's horse at Chester, and killing many gentlemen and officers of note,
particularly the gallant earl of Lichfield, who was the third brother of that
illustrious house that sacrificed their lives in the course of the civil war.
It has been said, that his views in entering into this war were purely
patriotic; and that he was never known to be influenced by covetousness or
ambition, when he had frequent opportunities of amply gratifying these passions.

Sir Marmaduke Langdale had intercepted a letter from Pointz, who had marched a
much shorter way, after he was informed which way the king was bound, to the
commander that was before Chester, telling him, "that he was come to their
rescue, and desiring to have some foot sent to him, to assist him against the
king's horse;" and the next morning he appeared, and was charged by sir
Marmaduke, and forced to retire with loss; but kept still at such a distance,
that the foot from before Chester might come to him. The besiegers began to
draw out of the suburbs in such haste, that it was believed in Chester, they
were upon their flight; and so most of the horse and foot in the town, had
orders to pursue them. But the others haste was to join with Pointz; which they
quickly did, and then they charged Langdale; who being overpowered, was routed,
and put to flight; and pursued by Pointz, even to the walls of Chester.



Here valor and fidelity contend
Which shall exceed in an officious way,
And both do to posterity commend
Brave Pointz triumphing on a routing day
On Rowton-Heath near Chester, where the flower
Of Cavaleerian force fell in the power
Of this Commander, whose courageous breast
Has purchased honor, and his Countries rest.
THis valiant and faithful Commander, The due praise of Major General Poyntz.
Major General Poyntz, if it were only for his constancy in the cause he
undertook, and stability, deserves of all true-born Englishmen, to be
honored, and as a Soldier he has done gallantly, even when the Parliament
and Kingdom was in a low condition, and the enemy strong, yet he in many parts
North, and North-West gave the Kings forces many defeats and overthrowes, as at
Rounton Heath, near West-Chester, and cleared those parts, and afterward drew
more Northward, and cleared those parts, was always active in promoting the
public, and when the war was completed, and our Brethren of Scotland
retreated toward their own Kingdom, this renowned Sir Sydenham Poyntz had a
command to secure and keep in quietness those Northern parts, in case of any
insurrection of the Malignant or any other party, which he did most faithfully
perform, and in all his proceedings he did endeavor to keep brotherly unity
with our Brethren of Scotland, which may add one badge of honor to him more
then to some of the rest of our gallant Commanders, and this may be the crown
of his honor, that in all the troubles of England, and sad division, he has
kept himself unspotted from covetousness, ambition, or faction, which if all
men in eminency and trust has done the like, we should have had less contests
for honor, and more self-denial, less reviling of and exclaiming at our
faithful Brethren of Scotland, and more Covenant-ingaged affection to them,
less fomenting and fostring of division, and more advancing of the truth in a
real Reformation, according to our most sacred Oath, and I could wish some men
of eminency had not been so guilty of blowing and kindling the coals of
jealousy betwixt England and Scotland, and finding God blasted them in that
Machiavell design, they act a second tragedy not inferior to the former, viz.
foment and countenance a division at home in the same Kingdom, amongst one and
the same Subjects of one flesh and blood, and although God (it may be) has
used some such men to do his own work, whom as men I honor, yet I am
confident their honor is not of so a long a life as their person, but for
faithful men, such as valiant Poyntz, when their persons decay and decrease,
their honors will increase to posterity.

The Religious succesfull and truly Valliant Lieutenant General Cromwell

CHAP. XX.
Upon the valiant Commander, Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell. Oliver Cromwell,
whose genius was awakened by the distractions of his country, was looked upon
as one of the people, till he was upwards of forty years of age. He is an
amazing instance of what ambition, heated by enthusiasm, restrained by
judgment, disguised by hypocrisy, and aided by natural vigor of mind, can do.
He was never oppressed with the weight, or perplexed with the intricacy of
affairs: but his deep penetration, indefatigable activity, and invincible
resolution, seemed to render him a master of all events. He persuaded without
eloquence; and exacted obedience, more from the terror of his name, than the
rigor of his administration. He appeared as a powerful instrument in the hand
of Providence, and dared to appeal to the decisions of Heaven for the justice
of his cause. He knew every man of abilities in the three kingdoms, and
endeavored to avail himself of their respective talents. He has always been
regarded by foreigners, and of late years by the generality of his countrymen,
as the greatest man this nation ever produced. It has been disputed which he
deserved most, "a halter, or a crown;" and there is no less disparity betwixt
the characters drawn of him, and the reports propagated by his enemies and his
friends. Colonel Lindsey affirmed, that he saw him enter into a formal contract
with the devil; and Dawbeny has drawn a "parallel betwixt Moses, the man of
God, and Oliver the Protector:" But the story of this contract is explained in
Nash's History of Worcestershire, where it appears to have been a citizen of
Worcester, and not the devil, that had a conference with Cromwell. He died in
his bed, on the 3d of September, a day which he had long esteemed fortunate, in
the year 1658. The French court went into mourning for him; but the famous
Mademoiselle de Montpensier disdained to pay that respect to the memory of an
usurper.#

Here Is noble blood, if that a noble mind
Makes man noble by denomination;
And he that reads this Soldiers acts, shall find
Matter of wonderment, and admiration:
That in such well-fought fields and fortresses
Assaulted, always conquering happiness
Attended him; thus (with grace beautified)
Despised men pull down great Princes pride.
AS a valiant, faithful Commander, brave The due praise of Lievtenant-Generall
Cromwell.
Cromwell deserves perpetual honor, who for his gallant actions, the
Cavaliers have (Anabaptist-like) rebaptized him (if I may properly so say) and
given him a new name, called Old Iron sides, and very well they might call him
so, for oftentimes he did prove to them as an iron rod to brake them in
pieces: God has used him as one of the great instruments to rescue our
Religion, Laws and Liberties out of the hands of those that would have
destroyed them all, and therefore he deserves high honor: I here present to
the view of the world, his valiant exploits (in shorter terms then M. Sprig in
his large Folio History of large relations and of the largest size) since he
was made Commander of a Brigade; one of the first and gallant pieces of service
he performed, was in the taking of Stamford, and clearing the parts adjacent,
often skirmishing with the enemy, always prosperous, especially at that never
to be forgotten fight at Marston-More, where in person he did perform most
gallant service, and afterward was active in all his undertakings, and being
eminently taken notice of upon the Model of the New Army, was chosen
Lievtenant-Generall, and at that great battle of Naseby did bravely perform
the day, to the downfall of the Cavalierian faction, and encouraged the
soldiers to prosecute the day, and with zealous courage marched toward their
Garrisons, and first took in Leicester, and afterward Heighworth, relieved
Taunton-Deane, re-gained Ilchester, routed Gorings Western Army, took also
Langport, Borough, Bridgewater and the City of Bath, and afterward did march
with the Army against Sherborne-Castle, and took it with the Castle of Nunney,
Porshut Point, and the strong Town and Castle of Bristoll, and having
re-gained that marched to the Devizes, and took it, with the Castle of
Farleigh, Chedwick and the strong Garrison of Basing the very receptacle of
rogueing Rob-Carriers, and having performed this gallant service, he marched
more Westward toward the relief of those poor oppressed parts, and in his
march took Langford-house, Tiverton, Fulford and Chillington-house, and
presently marched to Pouldram-house and took it, relieved Plymouth, regained
Budex Church and Sir Francis Drakes house, and having thus weakened the Kings
strength in Garrison, he did march toward the Lord Hopton and routed him, took
Launceston, Listithiell, Saltash, Wardbridge, and Temple-guard, the Lord Hopton
recruited to the number of 5000. Horse, whom within few days was by this
valiant Commander and the rest, enforced to disband and deliver with all their
ammunition, and having cleared the field in the West, marched up to
Dennis-Castle and took it also, with Felford Haven, Axmouth, Inch-house, and
Hilford, Exeter hearing hereof did also suddenly deliver, and Barnstaple stood
not upon so great terms as formerly, but was surrendered, and having finished
the work in those parts, marched more Eastward, and took Radcot-house,
Sherborn, and Oxford, and having been thus active, and completed the work,
except some petty Garrisons, this valiant Cromwell came back to take his
place, as a Member of the House of Commons, where I leave him to act by his
counsel, according to that pattern he has acted with his hands.

Richard Brown Esquire. major General of Oxon Berkshire and Buckingham

CHAP. XXI.
Upon the valiant and worthy Gentleman, Major General Brown. Richard Brown, an
eminent citizen of London, and a warm advocate for Presbytery, greatly
distinguished himself in the field, and had no small influence in the
parliament, where he was a representative for the city of London. He attended
the earl of Essex when he first marched against the king, and had a
considerable hand in defeating the royalists near Worcester, and at Edge hill.
He took Arundel Castle by storm, and seizing on Abingdon, bravely defended it
against the whole force of the garrison of Oxford. In a sudden sally from
Abingdon, he surprised and took Bellasith-house, which was strongly garrisoned
by the royal party, and found in it a good supply of provisions. He was one of
the commissioners deputed to receive the king from the Scots army, where,
perceiving the great advantage his majesty had in his disputes with their
politicians and divines, and probably penetrating the designs of the
Independents, he returned to his allegiance, and ever after inflexibly adhered
to it. He was much in favor with Churles II., whose resident he was at Paris,
before the Restoration; and was soon after created a baronet, having before
received the honor of knighthood. He had the command of the city militia, and
was lord mayor of London in 1660. His only daughter and heiress espoused John
Evelyn, Esquire. during her father's residence in France.#

And brave Brown brings up the Rear,
Last in the List, but not the least in field,
And he that reads this Soldiers acts, shall find
Matter of wonderment and admiration,
That in such well-fought fields and fortresses
Assaulted, always conquering happiness
Attended him; thus (with grace beautifide)
Despised men pull down great Princes pride.
BRave Brown, although last in List of The due praise of Major-Generall Brown.
the beadrow of Englands Worthies, yet inferior to few in his actions and
fidelity, as the Cavaliers know and acknowledge at this day with grief of
heart, and that it may be manifest to all, I shall here insert part of those
gallant passages and exploits by him performed since these unnatural uncivil
civil wars began: and first when Englands never to be forgotten, generally
beloved General, the bewailed, deceased Earl of Essex, first marched forth,
this gallant Commander attended him in his marches from London toward the
enemies Quarters, and falling in upon them near Worcester, they utterly
defeated them and put them to flight, in this battle this successful
Major-Generall Brown did most excellent service, and afterward marched after
the Kings Forces, who did recruit with much vigorousnesse, but being again
over-taken at Edgehill, were enforced to fight, which both sides did most
gallantly, but after a hot dispute the Kings forces gave ground, retreated, and
our soldiers kept the field, having won the day, and having thus prosperously
proceeded, and the winter drawing on apace, they came to London the chief
Garrison of England, and so soon as Forces were able to march, this renowned
Brown did march forth with a Brigade against Arundell Castle, and by a fierce
storm took it, with all the Ammunition, and not long after this service
marched into Kent, and quel'd the mutineers that had made a great uproare
there, afterward cleared those parts and marched up to Waltham-house, and
took it with much Ammunition, and from thence marched to Greenland-house and
took it also, and afterward took Abbington, and fortified it just under the
enemies noses, and defended it most valiantly against all the power the King
then had in his chief Garrison of Oxford, took also an opportunity and
marched forth and took the strong Garrison, Ballasith-house, with all the
provision, and retreated back to Abbington, and preserved it from all the
furious attempts of the enemy: These with many more gallant pieces of service,
did this gallant Commander perform, and though many proffers of honor,
riches, and preferment were made him, yet this may be valiant Brownes honor,
that he did refuse all, and stood for that cause his Covenant had engaged him
unto, and does persevere to this day, which if he also do to the end, it will
be a crown of honor to religious renowned Brown for ever.

ANd now having briefly recited many of the gallant actions of some of our
valiant Commanders, I shall also add hereunto the names of many more, who have
been seconders of the former, in gallant performances: and because most of
their actions are included with the former, I shall at present only speak to
part of the particulars, but for the future (God willing) I do intend to speak
more at large: for the first, the truly worshipful Colonel Hollis, his birth
and blood speak him to be a man that is free from baseness, his actions in the
field have been valiant, and his ends faithful, and I dare bouldly say, it was
not profit, honor, or preferment did allure that thrice noble hearted Hollis;
neither was it the Tower of London, in which he was most unjustly imprisoned,
did any ways daunt this valiant-hearted publike-spirited noble descended and
religious affected Denzill Hollis from prosecuting the design of God, and his
Country: and for many of his valiant actions in the field, I might speak much
to his praise, as also of his valiant Regiment (not inferior to any in
England, or that ever was in England since these last troubles in England) but
at present I forbear for brevities sake, and for his learned speeches,
profound motions, and religious orthodox advice and Council, in the Honorable
House of Commons, I could insert something to his honor (which is well known)
if it were proper for time and place.

And next in order to religious Hollis, I shall speak of faithful
Covenant-keeping Sir Philip Stapleton, sometimes Commisary-Generall to Englands
generally beloved General the Earl of Essex, and as it has been said of that
religious Earl deceased, that when he was alive, there was none like him in a
public Covenant engaged heart, so when he died, he left not his fellow; so I
may truly say of the truly worshipful Sir Philip Stapleton, if without
prejudice I may speak it; there is not his fellow-Knight, nor will he leave
his fellow behind him, I wish England were worthy of such men as he is; I
might add to this renowned Stapleton many gallant things he has both performed
by his sword and his Council, which are more for his honor then all his
enemies I hope can invent for his dishonor, but for me to pretend (as some of
the new light-mongers do) to light a candle to the sun, were a masterpiece of
folly, therefore I shall say no more, but leave brave Stapleton beclad with
wisdom honor and glory as a robe.

And so I shall descend to speak of valiant Sir David Lesley, whose actions do
deserve to be written in letters of gold: for to rehearse them, were to mention
almost all the victories of that faithful Army of our true-harted brethren of
Scotland; but I shall at present only give religious Sir David Lesley this
character, a man noble by birth, noble in mind, and noble in actions; true to
his Country, true to his Covenant, and true to his God, as also loyal to his
King in all just ways and proceedings which renders not him only honor, but
also that Army which had such, and many such like religious Commanders and
Soldiers.

And the next to this religious and faithful Lesly is Sir George Booth the
elder of Cheshire, who when the troubles first began, stood up for his
Country, exciting his tenants so to do, promising them that had leases of
their lands from him, that if any such did suffer in person or goods, he would
make them recompense, and if any had Lease by life, and should be slain, the
life of his wife, child or friend, should be put in his stead (a brave
religious resolution) if all the Gentry that had adhered to the Parliament had
done the like, the wars could never have lasted so long: But this religious
brave Booth thought it not enough so to do, but took a place of command
himself, and was very active and courageous for the preservation of his
Country, did many gallant exploits, which I hope hereafter to mention at
large, and at present give him this Character, faithful, free, grave, godly,
brave Booth, the flower of Cheshire.

Another neighbor and associated, vigilant and valiant Commander, is Sir John
Seaton, a Lancashire Gentleman, for activity, piety, and constancy, inferior
to few in England, he is the man under God, did pull down the pride, rage, and
cruelty of the proud, potent, Papisticall Lord Strange, who with his great Army
thought to carry all before him; but as we have just cause, so let us bless
God and honor true-hearted Sir John Seaton, for those great gallant things
that have been done in reformed Lancashire, and consequently in all England.

And as great honor is due to valiant Season, for all his victories performed,
which are mentioned in the List of the Lord General, so to valiant, vigilant
and religious true-hearted and right honorable Colonel Harvey, who when
things were at a low condition was willing to do his Kingdom service, marched
forth with a Brigade of the City of London, and with a small party did most
valiant things, which I omit for brevities sake. And because I have somewhat
more knowledge of him then many, of whom I have and am to speak of, I can
without flattery say of true-hearted Harvey, thus much, that I ever found him a
man of a noble spirit, free from by, private, and base ends, aiming at the good
and prosperity of the Commonwealth; active for the ends contained in the most
sacred National League and Covenant: a man most free from the scab of error,
adhering to no faction nor party, further then the Covenant, union of the
Kingdoms, and truth of God will admit of; and as he is a Member of that
visible Body the Parliament, so also I verily believe him to be a Member of
that invisible Body of Jesus Christ; I wish so much good to England, that all
their Parliament Members were such as pious true-hearted Harvey.

And with him also valiant victorious Sir Samuel Luke, a man who never was
known to turn his back upon the Enemy, in most fights of the Army of his
Excellency the Earl of Essex, brave Sir Samuel Luke deserves to be honored for
his undaunted resolution, and this (I hope) I may truly say, that he is no
turne-coat Knight, nor disobedient Commander, but was at first beginning what
(I hope and verily believe) he will be to the end, viz. a true-hearted public
engaged Covenant keeping and virtuous true-hearted English Knight, to whom
England may be indebted, and he not indebted to England.

The next in order, which is little used, which if any shall judge me out, I
shall desire to be excused, because it is the National Malady at this day, and
therefore if any shall conclude it is too high or too low for the right
worshipful Sir Tho. Middleton, or any other, I shall leave it unto their
wisdoms to please themselves, and to do as it seems just in their own eyes,
as it was when there was no King in Israel, yet I shall (I hope) give
satisfaction to this worthy Commander, as to the rest, in declaring to the
world that he has been and still is, faithful in performing most gallant
actions in and upon the Borders of Wales, subduing many parties of Welsh
forces, taking many Garrisons both by storm, siege, and stratagem, he has in
most places where he came, gained the love as well of his enemies as others, he
conquered not only by the sword, but also by his good and faithful carriage,
he behaved himself like a man of wisdom, a man of honor and virtue, which is
much to be found in one man, I shall for brevities sake descend to speak of
religious Sir John Gell, whose worth is such as speak him to be a man beloved
of his Country, and feared by his enemies, valiant in his actions, and
faithful in his ends to promote truth and peace, it is honor enough for
gallant Gell to be Patron of these virtuous parts, of which also deceased
Hambden was a man deserves to be put into the same beadrow, for a gallant,
valiant, virtuous Saint, and the taking of that wise Statesman away was the
great weakening of the Martial affairs, Parliamentary affairs, and
Church-affaires, the taking away from the evil to come the zealous, religious,
Earl of Essex, the faithful valiant Meldrum, the wise virtuous Pym, the
undaunted Covenanted Hambden, speaks little prosperity either for Church or
State, I fear, I pray it may prove otherwise.

And so I shall proceed to speak a few words concerning the worshipful
Colonel West, Lieutenant of the Tower of London, whose faithfulness deserves
much of this City, who has not been biassed by parties and factions, which if
he had, London might long ere this have been lain level with the ground, which
is by his faithful prudence, at this day preserved, and I am confident, all
Covenant-engaged Englishmen, more especially Citizens, and such as in some
measure know him, will conclude with me, concerning this thrice noble and truly
worshipful Colonel West, Lieutenant of the Tower: That he is a holy Saint, a
valiant Soldier, and a loyal Subject, which I hope will be as a badge of
honor to him for after ages to read.

And for the honor of London, I shall add to him Collonell Manwaring,
Commander of the Horse raised by the City for the defense of it self and
Parliament, this noble Commander bears about with him the badges of his honor,
viz. wounds received in battle; I shall conclude what I have to say of him, in
that I do believe concerning him, that he is a man of a virtuous heart, of
gallant desert, and a soldier expert.

And for the honor of Wales, I shall make mention first of Col. Laugherne,
whose prudence, valor and fidelity, has preserved those parts, and kept them
in good obedience, and by a handful of men, he has encountered great Armies,
routed and dispersed them, and has done like an honorable man, a
loyall-hearted man, and a faithful man.

A seconder of himself, and for the honor likewise of Wales is the valiant
Colonel Morgan, Governor of Gloucester, who has the command over that
Garrison, that was under God, the preservation of England, he has ever (since
he was put in the trust therewith) improved himself to be faithful, has done
much service for the Parliament, and that which is the badge of his and also
Colonel Laughorne's honor, is that they have stood faithful to God, their
King and Parliament from the beginning, and are still the same, according to
the Covenant, which (I hope) will be unto them and all the rest of the
Covenant-engaged Commanders, an eternal honor.

Amongst whom faithful and resolute Colonel Birch deserves to be had in
remembrance, for all his gallant actions performed, especially since the new
Model, he has not been absent in any material piece of service, but done his
part, and I could say truly, more then his part, were it not I should procure
the emulation of some men: but if I had been silent of him, his actions speak
him honor enough, and much more then my pen can express, therefore I shall at
present, be silent concerning him.

And call to mind the noble Colonel Milton, whose actions have been many and
prosperous, and although his service has been hard, his Brigade small, and his
pay poor, yet has he hitherto kept himself from disobedience, and his
soldiers from mutiny, they never yet dared the Parliament, nor pillaged the
Country, but always carried themselves like faithful servants to their
Masters, the King and Parliament.

Another of the like faithful Commanders is loyall-hearted, valiant-minded
Col. Butler, an honorable Member of the commanding and conquering Army, who
has left no Garrison unconquered, nor no power unsubdued in England; This
resolute spirit has been in most of these the gallant performances of the
Army, and has in what he undertook, done little inferior to any of the most
prosperous Commanders in England, as in some kind scars of honor make it to
appear.

I intend brevity, but must not forget another of the valiant Commanders,
Colonel Whaley, a man of honor and of trust, who deserves as much from the
King and Parliament as the best of the Commanders in his Excellency Thomas
Fairfax's Army (now resident) only one excepted, which I shall say more of in
my second addition, which at present time will not admit of, and therefore I
shall conclude in two or three words apiece to two or three Commanders more.

As Colonel D'Albere who has been faithful always to the Parliament, and
done them good service, and although he be not an Englishman, yet (I hope)
none will be so ungrateful, but acknowledge, he has done England good service.

Likewise Vice Admiral Batten has performed most gallant service at Seas, and
with the Navy has been as a Bulwark to preserve our distracted Kingdom from
foreign power, which had (in all appearance) long ere this made us miserable.

Many valiant things have by him been performed, as also the valiant
Reare-Admirall Swanley, whom I designed to bring up the Rear, his actions in
Wales, Cornwall, Devonshire, and the Northern parts of England, can witness
to be such, as deserve a History of themselves to be extant to succeeding
Generations. And thus much I can say, as most conclude with me, that there is
not his fellow at Sea this day, for valor, and judgment, in the commanding
and mannaging a Navy at Sea; I crave pardon in my rude conclusion, and desire
to be excused by many, whom I shall hereafter mention, as Sir Robert Pie,
Colonel Sir Hardresse Waller, Colonel Sir Arthur Hasterig, Colonel Sir James
Harrington, Colonel Sir William Constable, Colonel Sir Matthew Boynton, a man
whom England owes much honor to, as also those deceased valiant hearted
Worthies, who adhered to the Parliament, I have here nominated, as also all
others that have been slain on the Kings party, with the common soldiers on
both sides, as also those that fled out of the Kingdom, all which I hope will
be excepted of without prejudice from him who has hitherto been and resolves
(by the help of God) for the future to be the Kingdoms most faithful
servant, in reality, constancy, and sencerity, to serve them,

Josiah Ricraft.

A perfect List of the many Victories obtained (through the blessing of God) by
the Parliaments Forces under the Command of his Excellency, Robert Earl of
Essex and Ewe, Viscount Hereford, Lord Ferrers of Chartley, Bourchier and
Lovaine, Lord General of England: His Excellency Alexander Lesly Earl of
Leven, Lord General of the Army of our Brethren of Scotland: And the right
honorable Edward Lord Mountague Earl of Manchester Viscount Mandevile, Lord
Kimbolton, Chancellor of the University of Cambridge, Major-Generall of the
Associated Counties, etc. With the names of the Cities, Towns, Castles, and
Forts, taken from the Enemy since the beginning of these unnatural Wars in
the Years 1642, 43, 44 to the 14 of June, 1645.

1 THe first City in England assaulted by the Cavaliers since these unnatural
wars began, (after the King was denied admittance into Hull) was renowned
Coventry; the King came in person against it, and the inhabitants thereof most
courageously issued forth, and routed their Forces, took two pieces of
Ordnance, and many Prisoners, July 26. 1642.

2 The Cavaliers had no sooner recruited, but engaged with the Forces under the
command of the Lord Brook near Southam, where they were again routed, and many
taken Prisoners.

3. Portsay Island (the 15. of August) taken, with all the Arms and Ammunition
therein.

4 The Town and Castle of Portsmouth in Hamshire taken, with all the arms and
ammunition therein, by the renowned Patriots Sir William Waller, and Sir John
Meldrum, of happy memory.

5 Southsay castle taken by surprisall, with all the arms and ammunition.

6 His Majesty's Forces routed near Worcester about the 12, of September 1642.
by his Excellency Englands faithful Lord General the Earl of Essex, in which
fight the religious and faithful Colonel Brown did gallant service.

7 The ever to be honored town of Manchester in Lancashire, the Garrison
thereof being but few in number, and brought to great penury, yet most
gallantly issued forth, beat the Lord Strange, raised the siege, and took many
Prisoners.

8 Cawood Castle in Yorkshire taken by storm, with all the arms and ammunition
the 23. of October 1642.

9 His Majesty's Forces routed at the never to be forgotten and famous fought
battle of Edg-hill, October. 22. 1643. where was taken the Kings standerd, L.
Willoughy, Sir Edward Stanley, Col. Vavasour, Col. Lunsford, and many hundreds
more; in which fight was slain the Earl of Lindsey, L. General of His
Majesty's Forces, the Lord Aubeny, Sir Edmond Verny, the Kings Standerd-bearer,
with diverse other Officers of quality, and many hundred common soldiers; in
which battle his Excellency the Earl of Essex fought so gallantly, showing
much courage and fidelity, that his very enemies did acknowledge it.

10 The Castle of Farnham taken by storm, with all the arms and ammunition, by
the renowned Sir William Waller.

11 Madbury near Plymouth taken by storm with all the ammunition.

12 The City and Castle of Winchester taken by Sir William Waller, and in it
the L. Grandison, and 65. other Gentlemen and Commanders; 1000. Foot, 600.
Horse, 200. Dragoones, and 600. arms, with all the rest of the arms and
ammunition, December 7. 1642.

13 The Earl of Newcastles Army in the North near Tadcaster routed by the noble
Lord Fairfax, about the 8. of December, 1642.

14 Arundell castle in Sussex taken by storm December. 16. 1642. with all the
arms and ammunition, by Sir William Waller, and Col. Brown.

15 Chichester taken by Sir William Waller the 26. of December 1642. with all
the arms and ammunition therein.

16 The Earl of Newcastles Popish Army again routed near Bradford, by the noble
and religious Lord Fairfax, January 3. 1642.

17 The said Army of the Earl of Newcastle had no sooner rallied and recruited,
but they were again routed by the noble and successful Lord Fairfax, near
Leeds, the 9. of January, 1642.

18 His Majesty's Forces routed near Henly upon Thames the 11. of January,
1642. and many hundreds taken prisoners.

19 Leeds taken by noble Sir Thomas Fairfax, January 26. 1642. with all the
arms and ammunition therein.

20 His Majesty's Forces (under the command of Sir Thomas Aston) routed near
Namptwich, by the noble and truly religious Sir William Brereton, Jan. 28.
1642. taken prisoners 110. Foot, and 100. Horse.

21 The town of Preston in Lancashire taken (by Sir John Seaton) by storm,
Feb. 10. 1642. with all the arms and ammunition therein.

22 Lancaster town and Castle taken Febr. 13. 1642. with all the Ammunition.

23 The Cornish Cavaliers routed the 26. of February, 1642. near Madbury, five
pieces of Ordnance, 200. Arms, 120. Prisoners taken.

24 Lichfield Close taken, March 3. 1642. with all the ammunition.

25 Lastoll surprised with all the arms and ammunition.

26 The Army under the command of the Earl of Northampton, routed near
Stafford, and the Earl himself slain by faithful Sir William Brereton, and
Sir John Gell, about the 25. of March, 1643.

27 Malmesbury taken by storm, March 28. 1643. by Sir William Waller, with
all the arms and ammunition.

28 The Welsh Army under the command of the Lord Herbert were routed in the
Forest of Deane, by Sir William Waller, and Col. Massey.

29 Tewksbury taken by faithful Colonel Massey, with all the arms and
ammunition, about the third of April 1643.

30 The town of Wigon in Lancashire taken by Sir John Seaton, with all the
arms and ammunition therein.

31 Monmouth in Wales taken by Sir William Waller, about which time that
vigilant Commander did also surprise three Troops of Horse that were under the
command of Prince Maurice.

32 The town of Higman taken by Sir William Waller, and in it 1444 common
Soldiers, and 150 Commanders and Gentlemen, about the 16. of April, 1643.

33 Newman taken by Sir William Waller, with all the ammunition.

34 Rosbridge taken with all the Ammunition, by Sir William Waller.

35 Chepstow taken by Sir William Waller, with all the Ammunition.

36 Hereford taken by Sir William Waller, by storm, and in 42 Knights and
Commanders and 600 common Soldiers.

37 Sherborn town and castle taken by Sir William Waller, with all the
Ammunition.

38 Redding taken by his Excellency the Earl of Essex, April 18, 1643.

39 Lemster taken by Sir William Waller with all the Ammunition.

40 The town of Whaley in Lancashire, taken by the noble Manchesterians.

41 Croyland taken the 29. of April, 1643. with all the ammunition.

42 Stafford taken by the ever honored, and true lover of Religion and his
Country, Sir William Brereton.

43 Wolverhampton taken by Sir VV. Brereton with all the ammunition.

44 Wakefield taken by the Lord Fairfax the 27 of May 1643. with all the
Ammunition.

45 Warrington in Lancashire taken by the valorous and faithful Manchesterians,
with all the Arms and Ammunition, the 29 of May 1643.

46 Whitchurch taken by Sir William Brereton, with all the Ammunition.

47 The Kings forces routed near Wells the last of May, by Sir William Waller.

48 Hagerston castle taken by storm, the second of June 1643.

49 Holy Island (with the castle) taken by the noble Earl of Warwick.

50 Tamworth castle taken, June 4. 1643. with all the ammunition therein.

51 Ecklesall castle taken by the most religious Sir Will. Brereton, June 26.
1643. with all the Ammunition.

52 Lin Regis in Norfolk taken by the right honorable Earl of Manchester.

53 Cirencester taken by the renowned Lord General Earl of Essex.

54 His Majesty's great and potent Army routed by his Excellency the L.
General at Newbery fight, where was killed of his Majesty's party five Lords
and many hundreds of others, in which fight, his Excellency did in his own
person most gallantly charge the adverse party, and showed such valor as did
much encourage the whole Army.

55 Gainesborough in Lincolnshire taken, with all their Ammunition.

56 The town of Stanford taken by Col. Cromwell.

57 The mutinous kentish Forces routed by Colonel Brown, and that great
insurrection stopped.

58 Houghton castle in Cheshire taken by Sir William Brereton July 22. 1643,
with all the ammunition.

59 A party of the Earl of Newcastles Popish Army routed, Aug. 14. 1643.

60 The Earl of Newcastles whole Army routed near Horn-castle, by the Earl of
Manchester, 1500 foot taken, 200 horse taken, 55 colors, many Gentlemen and
Commanders.

61 Horn-castle taken by the truly noble and religious Earl of Manchester, with
all the ammunition, September. 2. 1643.

62 The City of Lincoln taken by the noble Earl of Manchester, with all the
arms and ammunition.

63 Gainesborough taken by the Earl of Manchester, with all the ammunition,
October. 12. 1643.

64 The Lord Capell routed near the Nantwich, by Sir William Brereton, Novem.
8. 1643.

65 Bullingbrook-castle taken by the Lord VVilloby, with all the arms and
ammunition, November. 14. 1643.

66 The town of Wareham taken with all the arms and ammunition, November, 16.
1645.

67 Holt-castle taken by Sir William Brereton with all the arms and
ammunition, November. 21. 1643.

68 Harden-castle taken by Sir William Brereton, one of the Patriots of his
Country.

69 The town of Rippon taken by Sir William Brereton, December. 3. 1643. with all
the ammunition.

70 Flint town and castle taken by Sir Thomas Middleton, with all the
ammunition, December. 5. 1643.

71 The Town and Fort of Moston taken, with all the Ammunition, 9 December,
1643.

72 The town of Wotton taken by Colo. Massey, with all the ammunition, December.
11. 1643.

73 The L. Digby routed by the Garrison soldiers of Plymouth, who took 200
horse and 200 foot.

74 The L. Craford routed by Sir William Waller near Alton, in which fight
faithful and religious Lievten. Col. Tailor did most gallant service.

75 Alton taken by Sir W. Waller, with all the arms and ammunition.

76 Grafton-house taken by Major General Skippon, with all the ammunition,
December. 20. 1643.

77 Holt-house taken by storm with all the arms and ammunition.

78 Bewly house taken by composition, with all the arms and ammunition.

79 Arundell castle taken by faithful Sir William Waller, with 2000.
prisoners and a ship in the Harbor, the fourth of Jan. 1643.

80 Sir John Biron routed by noble Col. Mitton near Elsmere, the 20 of
January, and many prisoners and much ammunition taken.

81 Burton upon Trent surprised by Sir John Gell, with all the ammunition, the
23 of Jan. 1643.

82 Hilsden-house taken, and Lacockhouse quitted, Jan. 25. 1643.

83 Croyland taken by the Earl of Manchester, Jan. 26. 1643. with all the
ammunition.

84 Burleigh-house taken Jan. 28. 1643 by the noble Earl of Manchester with all
the ammunition.

85 The Kings Forces routed by the faithful and valiant Earl of Manchester
near Winsby, took 1100 prisoners, 32 Colors, 500 Horse.

86 Cockquet Island and town taken by our faithful and covenant-keeping
Brethren of Scotland.

87 The Lord Byron routed near Namptwich by Sir William Brereton and Sir Thomas
Fairfax, taken 152 Knights and Gentlemen, 126 Commanders, 1600 common
Soldiers, 120 Irish women with long Skeanes.

88 The Isle of Axholm taken by Sir John Meldrum Febr. 4. with all the
ammunition.

89 Burlington in Yorkshire taken Febr. 10. 1643.

90 Alnwick taken by our Brethren of Scotland, with all the arms and
ammunition, Feb. 14. 1643.

91 The town of Morpeth taken by the Scots, with all the ammunition, Feb. 22.
1643.

92 King Mylus house taken by storm, with all the ammunition and provision.

93 Whitby in Yorkshire taken by the Lord Fairfax, with all the ammunition.

94 Milford haven taken by Captain Swanley, with all the arms and ammunition.

95 Biddle-house taken by Sir Thomas Fairfax, and in it the Lord Brereton, 26
Commanders, 300 common Soldiers, and all the ammunition.

96 Hisley-house in Buckingham-shire taken, and all the ammunition.

97 Newbury taken by Sir William Balfour, with all the ammunition.

98 Tadcaster taken with all the arms and ammunition, the third of March, 1643.

99 Bredport taken with all the arms and ammunition, the twelfth of March,
1643.

100 Haverford West taken and in it 10 Pieces of Ordnance, and all the
ammunition, March 15. 1643.

101 Tinby taken by storm March 19, and in it seven Pieces of Ordnance, 400
prisoners, 450 arms by our Brethren in Scotland.

102 Carew castle taken with all the ammunition, March 21, 1643.

103 The Earl of Carbery routed, and four Garrisons quitted, and possessed by
the Parliament Forces, upon March 24. 1643.

104 Sunderland taken by our Brethren of Scotland, with all the ammunition,
March 24. 1643.

105 Sir Ralph Hopton routed near Alsford by Sir William Waller and Col.
Brown, where was slain the Lord John, and taken prisoners 120 Commanders and
Gentlemen, 560 common Soldiers, and much Ammunition, March 26. 1644.

106 Whitchurch in Dorset-shire taken with all the Ammunition therein.

107 Waltham house taken by Major General- Brown, with all the Ammunition,
April 9. 1644.

108 Cawood castle and Axholm Island taken by the Lord Fairfax and Sir T.
Fairfax with all the ammunition.

109 Croyland town taken with all the Ammunition therein.

110 The Kings Forces routed near Selby in Yorkshire by the faithful Lord
Fairfax, and Sir Thomas his son, upon the 11 of April, 1644.

111 Durham taken by our brethren of Scotland, with all the arms and
ammunition, April 13. 1644.

112 Lumley castle taken by our Brethren of Scotland, with all the Ammunition.

113 Bewdley in Worcestershire taken with all the Ammunition, the third of
May, 1644.

114 The City of Lincoln and the castle retaken by the faithful Earl of
Manchester, and 200 Commanders and Gentlemen, 800 common Soldiers, 300 Horse,
and seven Pieces of Ordnance.

115 Caernarvon town and castle taken by Captain Swanley.

116 The Kings Forces routed near Newnham by Major General Massey, taken 200
Officers, 500 common Soldiers, and nine Pieces of Ordnance.

117 The I Will and Fort of Iermonth taken by Sir John Meldrum, with all the arms
and ammunition.

118 Abbington taken by faithful and religious L. Roberts, with all the
ammunition, May 24. 1644.

119 Beverton castle in Glocestershire taken by Colonel Massey.

120 Malmesbury taken by faithful Major-Generall Massey, and in it 300 common
Soldiers, seven Pieces of Ordnance, May 29. 1644.

122 Chippenham in Wiltshire taken by Major General Massey, with all the
Ammunition, the second of June, 1644.

123 Russell-hall in Staffordshire taken the 30 of May, 1644. with all the
Ammunition.

124 Morpeth castle in Northumberland taken, with all the Ammunition, by our
Brethren of Scotland, the second of June, 1644.

125 Tewksbury taken by Colonel Massey, with all the ammunition.

126 Shudely castle taken by Sir William Waller by storm, with all the Arms
and Ammunition, (June 8. 1644.) 70 Gentlemen and Commanders, 80 Horse, 250
common Soldiers, two Pieces of Ordnance.

127 Compton-house taken by storm, and in it 50 Gentlemen and Commanders, 120
common Soldiers, 60 Horse, and all the Ammunition.

128 Weymouth taken by Sir William Balfour, and in it 27 Pieces of Ordnance,
with all the rest of the Ammunition.

129 Taunton-Dean taken by Sir William Balfour, with all the Ammunition.

130 The town and castle of Oswestree taken by the Earl of Denbigh, with all
the Arms and Ammunition, June 15. 1644.

131 Barnstaple taken by the ever to be honored Lord General the Earl of
Essex, with all the Ammunition therein.

132 The Kings Forces under the command of Prince Rupert, and the Popish Earl
of New Castle, were routed by our Brethren of Scotland under the command of the
Earl of Leven; and our English Armies under the command of that faithful and
never to be forgotten E. of Manchester, and the noble Lord Fairfax, at
Marston-moore, where they killed of the Cavaliers upon the place 4500, and took
1500, besides much Arms and Ammunition.

133 Greenland-house taken by Major-Generall Brown with all the Arms and
Ammunition, the 18 of June, 1644.

134 The castle of Taunton taken by the noble Lord General, with all the Arms
and Ammunition, the 22 of June, 1644.

135 Cholmley-house in Cheshire taken by the Earl of Denbigh, with all the
Arms and Ammunition.

136 Wilne Fort and Ferrie taken by storm, with all the Arms and Ammunition,
the 23 of June, 1644.

137 The city of York surrendered to the three Generals, the Earl of Leven,
the Earl of Manchester, and the Lord Fairfax, with all the Ammunition therein.

138 Tickhill taken by the religious and renowned Earl of Manchester, with all
the Arms and Ammunition, the 25 of June, 1644.

139 Mount Stamford taken by the Lord General the Earl of Essex, with all the
Ammunition.

140 Plimpton taken by his Excellency the Lord General and in it eight Pieces
of Ordnance, and all the rest of the Ammunition.

141 Salt-ash with the Fort belonging thereunto, taken by the Lord General,
and all the arms and ammunition therein.

142 Launceston, with three or four more small Garrisons, taken by the Lord
General, and all the Ammunition therein.

143 Greenvill-house near Tavestock, taken by the Lord General, with all the
Arms and Ammunition therein.

144 Newbridge taken with all the arms and ammunition therein, the 14 of July,
1644.

145 The Kings Forces under the command of Greenvill, were routed by the Lord
Roberts in Cornwall, near Lestithiell, 150 Gentlemen and Commanders, with many
hundreds of common Soldiers, and much arms and ammunition taken, the 16 of
July, 1644.

146 Tadcaster in Cornwall taken by the Lord General, with all the arms and
ammunition therein:

147 Foy in Cornwall taken by the Lord General, with all the ammunition, and
two Ships in the Harbor.

148 Shelford castle taken August 1. 1646. with all the ammunition therein.

149 Welbeck-house taken Aug. 8. 1644. with all the arms and ammunition.

150 Wareham surrendered August 9. 1644. with all the ammunition therein.

151 Gateshead near New Castle upon Tine taken by the faithful and religious
Earl of Calendar, with all the arms and ammunition therein.

152 Wingfield Manor taken, with all the arms and ammunition therein, the 12
of August 1644.

153 Latham-house surrendered, with all the arms and ammunition.

154 Red-Castle taken by storm by Sir Thomas Middleton, with all the
ammunition, the 28 of August 1644.

155 The Kings Forces under the command of Prince Rupert, routed by Colonel
Massey, that valiant and successful Champion, who took 200 Soldiers, 200
Horse, and 12 Pieces of Ordnance, Sept. 3. 1644.

156 New Castle taken by our faithful Brethren of Scotland, after a very hard
Siege, and by a most resolute storm, and in it 20 Lords and Knights, 2500
Soldiers, 48 Pieces of Ordnance, and much arms and ammunition, the 20 of
October 1644.

157 The Kings Forces were no sooner come out of the West, in the height of
their pride and cruelty, but they were met withal by the noble Earl of
Manchester, who totally routed and dispersed that great Army, and took nine
Pieces of Ordnance, 300 prisoners, and much more of provision and ammunition,
the 29 of October 1644.

158 Tinmouth castle taken by our loving and faithful Brethren of Scotland,
with all the ammunition.

159 Leverpoole re-taken the third of November, and in it 1500 prisoners, 2000
arms, and much more ammunition.

160 Helmsley castle surrendered, with all the arms and ammunition therein,
the 22 of November 1644.

161 Newbery, Farringdon, and Marlborough quitted.

162 The town and castle of Laughorn in Wales, taken the fourth of December,
with all the arms and ammunition.

163 Carlisle taken by our Brethren of Scotland, with all the ammunition.

164 Croyland taken with all the arms and ammunition, the 14 of December 1644.

165 Munmouth in Wales taken by Colonel Massey with all the ammunition,
December the 19. 1644.

166 Knaresborough taken with all the ammunition, December the 20. 1644.

167 Bellasith-house near Abbingdon taken by Major General Brown, with all
the ammunition.

168 Russell-house in Worcestershire retaken the 27 of January with all the
arms and ammunition.

169 The Kings Forces in Wales routed by Collonell Laughorne, and took 300
common Soldiers, 400 Arms, and four pieces of Ordnance, the second of
February, 1644.

170 Scarborough town taken by Sir John Meldrum, that faithful Commander, and
in it 30 pieces of Ordnance, and 120 Ships in the Harbor, upon the 17. of
February 1644.

171 Shrewesbury taken by stratagem by Colonel Mitton, and in it 100
Commanders, and Gentlemen, 36 piece of Ordnance, 3000 Arms, 2000 Soldiers,
with all the provision, February 19. 1644.

172 Scarborough castle taken by Sir John Meldrums forces, with all the
ammunition, March 25. 1645.

173 Weymouth re-taken the 27. of April, 1645. with all the ammunition.

174 Bletchington-house taken, April 28. with all the ammunition.

175 Evesham taken by Major-Generall Massey, and in it 30 Commanders, and
Gentlemen, 500 prisoners, 500 arms, 120 Horse, May 27. 1645.

These Mercies (with many more, which are expressed in the List of Sir Thomas
Fairfax his victories) has God bestowed upon Englands Lovers, and
Covenant-keeping Friends; for which let God have the glory, the Enemies to
Truth and Reformation the shame, and Schismatic Incendiaries, division and
jealousie-contrivers betwixt the two Nations, their due punishment, according
to our Covenant; that so God may be one, and his Name one in the three
Kingdoms: to which let Englands, Scotlands, and Irelands Friends say, AMEN. So
be it.

A perfect List of the many Victories obtained through the blessings of God by
the Parliaments Forces under the command of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax,
since the loss of Leicester, being last May, 1645. to this present month of
June, Anno Dom. 1646. with the names of the Garrisons, Towns, and Castles taken
from the Enemy.

1. THat never to be forgotten Naseby field; where, after a fierce battle, were
routed all the Kings Horse, killed and took all his Foot, with all the Ordnance
bag and baggage: Also the Kings Cabinet of Letters took, and since published,
and the design discovered. All this was performed the 14 of June, and after a
long march.

2. Leicester regained, June 17. with all the arms and ammunition therein,
with 400. men prisoners, 200. horse, which was performed after a very hard
march within three days afterward.

3. Highworth Garrison taken with all the ammunition.

4. The relief of poor oppressed, but faithful, Town of Taunton July 4. 1645.

5. The retaking of Ilchester in Sommersetshire, the 7 of July, with all the
ammunition.

6. The routing of Gorings Western army near Langport; taken 10 Colonells,
2000 prisoners, 2000 horse, 4000 arms, 35 Colors of horse, 21 of foot, four
pieces of Ordnance. This was most gallantly performed the tenth of July 1645.

7. The Garrison of Langport taken with all the ammunition therein.

8. The Garrison of Borough also taken, with all the arms and ammunition upon
the 14 of July 1645.

9. Bridgewater, a strong Garrison taken by storm with all the arms and
ammunition, July 22. 1645.

10 The city of Bath surrendered with six pieces of Ordnance, and all the
ammunition, July 22. 1645.

11. The Club-men in Somersetshire beaten, 2000 arms taken from them, and 300
of the ringleaders, upon the third of August 1645.

12. The strong castle of Sherborne taken by storm, with all the arms and
ammunition, Aug. 15. 1645.

13. The castle of Nunney in Somersetshire taken the 8. of September, with all
the ammunition.

14. Portshut point commanding Kings Road, taken upon the 11. of September
1645. and afterward.

15. The strong City of Bristoll most gallantly retaken by storm with all the
arms and ammunition.

16. The Town and castle of Devizes taken the 22 of September, with all the
arms and ammunition.

17. The castle of Farleigh in Somersetshire taken.

18. The castle of Cardif with 16 pieces Ordnance and 400 arms taken the 15 of
September, 1645.

19. Lacok House in Wiltshire taken with all the arms and ammunition therein.

20. Barkley castle in Glocestershire taken September. 26.

21. Chedwick castle near Lime taken, with all the arms and ammunition
therein.

22. The strong castle of Pontefract in Yorkshire, with all the arms and
ammunition.

Taken by our Brethren of Scotland.
23. The strong City and castle of Carlisle with all the arms and ammunition.
And likewise,

24. The impregnable castle of Scarborough taken.

25. The castle of Rabi in the county of Duresme taken: as likewise our
brethren since took.

26. The castle of Canon in Herefordshire.

The Forces under the command of the Committee of Shrewsbury, have been
prosperous in the taking of
27. Dauly castle, by composition, with all the arms.

28. Shraden castle, by composition, with all the arms.

29. Caos castle, by composition, with all the arms.

30. Stockley castle, by composition, with the arms.

31. Morton-Corbet House, by storm, with the arms.

32. Rowton castle, by composition, with the arms.

33. Linsell Manor. And

34. Aply House with the loss of very few men's lives, blessed be God for it.

35. The rebellious Army of Montrosse subdued and dispersed September. 16. 1645.

36. In the raiseing of the siege of Pembroke our English Army was likewise
prosperous.

37. Likewise a glorious victory over the Welsh three miles from Hereford,
where they were totally routed, 150 of them killed, 700 taken prisoners, four
pieces of Ordnance, five barrels of powder, and 800 arms, with all their
carriages and provision, the first of October, 1645.

38. The town and castle of Haverford West taken by storm October 3. 1645. and
in it two pieces of Ordnance, 140 arms.

39. The castle of Carew taken with all the Ammunition therein.

40. The castle of Picton in Pembrokeshire taken by storm, with all the arms
and ammunition.

41. Cardif castle in Glamorganshire taken with the arms and ammunition
therein.

42. The Kings forces totally routed at Rownton Heath near Chester, September
24, by Gods blessing upon the Armies under the command of the most victorious
Major General Points, where was killed the Earl of Litchfield, 1600 common
Soldiers taken prisoners, and 2000 horse, and ten Knights with some 90
commanders.

43. The castle of Sandall taken the second of October 1645. with all the
ammunition.

44. The city and castle of Winchester taken the sixth of October, with all the
ammunition therein.

45. The town and castle of Chipstow in Monmouthshire taken October. 11. with all
the ammunition.

46. Holt-Church Garrison taken by storm, the 13 of October, with all the
ammunition.

47. The plundring Garrison of Basing taken by storm with all the arms and
ammunition, by the wonderful blessing of God upon our Forces under the command
of that religious, succesfull, and truly valiant, Lieutenant Genesis Cromwell,
with Col. Dolbier October. 14. 1645.

48. The town and castle of Carmarthen taken the 14 of October. with all the
ammunition.

49. Langford House took the 17 of October. 1645. with all the arms and
ammunition therein.

50. The 17. of October. was Digby and Langdale routed in the North, going for
Scotland, their bag and baggage taken, and their journey stayed.

51. The castle of Tiverton near Exeter taken the 19 of October, with all the
ammunition therein.

52. The town and castle of Monmouth taken by storm October. 19. with all the
ammunition.

53. Digby and Langdale having again recruited, march again toward Scotland
and are again routed by the Scottish Army, bag and baggage taken, and Langdale
hardly escaped.

54. The Kings Welsh forces under the command of Sir William Vaughan were
totally routed by the Forces under the command of Sir William Brereton upon
the twenty ninth of October: Taken of the enemy prisoners four hundred Foot,
six hundred Horse, and killed two hundred upon the place, with small loss,
blessed be God for it.

55. The castle of Boulton, taken by composition, with all the arms and
ammunition.

56. Shelford House taken by storm, with all the ammunition and arms, October
1645.

57. Wharton House near Newark taken by composition, with all the arms and
ammunition.

58. The strong castle of Beeston in Cheshire taken by composition, with the
ammunition therein.

59. The Fort of Latham taken by composition with all the arms and ammunition.

60. The city of Hereford taken by stratagem December. 18. with all the arms
and ammunition.

61. The castle of Embleden in Carmarthenshire taken by composition, December
29. 1645.

62. The castle of Skipton taken the 22 of December, with all the arms and
ammunition.

63. The town of Tidbury taken by Sir John Gell, with all the arms and
ammunition.

64. The Garrison of Fulford near Exeter taken, with all the ammunition.

65 Chillington House near Exeter taken by a sudden storm, with all the
ammunition, December. 28. 1645.

66 Pouldram house near Exeter taken by storm, December. 29.

67 Plymouth relieved, and the Kings Forces beaten, Jan. 2. 1645.

68 The fort of Canterbury taken by a sudden storm, Jan. 4.

69 Budex Church near Plymouth taken by storm, and in it 100 prisoners, 100.
horse, 200. arms, Jan. 9. 1645.

70 Sir Francis Drakes house taken Jan. 12. by storm, and in it 100. prisoners,
besides other ammunition.

71 The town and castle of Dartmouth taken, Jan. 18. and in it one Earl, two
Colonels, 5. Lievtenant-Colonels, 3. Majors, 15. Captains, 22 Lievtenants, 12
Ensigns, 900 common Soldiers, 120 pieces of ordnance, two ships, and all the
ammunition.

72 The castle of Belvoir taken by composition, Jan. 20. 1645.

73 The city of Chester taken, with great store of arms and ammunition, by Sir
William Brereton, Jan. 29.

74 The town of Torrington taken by storm.

75 The Prince and L. Hopton routed in the West, 400 taken, with 200 horse, the
rest fled.

76 Cardiffe relieved by Ma. Genesis Laugherne.

77 The Kings Forces in Wales totally routed by the said Major General
Laugherne, 800 common Soldiers taken, 75 commanders, 250 slain, bag and
baggage taken.

78 Corf castle in Dorsetshire taken by storm and stratagem, with all the arms
and ammunition.

79 The Kings Forces having surprised Abbington, were by the Garrison soldiers
beaten out with great loss, in which service Col. Pane the Governor behaved
himself gallantly.

80 The Forces under the command of Major-Generall Web were routed Ian. 5. and
many prisoners taken.

81 Ashby-de-la-Zouch surrendered upon composition, with all the ammunition,
March 2. 1645.

82 Chirk castle surrendered to Sir Thomas Middleton.

83 Launceston taken, and Bodman quitted by the enemy in the West.

84. Listell taken, and four load of ammunition of the Lord Hoptons.

85. Saltash taken, and in it five pieces of Ordnance.

86. Ward-bridge and Temple-Guard taken, and the enemy totally routed and fled.

87. The town of Litchfield taken by Sir William Brereton, March 5. with the
loss of three men.

88. Sir R. Hoptons forces consisting of 5000 horse, disbanded, and delivered
up to Sir Tho. Fairfax.

89 Sir Jacob Ashley totally routed, and himself with 1500 men and horse
taken, with all their bag and baggage, March 21. 1645.

90. Dennis castle and Felford haven taken, with 26 pieces of Ordnance in a
Dunkirk ship that was coming for relief of Pedennis.

91 The Fort of Axmouth is surrendered: they were to march forth with their
swords only.

92. Inch House near Plymouth taken with four pieces of Ordnance, and 90
Muskets in it.

93. High Ark hall in Shropshire taken the 27 of March. 1646. with all the
ammunition.

94. Hilford Fort in the West surrendered, and in it 26 pieces of Ordnance.

95. The strong castle of Dennington surrendered, with all the ammunition, to
Col. Dolbier.

96. Bridgenorth Town taken by storm, the second of April. 1646. with all the
ammunition.

97. The castle with the Isle of Portland surrendered: with the arms and
ammunition.

98. The Kings body of horse routed near Faringdon, by Major Blunden, where was
taken 300 Horse, 200. men, and many arms.

99. Exeter taken by composition, April 13. 1646. with all the arms and
ammunition therein.

100. Ruthen castle surrendered to Lieutenant General Mitton: with all the
ammunition, bag and baggage, April 13.

101. Barnstaple surrendered by composition with all the arms to Sir Tho.
Fairfax, April 14.

102. The Fort of Ilford-comb, taken by storm.

103. S. Michaels Mount near Pendennis castle, surrendered, a very considerable
place.

104. Aberistwith castle in Wales surrendered to Col. Powel, with all the
ammunition, April 16.

105. Dunster castle in the West surrendered to Col. Black, Ap. 19. with all the
ammunition.

106 The castle of Tidbury surrendered to Sir William Brereton April 20. with
all the arms.

107. Woodstock Manor surrendered to Col. Ireton, and Col. Rainsborough, April
27.

108. The castle of Bridgenorth surrendered.

109. The strong castle of Banbury surrendered to Colonel Whaley.

110. The Garrison of Newark surrendered to the Commissioners of both Kingdoms.
And his Majesty's coming to our brethren of Scotland.

111. Penrin in Wales the Bishop of Yorks house, surrendered to Colonel Mitton.

112. Dudley castle in Staffordshire surrendered to Sir William Brereton May 12.

113. Hartlebury castle surrendered to Colonel Morgan May 16. with all the
ammunition.

114. Ludlow castle and town surrendered to Colonel Birch, June 1. 1646.

115. Radcot-house surrendered to Sir Thomas Fairfax.

116. The town and castle of Caernarvan surrendered.

117. The strong Garrison of Bostol-house surrendered.

118. Sherburn-house surrendered to Sir Thomas Fairfax.

119. The strong city of Oxford, his Majesty's chief Garrison, surrendered,
with all the ammunition.

120. The Garrison of Faringdon surrendered

July 1646.
The City of Worcester with all the ammunition. Lichfield Close taken with all
the ammunition. Wallingford-Castle taken.
In August 1646.
The castle of Gothridge taken. The castle of Rothian taken. Ragland castle
surrendered. Pendennis castle surrendered. Flint castle surrendered. The Isle of
Cily surrendered. Denbigh castle surrendered. Conway Castle taken. Harleigh
castle taken. Holt castle taken. The Isle of man taken. The Isle of Garnsey
taken. The Isle of Iersey taken.
A Catalogue of the Earls, Lords, Knights, Generals, Colonels,
Lieutenant-Colonels, Majors, Captains, and Gentlemen of worth and quality
slain on the Parliament and Kings side, since the beginning of our uncivil
civil Wars; With the number of Common Soldiers slain on both sides: As also a
List of those that have fled out of the Kingdom.

Of the Parliament side these following slain.
THe Lord S. John slain at Edg-hil fight. The Lord Brook slain at Lichfield.
Sir William Fairfax brother to the Lord Fairfax slain at the raising of the
siege before Mountgomery castle. Sir John Meldrum mortally wounded in the
admirable service performed by him at Scarborough Castle. Major General Charles
Fairfax, brother to his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, slain at Marston-Moor
fight. Colonel Charles Essex slain at Edg-hil fight. Lieutenant Colonel Ramsey
slain also at Edg-hil fight. Colonel Tucker slain at Newbury fight. Sergeant
Major Quarles slain at Branford. Sergeant Major Stawhan slain at the fearful
fight betwixt Friznol-hil and Tough-hil. Capt. George Massey slain at Newbery
fight. Captain Hunt slain at Newbery fight. Captain Lazy slain at Branford
fight. Captain Lister slain at Tadcaster fight. Captain Nutty slain at the
siege of Reading. Captain Williams slain near Oswestry. Cap. Lieut. Fletcher
slain near Oswestry. Lieutenant Richard Macock slain at the siege of Ragland
Castle. Captain Pue slain at Marston-Moor fight. Mr. Hugh Popham slain. Major
Burton slain. Major Haynes slain at St. Beaudeux. Captain Dove slain at
Sherborn Castle. Two other Captains, whose names are not perfectly known, slain
there also. Lieut. Col. Ingoldsby slain at Hilford castle. Captain Allen slain
near Burleigh Garrison. Major Sidenham slain at Melcomb. Captain Oglesby. Major
Jackson. Major Bradbury. Major Fitz Simons. Colonel John Gunter. The full
number 33.
Slain on the Kings side these following.
The Earl of Lindsey Lord General of his Majesty's Forces slain at Edg-hil. The
L. George Stuart slain also at Edghil. The Lord John Stuart slain at Cheriton.
The Lord Bernard Stuart slain at Routon Heath: All these three Lords being of
blood royal, brothers to the Duke of Lenox. The Earl of Northamton slain near
Stafford. The Earl of Denbigh slain near Brimidgham. The Marquess of Viville
slain at Newbery fight. E. of Caernarvan slain at Newberie fight. The Earl of
Sunderland. The Earl of Kingston after he was taken prisoner, going in a Pinace
toward Hull, by the Earl of Newcastles Cavaliers that thought to have rescued
him was shot to death and none hurt besides him. The Lord Grandison. The Lord
Faulkland. The Lord Darcy, eldest son to the Earl of Munmouth slain at
Marston-Moor fight. Lord Ashton slain near Dudley Castle. General Cavendish
slain at Gainsbourough. General Mynne slain at Ridmarly. Sir Edward Verny the
Kings Standardbearer slain at Edg-hil fight. Sir Joh. Harper slain at Bradford
in York-sh. Sir Bevil Greenvil son to the Marquess of Hartford slain near
Marsh-field. Sir George Bowls slain near Horn-castle. Sir William Wentworth
brother to the Earl of Strafford. Sir Francis Dacres near kinsman to the Lord
Dacres. Sir William Lambton. Sir Marmaduke Ludson. Sir Thomas Metton. Monsieur
S. Paul a French Gentleman. Sir Richard Goodhil. Sir William Crofts slain near
Stoaksey Castle. Sir Thomas Not slain at Highworth in Wiltshire. Colonel Owen
slain at Holt bridge. Sir Bryan Stapleton. Sir Francis Carnabie. Sir Richard
Hutton. Colonel Monroe slain at Edg-hil fight. Colonel Wane slain near
Nantwich. Colonel Ewers. Colonel Roper. slain. Colonel Slingsby Colonel
Fenwick Colonel Prideaux Colonel Atkins Col. Marrow slain near Crowton House.
Col. Baynes slain at Malpass. Col. Connyers slain also at Malpass. General
Gorings brother slain at Newbery fight. Colonel Hauton slain near Namptwich.
General Gorings Quartermaster General of Horse. General Gorings
Quartermaster of Foot. Colonel Philips slain near Winchester. Lieutenant
Colonel Howard slain also near Marsh-field. Lieutenant Colonel Bowls slain
at Alton in Surrey. Lieutenant Colonel Lister slain near Namptwich. Lieutenant
Colonel Stonywood slain. Sergeant Major Beaumont drowned near Leeds. Sergeant
Major Purvey slain at Preston. Sergeant Major Smith slain at Gainsbrough.
Sergeant Major Lower slain near Marshfield. Mayor Wells slain at Gloucester. The
Major of Preston slain. Major Heskith slain at Malpass. Major Trevillian
slain. Major Hatton Farmer slain near Abington. Major Pilkinton slain in
Worcestershire. Major Duet slain near Radcot-bridge. Major Heynes slain. Major
Pollard slain at Dartmouth. Captain Wray slain Captain Bins Captain
Houghton Captain Baggot Captain James slain near Marshfield. Captain
Cornisham slain. Captain Plunket slain about Strozby Heath. Sir Joh. Smith,
brother to the L. Cottington. Major Threave slain. Captain Fry Colonel
Billingsly slain. Capt. Cottington slain near Ruthencastle. Major Casts slain
at Basing-house. Six Priests slain at Basing-house. Lievtenant-Colonell Gardner
slain near Winchester. The full number 82.
With diverse more of quality which were found dead after several fights, but
to the Parliaments forces unknown.

Common Soldiers slain on the Parliaments side.
AT Babell hill 6 At Portsmouth 1 At Manchester 4 At Keinton 380 At Brainford
about 160 At Winchester 14 At Tadcaster 8 At Bradford 15 At Henley 8 At Leeds
12 At Namptwich 33 At Seybridge 16 At Preston 4 Near Stafford 40 At Middlewich
6 At Lichfield close 98 At Dorchester I Captain 1 At Causam-bridg 5 At High
Arcall 40 At Hereford 1 At Stafford 1 Near Newark 2 At the Trench 11 Near
Nottingham 10 At Friznot hill 18 At Gloucester siege 8 At Newbery fight 170. at
Burleigh-house 7. In Kent 8. At Weem 5 At Alton 5 At Plymouth siege raising 16
At raising the siege of Namptich 2 At Lincoln storm 115. At Milbrook 6. At an
assault at Lime 18. Of the Garrison at Lime 16. At Dudley castle 17. At Marston
Moor near York 340. At Newbridg 40. In Cornwall 28. At Mountgomery castle 40.
At Beezly 10. At Peel 1. At Helmsley Castle 4. At Heightley 9. At Weymouth 10.
At Holt bridge 6. Near Tedbury 7. At Taunton 100. At Evesham 5. At Naseby 300.
At Barkley castle 3. At Sherburn castle taking 210. At Basing 40. At Sherburn
8. At Carlisle sands 30. At Beaudeaux 30. At Bristol 160. At Torrington 20 At
Cardif many hurt. The total number of common Soldiers on the Parliaments side
in all 2533.

Slain on the Enemies side of the Inferior sort.
At the Leaguer before Hull 23. At Coventry 70. At Southam by L. Brooks forces
40. At Sherburn castle or Babel hill 20. At Caldrot by Mr. Purfreys household 18.
At Portsmouth of Col. Gorings 3. At Worcester fight diverse, the number unknown,
its supposed 100. At Manchester of the E. of Darby's 200. At Keinton fight
2000. At Branford several Cart-loads, supposed that were slain 100. At
Winchester 20. At Tadcaster of Newcastles men 200. At Chichester 1. At Bradford
by Sir Thomas Fairfax against Newcastle 100. At Burford of Birons men 7. At
Newbridg 2. At Henly of the L. Grandisons 30. At Leeds of Newcastles men 28. At
Namptwich about 40. And many mortally wounded. At Preston of quality 8. At
Madbury 100. Near Stafford of the E. of Northamptons men 140. At Middlewich of
Sir Tho. Ashtons 30. Near Malmsbury 10. In the Forest of Dean by Sir W. Waller
600. At Lichfield close 30 At Sherborn town 10 At Dorchester 60 At Causam
bridge 100 At Hereford 20 At the taking of Stafford by Sir William Brereton 3
Near Newark by Col. Cromwell 100 At Whit-Church 150 Near Nottingham diverse, but
of note 4 At Friznol hill 200 At Gloucester siege at least 220 In skirmish at
Auborn hills 80 At Newbery fight of dead and wounded, 140 cart-load. Slain
about 200 In the pursuit near Reading 100 At Gainsborough siege raising 300 At
Stamford 200 Near Burleigh of club-men 50 In Kent at Tunbridge 20 In fight by
the E. of Manchester near Horn-castle 1000 At Weem 6 cart-load of dead, about
60 At Plymouth 25 At Alton 40 At Plymouth siege raising 100 At Winsby fight 100
At Namptwich siege 500 Slain in raising the siege 800 By the L. Fairfax near
Hull 30 Near Nottingham 100 By Col. Lambert at Bradford 100 At Alrezford 400 At
the storming of Lincoln 400 At Lime 140 At an assault against Lime by stratagem
400 At Dudley castle by the E. of Denbigh 100 In all against Lime in that siege
2000 At Marston Moor 41^0 In Penbroke-shire by Colon. Laughorn and Cap. Mitton
500 At New bridge 200 At Ridmarly 100 Near Crowton house by S. W. Brereton 400
At Mountgomery castle 500 At Pool 16 At Newbery 200 At Taunton siege 1000 At
Nazeby 800 Besides Irish Queans 300 At Langport 220 At Routon Heath 400 At
Bazing house 300 The full number 21560

A List of those that have sled out of the Kingdom.
THe Lord Goring senior. Sir John Finch, etc. Sir Francis Windebank The Lord
George Digby. The Earl of Yarmouth. The Lord Percy. The Marquis of Newcastle.
The L. Widrington. Sir Hugh Cholmley. The L. Goring junior. General Hinderson.
The L. Newport. Mr. Walt. Mountague. L. Culpepper. The E. of Huntington. The L.
of Loughborough. The E. of Northampton. Sir Rich. Greenvill. Sir Nich. Crispe.
L. Hopton The L. Wentworth. The L. Capel. Sir Endi: Porter. Major General
Taplane. Sir VVil. Neave. M. Ashburnham, with many others.
COurteous Reader, take notice that many more were slain at other places, but
in regard I could not have certain intelligence of them, I thought it fit
rather to break off then to proceed superfluously, here being all that were
slain in chief Battles and Skirmishes at the most remarkable Towns and Castles
that were besieged and taken by storm from the Enemy.

FINIS.
An Addition of the late proceedings of the Army to this present.
IN April 1648 a great tumult, insurrection, and mutiny first began on the
Lords day in the afternoon in the County of Middlesex, where they seized on the
colors of one of the Trained Bands, of the said County, and being dispersed by
some of the Lord G. forces did gather together within the City of London, and
liberties thereof, and in a riotous manner did break open diverse houses, and
Magazens, and took away plate and money and seized upon the drums of the trained
Bands, seized upon the Gates, Chains, and Watches, marched to the Lord Mayors,
and shot into his house, beat back his Guards, and killed one of them, came to
the Magazeen at Leadenhall, but by the speedy and seasonable aid of the Lo. G.
Horse, their Drak and coulors were taken, for which the Militia in the name of
the City, by unanimous consent of the Common Counsel, was to return to his
Excellency the Lord General hearty thanks.

A rising in Norwich, where they seized upon the Magazin, and those that fired
the same were destroyed, but those that were cordial friends to the Parliam.
being underneath, the house fell part of it upon them, that part below them
were all saved, one having his head seen, was dug out, after he was out, he
told of others, until all were dug out without loss of life or limb.

The old Lord Goring was on the 5 of June 1648. proclaimed General of the
Kentish forces upon the hill near Alisford, where their body was drawn up,
consisting of 8000 men, and 3000 more in Maidston and Alisford coming as a
fresh supply, there were 300 slain and about 1300 prisoners, among which were
Gentlemen of good quality, Sir Gamaliell Dudley, Sir William Brookman, Esquire
Scot, Maj. Price and others, there were about 500 Horse, 3000 Arms, nine foot
colors, and eight pieces of Cannon, with store of Ammunition taken: their word
was KING and KENT, ours TRUTH, the rest marched over Rochester bridge with
about 3000 Horse and Foot, most of them were Cavaliers Prentices, and
watermen, these fled over the water into Essex by Woolidge and Greenwich.

June 30 1648. 600 horse met for the King about Kingstone, and the Duke of
Buckingham with them, Lord Francis, Earl of Holland, Lo. Andrew, Lo. Camden,
and others.

Proclamation was made, that they expected the Parliament would have settled
the Kingdom, but because they would not, they would fetch the King, and live
and dye with him to settle it, also Col. Leg and others of the Kings Officers.

Captain Pretty with a party of Horse from Windsor fell into Kingston and took
20 prisoners, and beat all the Royalists out of the town.

6 July Lord Gray of Groby sent a party of Horse under Colonel Hacket, took
200 of them and routed the whole body of them near Wiloby.

5 July Col. Rossiler had a victory against the Pontefret forces, 4 Cornets. 2
Ensigns, 42 Gentlemen of quality, 500 Prisoners were all Horse except 100
Dragoones, 8 Carriages taken with Arms and Ammunition, Col. Pocklington, Col.
Cholmley slain; all their Colors bag and baggage taken.

10 July was defeated totally the Royal party, with the Earl of Holland at St.
Needs by a party of Horse commanded by Col. Scroop sent from the Leagure before
Colchester, the Parliaments Forlorn charged, and routed them before the body
came up, but when the body came up, they in an instant fled several ways yet
many fell, the Duke of Buckingham fled with about 60 Horse toward Lincolnshire,
the E. of Holland was taken in his chamber, Sir Gil. Gerrard, Col. Skemisher,
M. Holland, M. Sleping, Lieu. Col. Goodwin, C. Dolbeire slain, C. Leg. wounded,
10 prisoners taken, Kenelm Digbyes son slain. 100 gallant Horse taken, good
store of gold and silver, good clothes, weapons good store.

10 July. 1648. was surrendered Pembrooke Town and Castle to Lieut. Genesis
Crumwell for the use of the Parliament, upon honorable terms, The Commanders
were to depart the Kingdom and not to return within two years, other gentlemen
and private soldiers had free liberty to go to their habitations.

1 July 1648, Were prisoners taken in Northumberland by Col. Lilburn, of which
Col. Gray commander in chief, ^00 Soldiers, between 4 and 500 Horse and many
Arms, they were 1200 and Coll. Lilburne 900, 600 from Barwicke should have
joined with Col. Gray that day.

A great defeat given to the enemies forces in Wales under Laughorne, he was
eight thousand, and we were three thousand and took them prisoners. And
Chepstow, and other Garrisons were there reduced: As also Appleby Castle,
Brugham and other places of strength in the North, And Waymor Castle in Kent. A
good success in North Wales against Sir John Owin.

The defeat of Sir Henry Lingen and his party, on the 17th of the same month in
Montgomeryshire, by the Forces under the Command of Colonel Horton, and Major
Robert Harley, and Col. Dingley.

Newcastle 10 Aug. 1648. Lieu. Col. Lilburn Deputy Governor of Tinmouth, sends
most of his own soldiers in parties abroad, and declares for the King and
Himself, armed such prisoners that were in the Castle, The Officer that kept
the Arms being but a Corporal he ran through for refusing to deliver them; a
sad and ominous action, some leap over the wall to give Sir Arthur Hazleridge
our Governor notice.

In the interim, Lilburne summons all the saylors and others to come in and
assist him for the King: Sir Arthur in the mean time sends a party under
Lieut. Col. Ashfield, also with a 100 Dragoones, who with such ladders as could
be got, got thither before morning, yet not so private but some shot was made,
they fall to storming, Major Cobbit leading on the Forlorn, and after a hot
dispute the Castle was recovered, all in arms put to the sword, the Lieut.
Col. found dead, whom a Soldier espied, cuts off his head, and sets it upon a
pole on the wall where it now stands, crying, God bless the Parliament. The
Soldiers got at least 2000 li. in money and plate, which was laid up by Lieu.
Col. Lilburnes Royal friends.

Aug. 14. 1648. 800 land soldiers and saylors came to land, with a resolution
to fall upon Col. Riches and Col. Hewsons men, as they lay entrenched, but
being discovered 300 Musketeers were drawn out of Col. Hewsons, Col. Maj.
Husbands mounted 100 Horse, The Princes forces marched up with a great
resolution, the Major wheels about in way of retreat which occasioned them to
advance in conceit of a victory, the horse flanked them, the 300 Muketiers at
the same time discharged, and presently the Princes party is in disorder; the
Parliaments fell to execution, near 200 slain on the place, many of quality
taken, 100 prisoners, 300 Arms, the rest wounded and fled.

Sandoune delivered up.

It is observable, that Aug. 17 the Covenant was taken in Scotl. and their Army
on Aug. 17 was routed for the violation thereof in England.

A List of the Particulars of the Victory against the Scots from the first to
the last.
Taken Prisoners.
Duke Hamilton Lord Genesis the E. of Callendor L. G. and two Earls besides, Maj.
Genesis Vanrusk. Lieu. Col. Bayley, five Lords, five Knights, 16 Colonels, 20
Lieutenant Colonels, 25 Sergeant Majors, 70 Captains, 100 Lieutenants, 90
Ensigns, 30 Cornets. 8 Trumpeters, 350 inferior Officers, 300 Servants.

Taken in all
9000 Soldiers by L. Genesis Crum. 2000 soldiers in several places, 3000
Soldiers in Vloxter, 4000 Horse, 3500 Horse Arms, 15000 foot arms, 160
Colors, 2500 slain.

Ours under the command of Lieut. Genesis Crumwell was but 8600.

Letters were read in the House of Commons from Col. Rich that he, Col. Hewson,
etc. have taken Deal Castle for the Parliament, Officers, and Soldiers to
march away, and leave all behind them, giving their faith never to engage
against the Parliament. There marched out Captain Wynn the Governor, and 200
more, besides 16 that were sick.

Aug. 19 Taken Prisoners in Colch. The E. of Norwich, L. Capel, L. Louborough,
Sir Charl. Lucas, was shot to death Sir Geor. Lyle, was likewise shot to death,
Sir William Compton, Sir Barn. Gascoign, Sir Abra. Skipman, Sir Hugh Oreley,
Sir Hen. Appleton, Sir Rich: Mauleverer. Sir Lodo. Dyer: Sir Char. Hastings,
etc. Colonels, Will: Maxey, Far, Ayloff, Bard: Hamond, Till, Heath, Tewk,
Chester, Gilburt, Culpepper, Saver, Slingsby, Lancaster, etc. 183 Knights, Col.
and Esquires. 300 other Officers, 3067 Soldiers, 5000 Arms, 26 Ordnance.

Scarborough taken by Col. Bethel by storm, with the loss of six men, and
some wounded, and 35 of the Enemy slain, and near 200 prisoners, September. 16.
1648.

The Names of those that are appointed to attend his Majesty during the Treaty.

Duke of Richmond, Marquess of Hertford, E. of Southampton, Earl of Lindsey,
George Kirk, James Leviston, Henry Murray, Thomas Davis, Hugh Hen, Humphery
Rogers, William Levet, John Rivers, Sir Ed. Sidenham, Rob. Tirwhit, John
Howsdon, Mrs. Wheeler with such maids as she shall make choice of. Sir Fowlke
Grevile, Capt. Titus, Cap. Burrowes, M. Cresset, M. Ansley, M. Firebrace. Dr.
Juxon, Dr. Dupper, Dr. Sanderson, Dr. Turner, and Doctor Honywood, Sir Thomas
Gardner, Sir Orlando Bridgeman, Mr. Jeffery Palmer, Mr. Thomas Cook, Mr. Jo.
Vaughan, Edward Walker Esquire, Mr. Philip Warwick, Mr. Nicholas Owdart, Mr.
Charles Whitacre, Mr. Philip Newton, Mr. Clement Kinnersley, Dr. Ducke, Dr.
Reves two civil Lawyers.

The names of the Commissioners sent from the Parliament.

Of the Lords House.

The Earl of Northumberland, Earl of Pembrooke, Earl of Salisbury, Earl of
Middlesex, Viscount Sea.

And of the House of Commons.

The Lord Wayneman, Sir Henry Vain, Sir John Pots, Mr. Crew, Mr. William
Perepoint, Mr. Denzill Hollis: Sir Harbottle Grimstone, Mr. Glin, Mr. Bulkeley,
and Mr Samuel Brown.

Chaplains for the Commissioners, Mr. Caroll, Mr. Seymer, Mr. Hearle, Mr.
Vines, Mr. Marshall.

FINIS.

