THE CHRISTMAS ORDINARY, A Private Show; Wherein is expressed the JOVIAL
FREEDOM of that Festival.

As it was Acted at a Gentleman's House among other REVELS.

By W. R. Master of Arts.

Nill Lascivius est Carisiano;
Saturualibus ambulat Togatus.
Mart. lib. 6. Epigr. 22. LONDON, Printed for James Courtney, at the Golden
Horse-shoe, on Saffron Hill, 1682.

THE PREFACE.
AS the Stages of our Theaters, so that of the World too, is thronged with
Comedy; and the Representations of Mirth have been of late so numerous, that
the whole Universe ere long will be a Vatican of Play-Books. And indeed it is no
wonder they swarm so, seeing whatsoever is Acted within Doors, is immediately
exposed to veiw without, and the Play Houses in London are but as it were the
Tireing Rooms to the Theater or Cirque of Nature. Every Book sellers Shop now
is a Duke's House, and presents us with a Play; and almost every Street (like a
Salisbury Court) Exhibits Scenes for Pleasure, and Diversion. The Boxes and Pit
have been as much Tormented with the noise of Farce, and Fable, as Fronto's
Plane-Trees, with the tedious Repetitions of Hoarse Poets; Juven. Satyr. 1. and
as his Marbles burst through the severe Infliction of too much Poetry: So these
have underwent their Fate, cracking almost under the Penance of clamorous
Buffonry. So that now we have such variety of Humors to tickle our Spleens, and
such mighty Helps for the promoteing of Laughter, that I cannot conceive how
the World can be Sad again. And indeed, that it may never sit Pensive in the
shades of Melancholy, nor sink into Languors through excessive Sorrow, I make
bold to present it with a Particle of Apollo, a Glympse of Phoebus, a Beam of
Wit, and Eloquence, to chase away Night from Clowdy Brows; here is a Dose of
Cordials, some Distillations of Helicon to cheer up, and revive all Drooping
Spirits.

It Is the Firstborn of a young Academick Head, which since has been Delivered
of most excellent Productions. It has lain Dormant almost half an Age, and
has only crawled out in Manuscript into some few hands; who likeing the
Entertainment they found in it, thought it too good a Morsel to be Devoured by
Moths, but supposed it a fitter Bit to feed some Book seller, and therefore
wished it might rather be advanced to the Clutches of the one, than miserably be
condemned to the grinders of the other.

Here are as Ingenious Passages, and as Humorous Conceits, and as Lively
Descriptions, as any occurs in the most celebrated Dramatick. But if these
Beautiful Charms will not in the least allure the Reader, then let the
Deformity of the Shape invite and draw him; for it is neither exact Comedy,
Farce, or Tragedy, but a spatch'd Chimaera; that has somewhat of every one,
and the Spirit, Flame, Elixir of them all. It Is a Monster in Learning, as great
as any that occurrs in Nature, and if men will not read it for its Ingenuity,
yet I hope they will come see it, as a Prodigy, and so gratify their
Curiosity, if not please their Fancy.

Helmdon, October. 18. 1682. W. R.

The SCENE Vbivis.
The Time from Christmas till Twelfth-night.

Dramatis Personae.
Mr. Make Peace, A Countrey-Justice. Astrophil, An Astronomer, his Son.
Humphry, The Justice's Man. Drink-Fight, A Jovial Soldier. Austin. An Hermit.
Shab-Quack, A poor Chyrurgeon. Roger. An Apprentice to Shab-Quack. Win-all, An
Host of an Ordinary.
An Inducted Show.
Apollo. Terra. Ver. AEstas. Autumnus. Hyems.
THE ARGUMENT.
ROGER escaping from his Master Shab-Quack, at Christmas Time, me is with
Drink-fight, and joins with him in a Knot of Merriment: They also inveigle the
Hermit and Astrophil. Mr. Make-peace being pensive at his Son's Departure,
sends Humphry to enquire him out, who, in the Disguise of a Traveller, finds
them frolicking at an Ordinary; who insinuates himself into their Mirth:
Afterward, with false Dice, cheats them, and escapes. They afterward,
wrangling about the Reckoning, beat their Host, who summons them all before the
Justice, and runs to Shab-Quack for Cure. Mr. Make-peace perceiving his Son
Astrophil amongst them, joyfully entertains him and the rest. Shab-Quack
pardons his Servant's Christmals Merriment, and the Hermit, in a jolly Humor,
is bound Apprentiee to the Host.

THE PROLOGUE.
WE need not sift our Audience, since we may,
In each Man's Looks read an artic'late Play.
Acted in mirthful Glances from our Stage;
We bar those Histrio-masticks of the Age:
For what is here worth their Envy? Whose grim Star,
More sourly snarles than AEsop 's Picture far.
Who wear such Vin'gar Faces, and swollen Spite,
That the Spectators might be made the Sight.
This to the Cynick Spies --
Since all then would seem candid, let none use
Satyrick Rods to such a Cradle Muse.
She Is your Camelion, and the Air strikes dead,
Or keeps alive; she by your Smiles is fed.
Expect not then those Men's high fancied Streins,
Where Wit is the Complexion of their Brains;
Whose Words so strained from Dross, so purely placed,
As if they were not only ranked but cast,
Alas, it is hard to fit the Palate, where
It Is placed in the Eye, and Taste dwells in the Ear.
But if our Infant-Cook shall please your nice
Judgment with Messes, which your Breath must spice,
We'll joy our Ordinary with such Resort,
Will both be made a College, and a Court.
The Christmas Ordinary.
Enter Drink-Fight and Roger, at several Doors. SCAENA PRIMA.
Drink-Fight. WEll met my brave Roger! Thou wandering Shop of Surgery! Thou
Aesculapius or Commonwealth of Physicians, that has engrost the Monopoly of
Cures! How fares thy Master Shab-Quack?


Roger. Faith (Captain,) he lives like an Horse-Leech upon other Folks Blood,
and his best Setting up is, when his Customers break their Legs, or their
Pates, and then he is the exact Emblem of Envy, or a bad Officer: for he grows
Fat by his Neighbors Crosses, and scrapes up Wealth by Corruption. I and my
Master are like to City-Scavangers; for whilst he is the Broom still cleansing
their Wounds, it is my Trade always to cleanse their Pockets. The last
Redemption he practiced was upon your Pinnace, when the French-Fowling-Peice,
charged with Stone Bullets, shot you through the Mediterranean, till your
Gun-Room sprang a Leak, and your Pump ran blood like a knocked Marrow-bone; but
ever since, he has lain moulding at home, like the rusty Spits in Lent, clean
out of service. He has been a Fortnight in Commons with the Rats, and has
scarce had maintenance to keep him from Dining upon his own Lice: But let those
Sores and Plasters go with a Pox to 'em; I Will feed no more on other men's
Cuttings, nor live a tame Cannibal upon Man's Flesh. I Will walk more Free than
the unlimitted Air, more Licentious, than the Dutch Mariners in a Pillage. I
hate all Vocations, but calling for Liquor, and I scorn to be overruled by any
Body, but Strong-Drink.


Drink-Fight. Why then thou art an Acute Rascal --


Roger. Faith (Sir!) I think I am; Rogue, and Rascal are my Right Worshipful
Surnames, and to deserve these Titles of Note, is the Ambition of my Profession.


Drink-Fight. Then let us join (my Acromatical Villain!) that the History of
Roguery may stuff up Chronicles, and be thought too monstrous a Subject for
Tragedy, that hereafter we may be Sainted for unimitable Villainies. I that
heretofore have danced Anticks up to the Chin in an Occan of Blood, when the
Vesuvius of my Throat (like Phlegeton) belched out nothing but Flame, and
Thunderbolts; and the Skirmish has been so hot, that I lived like a
Salamander in the Fire: I have Wintered e're now Three Months in a Coat of Ice,
instead of Armor, and been fed with nothing but the North Wind temperately
Fanned by the warm blast of Fame. I have lain down a Man, and have rose up a
Snow-ball. My Belly has had as many holes-bor'd in it as the Danaid's Tub; so
that I have been fain to tie up my Breeches with my Heart Strings, and twine my
Guts about my Wrist, like a roll of Match. But I have since forbore all bloody
Pates, but the bleeding of Claret Hogs-heads; all Weapons go against my
Stomach, but Fried Pikes, and Sword-Fish; the Metal of my Dagger is
Metamorphoz'd into jingling Spurs, but the brazen Hilt flew in my face. My Tent
is become an Ordinary, where my Buff-Jacket is converted into Leathern Jacks,
and my Armor is coined into Pewter-Wine-Pots. I have been lately reputed a
most renowned Cheater, and indeed I borrowed that Art of a certain City-Major,
who was properly married to his Trade; for his Wives Petty-coat was his best
Warehouse; whence he grew to be the Frontis-peice of the Town; for the Ford he
maintained in his Cellar, and the Ox in his Head. But come my Sublimated
Alchimy of madness; Let Us pursue our Speculations, and whom we find Heretical
against our Ordinary, we'll either convert him to our Orthodoxal Apostasy, or
send him to Purgatory to do Penance for being sober at Christmas.


SCENE II.
Enter Astrophil solus, as waking out of Sleep, with a Globe by him. Astrophil.
Two Bunches of Stars rode by without my leave; they are Traitors to our Crown;
they should have asked a Ticket for their Pass. Yonder Is a Cloud sick with a
Timpany, it is now delivered. Apollo with Sagitta fleadg'd with Phaenix
Feathers, shot through Iris Bow, and slew the Python Miracles! The Planets are
all in a Combustion, and the Constellations are turned Lunatics. What is it
Holy Day in Heaven? See! the gods are drunk with Nectar, and the Stars which
enjoy continual Wakes, are now joined in a Morris Dance; sometimes Stationary,
some Retrograde, whilst the Harmony of the Spheres make up the consort. Look
yonder are Caprae Saltantes skipping a Jig, and Lyra plays to 'em. Arctophylax
has put a Ring in the Nose of Vrsa Major, and leads him about, whilst he
Dances the Bears mask. Sure the Heavens keep open House, for Castor and Pollux
are drinking a Syllibub, in via Lactea, and Vindemiatrix pledges them in
Crater. Yonder Cephus has gotten the Arctick Pole for a Fishing Rod, tied to
the Meridian Line, and is Angling for Piscer; Crux, Pavo, and Columba are a
roasting by an Ignis Fatuus, and a Surloin of Taurus is Dressing, whilst Virgo
turns the Spit. They dare not but invite me to their Gawdys. It Is good being in
Heaven at this time a Year. Well! I must consult the Lady Cassiopeia,
concerning the Revels; for she has sat contemplating in her Judgment Seat,
with a Parliament of Stars, and Libra has been all this while weighing the
matter.


[Exit. SCENE III.
Enter Austin, running before Drink-Fight, and Roger. Drink-Fight. Will thou
still Pilgrimize thus mutely, like a Traveling Sign-post, and be gazed at as
an Owl at Noonday, till the School Boys Martyr Thee with Snow Balls and Rotten
Eggs? Was Nature out of Breath when she made Thee, that she gave Thee no more
Spirit? Or had Prometheus no fire left, when Thou were framed, and so thy Soul
was made of some dying Snuff? Well! either drench thy self from this sober
Madness, or like Medusa's head, I Will look Thee to a Stone Bottle.


Austin. Legions, Legions of Evil Spirits, ascending and descending in the Air!


Roger. Nay, We'll Anatomize Thee alive, then screw out thy Bones, and make
Tobacco Pipes of 'em; thy Skull we'll turn into a Sack Bowl; thy Flesh we'll
mangle to make Mince Pies of, for Cerberus, but thy Cave shall be turned into a
Bawdy House, with the Sign of the Elephant hung out.


Drink-Fight. Ha, Ha, Hey!


Austin. Cursed be ye that persecute the Innocent and Harmless!


Roger. Are you still Canting over those highway Phrases of Religion? nay,
never fly, we'll be everlasting Duns to bait Thee.


Drink-Fight. And haunt thy side more inseperably, than thy Evil Genius.


[Exeun. SCENE IV.
Enter Mr. Make-peace and Humphry attending him. Mr. Make-peace. Go Humphry put
my Son out of his Melancholy Element, or else he will study himself to
Whit-Leather. O this Astrophil does so Banquet me with joy, that I am almost
cloyed with my Felicity, and I grow hoarse in Gratulatory Praises. He is such a
Son, whom the Creation worships; the Map, or Common Place Book of the gods; the
Arch Register of Heavens Star Chamber. To me he is a mere Dictionary of hard
words, and confounds me with new Plantations in the Planets. He can tell who
made the Moon first a Cuckoldess, and gave her Horns, and has extracted a
Quintessence to cure the Orbs of their Vertigo, and their Palsy of
Trepidation. He has invented a Magical Spell will fright the Sun from his
Coach Box, and can toss the Earth up and down like a Foot Ball. He told me that
Jupiter's Larder stood wide open, and promised me a mess of Constellations for
my Breakfall. He says, He Will pluck the wings of Time, and make me a Feather
Bed, and my House shall be paved with a Quarry of Thunder Bolts. I am Grandsir
to some Four and Twenty Folio's of his Issue already. He means to people whole
Libraries with his Families, and there hang 'em in Chains to Immortality.


Humphry. Sir, I have been more narrowly Inqulisitive, than Revenge, or
Frantic Jealousy. I left never a Cranny, or Eyelet-hole unsearch'd, as if I
had sought a dead Fly, or an Emmets Eg. There Is never a pair of Snuffers, or
Inkhorn in the House but I have examined, and half worn out, with often turning
of them. But there was no man living there. Sir! my young Master is departed.


Mr. Make-peace. How? departed? why he cannot die, the trembling Fates are
afraid of him, least he should prove their Destiny, and Death himself pays Fine
to him for a Lease of his Dominion.


Humphry. Sir! He is not to be found.


Mr. Make peace. What? not in his Study? thou lie, and yet it is true, [aside]
Go call in Astrophil, or -- what do thou answer me? go seek him speedily --
where will thou run? -- will thou go before thou know whether? And I cannot
direct thee. Fly swiftly every where, and recover him quickly, or I shall not
have a dram of Peace, and Justice.


[Exeunt. SCENE V.
Enter Dring-Fight with a Pot and Cup, Astrophil, Austin, and Roger with their
Cups. Drink-Fight to Astrophil. Were it not braver still to bathe thy Spirits
in warm streams of Nepenthe, than to stew thy self up in a Fur'd Gown, and melt
away thy Soul like a Watch Candle? Away with those Fume Bibbers, that drink
nothing but night Air, and Lamp Smoke! Here Is a Liquor will glaze your Face,
till it shine like the Man in the Moon! O! 'twill create such an Intelligence in
the Brain-Sphere, that 'twill make the Orb of the Head run round like the
Primum Mobile.


Astrophil. These Caelestial Riddles in this are moraliz'd, and I am become
your Convert, I will hereafter be Diametrically opposed to all Sobriety. My
Courses shall be more crooked, than the Eclyptick Line, and I will rest a
continual Inhabitant in the Torrid Zone of Canary. Hang the Constellations in
the Belt of the Zodiac, we'll have more variety of Delights in one Hour, than
the Moon has changes in one Year, or than Iris wears Colors in her multiform
Girdle. Oh thou Alpha of all Sciences, and Center of all Perfections! A Quire
of Planets make up that one Pate: Thou have more Virtues in thee, than there
are Scruples in a Major Circle. Let Us embrace like Gemini.


Roger. Come Hermit, refine thy self from the obtuse Idiotisms of Honesty; be
drunk, and turn mad man, and thou may be saved yet.


Austin. Before this Lecture, I had no more Wit in me, than a Face painted upon
a Stone Jug: Such a Grotian, that Apuleius his Ass was a grand Sophy to me. I
was as silly, as if I fed upon nothing but Woodcocks Brains; but I am
transubstantiated, and my Soul is become all Wild Fire. From henceforth, I Will
live the Comedy of the Age. My Life shall be a continual Bacchanal, and the
spungy Dutchmen compared to me, shall go for sober Cato's.


Drink-Fight. Now then to give you a Taste, or Sip of your Happiness, why this
Drink is a pure Elixir, the true Aqua vitae, it is the only Step and Degree of
Reputation: For it will make you Blades of great Account in other men's Books:
It Is Liquor. It is a very Idol: For it makes all men fall down to it.
Drunkenness is a Catalogue of all the Faculties. Do you desire Physic, here is
then the Antimonial Cup, that cures all Diseases; the Potion that will still
keep you in Health. If you study the Law, this is the mere Midwife of Justice:
For it brings forth all; and if perhaps it receives too much, it will purge it
self clearly, by Mouth, and restore it again with Usury: And pray, where will
you look for a College of great Divines, but where there is a good Fellowship?
Away then with these Hydro-potists! Those Anathematists to all Jollity: Let
them empty Wells with Cleanthes Backet. Here Is Drink will make you deliver your
mind in a Flood of Expressions, and spew like Homer: and it is therefore called
Double Beer, because it doubles your Capacity, and makes you speak and see
every thing double. What Is the reason then that Fishes are so dumb? It Is
because they drink nothing but Water; and no marvel, if Tantalus thirst in the
midst of a River, when he stands up to the Chin in Tiff and Tap-lash, whilst
one Bowl of this Nectar would make him account his Hell a Paradise.


Roger. Then let us be jovial, my sturdy Antipodes, my vigilant Student of the
Wine-Tub. There Is no such Sanity, as to be sick with the Staggers, and the
sweetest Life is to be dead drunk.


Austin. I will never more be sober, till the Devil turns Tapster. Bring me
hither the famous Borussian Bottle of a thousand, and five Else long, or the
Barrel at Heidelberg, that I may set my Nose to the Bung, and suck it dry.
Haustic^s, for a Deluge of Strong Beer, that I might begin it all supernaculum
to my Academical Captain.


Astrophil. Methinks the Constellation of Eridanus were but a Draught, and I
could sup up whole Helicon in a Breath ex tempore: Sure I could drink more than
Apollo after a Shower.


Drink-Fight. But my Frolic Associates, before you be Registered into our
Rubric, I must charge you with these four Canons. First, That no man dare to
talk wisely, or to talk Sense. Next, that neither of you presume to commit the
gross Indignity of sleeping above twice a Fortnight. Thirdly, That you refuse
no Cups, but Poculum Charitatis, which you must always excommunicate and banish
the Society: And Lastly, That you pay no Reckonings: For it is a disparagement
to your Credit not to be trusted; but still swear the Host out of his Faith.
Hence therefore, it will be expedient, to furnish your selves with a Volly of
Oaths, to discharge upon all Assaults. Now there be mincing Oaths, for the
City, courageous-Oaths for the Court, and Hob nail Oaths, for the Country:
There be Cudgel-Oaths, to break a Creditor's Pate, Rapier-Oaths, to run a
Sergeant through with, and Backsword-Oaths, to cross an Alehouse Score. I have
a rich Mint of them, you shall have them stamped of the latest Edition and
Coining.


Astrophil. Would I had as many Ears as Autumn, to drink in your Fluent
Precepts.


Austin. I Will be no more mindful of these same Statutes, than an hungry Scholar
is of a Feast, or a young Heir of his Day of one and twenty.


Drink-fight. Enter 'em both.


[Drink-Fight fills the Cup, and they both drink all. Astrophil. What must I
kiss the Cup?


Roger. No, you must swear deeply: This is a Cup of Lethe, that will make you
forget the heinous Solaecism of Temperance; hey brave, soaking Cavaleero's,
here is Austin has it ad unguem already.


Drink-Fight. Now my free Comrades, that our Mirth may not halt, but stream
along with full Measure, I have here procured a roaring Carrol, named The
Tripple Invitation, of the Tapster, Alewife and Drawer, to their several
Liquors.


Tapster.
Beer leave to the Barrel,
And broach no Quarrel;
Let all your drawn Anger be spilt:
Here Is a Bowl to the Brim,
Will make your Tongue swim,
And your Jollity run a Tilt.
(2.)
The Spigot which flows
From the tap of the Nose.
Kindles Bonefires in the Head.
It Is the Midwife Man,
To the Knights of the Can;
For It speedily brings 'em to Bed.
Alewife.
Where Red Lettice does shine,
It Is an outward Sign,
Good Ale is a Traffic within:
It will drown your Woe,
And thaw the old Snow,
That grows on a frosty Chin.
(2.)
Here Is against a Storm,
Lamb's Wool to keep warm,
And the Lips of the bonny she Host.
Your Cup do not scorn,
It Is a Cuckold's Horn,
Your Sauce is a Nutmeg Tossed,
Drawer.
But hither come rush,
Ye Birds of the Bush.
Compose all Strifes in a Jar:
If it be not enough,
Then take it in Snuff,
We'll answer it straight at the Bar.
(2.)
Would ye reel to a Wench?
Here Is the ruddy French;
And least you should want Language to speak,
Canary from Spain,
Shall advance your Brain,
And your very Wine shall be Greek.
Corollary or Assent.
Hang Sider and Perry,
With Beer, Ale and Sherry,
Let Us wash away muddy Cares;
We'll trowl the Bowl quicker;
Then sing till our Liquor,
Be rarefied into Airs.
Onmes -- We Will trowl, etc.
Drink-Fight. Come away, my rare Canary Birds, there is no such Music as in a
Tobaccopipe, and the sweetest Instrument is a Sackbut.


SCENE VI.
Enter Win-all, the Host, solus. Win-all. Here Is a Mess of Roarers within my
Hall, are able to swallow up a Red Sea of Claret, and never belch at it. Their
Canon Throats, if they were in the Cellar, would make an Earthquake. There Is a
gilded Captain, is a mere embroidered Beggar, the Seignior Decoy of the City,
that lives by seducing wild Ducklings; he is a most entire Coward; but I cannot
blame him for being in the Gentleman's Fashion: He Will swoon at the sight of a
cut Finger: The Flash of a Touchhole, will make him fly the Realm. I am not
ignorant how many Ordinaries have lain upon their Death Beds, and how many
Alehouses have given up the Ghost, by his frequenting: They count us the mere
Scum and Chippings of the Town, the Parenthesis, or Apochrypha of the
Commonwealth: But they shall find, we are Men of greater Reckoning than they,
when they come to our Bills.

A Bill.
Inprimis, For the Ale and lofty Beer, served out in Firkins: Sack in full
Career, did flow in a Spring Tide; next I did bring five Else of Rope Tobacco
in a String.

Item, Three Ranks of Pipes destroyed: Nay, more; besides, of broken Glasses,
some threescore.

Item, My own sweet Company, and the Set of Salted Jeers, besides three Dishes
of Wit: Next, my Wive's wanton Kisses, and soft Knee.

Item, A Sallad of her Bawdery.

Item, For Noise and Stamping I Will be paid.

Item, Four times Conjunction with my Maid.

Nay, ye shall pay for all, for room and seat,
And every Custom 'cause you have no Meat.
I have an Army of more things to put in,
I know not where to end, where to begin.
Well, I Will go in, and try whether the odd Rundlet of Canary be yet in
Consumption or no --


SCENE VII.
Enter Drink-fight, Roger, Astrophil, Austin: All with Pipes on their
Shoulders, and other Furniture. Drink-fight. Now my Martial Volunteers, to
instruct you in the military Postures of the Pipe, and to make you proficient
Soldiers in the Artillery of Tobacco, Lieutenant, Sergeant, etc. March up in
Ranks -- Stand -- Stoop your Muskets -- Draw your Bandileers -- Charge your
Pieces -- Ram your Powder -- Prime your Pan -- Light your Match -- Present --
Give Fire --


Enter Humphry, like a Traveller. Humphrey. Under this Cloud I Will walk
Gentlemen, pardon my rude Assault: I am a Traveller, who having surveyed most
of the Terrestrial Angles in this Globe, am hither arrived, to peruse this
little Spot.


Drink-fight. A Traveller? Why, what Mysteries can thou relate of thy
Experience?


Humphry. I can tell you more than all the creeking Barbers in Europe, than a
Swarm of Posts: I am the only Intelligencer, and Antiquary of Stories, the
Custom House of Relations; as if I had procured the Patent or Charter of News.
Alas, the Historiographers and Annalists, do lie now a days like Poets, and the
Chronicles are turned Parasites. I have seen the Terra Incognita, where the
Ladies say their Prayers, and the Courtiers keep their Promises, the Usurers
lend Gratis, and the Prodigals build Hospitals: Nay, the very Scriveners wear
long Ears, and the Townsmen shorn Foreheads. I could relate what glorious
Fools I saw there; but it is dangerous meddling with Nobles. I can tell you the
precise Number of all the Whipping Posts in Purgatory, and how many pound of
Brimstone is spent yearly in Hell, though I was never there to see them weighed.


Astrophil. You discourse like one that have seen the Books of Fate, or read
the Sybills Leaves.


Humphry. Pish! These are but obvious Trifles, I have seen a Legion of wonders,
such as would make Fabulous Pliny seem Authentic, and Romes Adulterate Relics
prove Articles.

I saw Jupiter's Nod in a Cob-web Net,
And Saturn's Frown writ in Brass,
With Venus her Kiss in a Ring of Jet,
And Juno's Groan in a Glass:
A stifled Thought in a Bag cloakt up;
With a Sigh that was gray with Age,
Diana's Hem in a Nutshel Cup,
And Apollo's Beam in a Cage.
The Syrrup of Blushes new Distilled,
The Maiden Head of a Dream,
The Soul of a Smile that was lately Killed,
Enameled with a Stream.

Roger. I must applaud your Invention in this, and not your Travel.


Humphry. Nay, These are not Minerva's of my Brain. Alas my head brings forth
no Creatures but Travelers Lice.


Austin. Why, These exceed all Miracles. Pray, where were thou Bred?


Humphry. Faith, every where, I am a living Miscellany of all Customs, and I
have lost my self into another Metempychosis. In Barbary I lost my Manners, in
Hungary mine Abstinence; my Gentility in Sclavonia; in Spain I made Shipwreck
of mine Honesty; in Germany of my Religion; in France my Nose was in more
danger, than in Russia and Greenland Frost. In my Journey through Vtopia, I met
with a Companion, that wore a Lecture of Arts in his Habit; his thick Hat was a
dull Problem; or a great deal of matter in a short cut; his Face was a Greek
Criticisme full of Meanders, and Intricacies; his Pate a Paradox, contrary to
all the Nation; his Breeches are exact Character, for they were so close, that
they displayed every part of him, and his Doublet a plain Anatomy, nothing but
Cuts and Slashes. This same stranger was the very Aristotle of all Poets, for
he could express Five kind of Poems in an Instant, without the help of Pen or
Ink. He could speak forth a fluent Epigram; he could weep forth a Doleful
Elegy; he could finger out a Mirthfull Lyric; he could grin out a biteing
Satyr, and tread forth a stalking Heroic in spondee Feet; not many Degrees from
this Horizon, I happened on a Diminutive Man, whom I Limbed out in this Paper.
Hearken, and you shall see him.

A Dwarf.
Behold his Portraicture! whom you will suppose
In Rhyme a Pigmy, or a Dwarf in Prose;
A Copy of Natures shorthand, and who can
Without a Metaphor be called a Span.
If man be but a little World; then he
Was the Analysis of an Epitome.
A sheet of Paper would, tho it were broke,
Make him an English Jesuits long Cloak.
His Beard face his Doublet, just for space,
And length, 'twas like some Puritans long Grace.
His Nose would bear no jest, his Cabbage Pate
Was sure too big to enter Heavens strait Gate.
His Ears, and Shoulders kissed, his Waste did shun
All Smiles b'ing swollen beyond Ben-John-Sons Tun.
His Legs like Bag-Pipes, which a natural Gout
Has blown at least some 13 Inchabout.
But if I could his little Feet rehearse,
They were too short to make a Foot in Verse.
Well! I will say no more, least I should name,
A Pigmy's Picture in a Giants Frame.

Drink-Fight. A pretty patcel of Wit, I Faith, come, we'll enter into our
Society immediately.


Humphry. Stay! Let us expect a while; It is reported that there was a
Christmas show to be presented at the next House, of the Four parts of the
Year, contending for Priority. Let us not omit any Satisfaction, either of
Mirth or Novelty. Look! Apollo the Moderator is entered, and Terra does induct
the rest.


Enter first Apollo, then Terra leads in the Four Parts of the Year, viz. Ver,
Aestas, Autumnus, and Hyems. Terra.
Can such a Combat find a Scene? can ye
Spectators stand at the Worlds Tragedy?
When Atlas Heavens great Porter fears the Fall
Of his Burden at Times Funeral.
The groaning Globe in Labor now lies sick,
And the whole Orb is turned Peripatetick.
Both Poles do crack his Frame, e're while so safe,
Balanced now sinks into its Epitaph.
The Parts of the Year raise Civil Wars, and Thirst
For vain Supremacy, who shall prove first.
.
How will Astronomers startle, and mistake
The Months, at the Birth of this New Almanac!
When frozen July shall be starved, and Dry
December in a Burning Fever lie.
But thou great Monarch calm their Stormy Pride,
Before it swell into a Factious Tide.
He Builds that keeps from Ruin, who so States
This wild Sedition, he again Creates.
Ver.
What use of Pleading is there, when we see
The chiming Birds in Natures Heraldry
Blazing my Argent Field? each vocal stream
By me made both the Grater, and the Theme.
Look on the Years Virginity, and see
How Flort struts in her new Tapostry;
Decked in her Parl'ment Robes, and Richest Mold,
A Native Mint shines in each Marygold.
Behold the Earth made Paradise! below
A Constellation does of Roses grow.
Whose Clouds of Violets wave, whose annual Spice
Offers an Everlasting Sacrifice.
Mantles of Pinks (like Rain-Bows) do display
Their Beams, and Lillies make a Milky way.
And that my Palace may true Heaven be said,
Harvestst of gods here are not made, but bred.
I am the Nurse of Health, and Queen of sport,
Each Goddess Nymph's but Handmaid to my Court.
I dress the Fowl in Marriage Cloths, and Wed
The Nuptial Birds, and strait bring them to Bed.
And when the Captive Earth in Penance stands
Clad in a Sheet of Snow, I lose their Bands.
Yet though I ransom them from Chains, and do
Repreive their Thrall, I Will still be bound to you.
Summer.
Dare you descend in Combat, when each Field
Is up in Arms and Ranks of Pik's does yield,
Like a wild Porcupine? But know instead,
That Words have Edges, and Tongues are Swords indeed.
Each Furrow gapes, and says the golden Fee
Of Venus Beauty, was stolen from one Tree,
And the Herculean Apples, the Orator Towrs,
His Rhetoric Nose-gays, borrowed from my Flowrs.
Were not for Allegories made from me, pray whence
Would Poets Rhyme, or School Boys have their sense?
I warm the stupid Air, should I withhold
My Heat, even Heavens Kitching would grow cold.
See how the Adopted Boughs are Thatched, whose Maine
By Phoebus curling Irons are Crisp'd again.
And by the Cutwork, which from thence is made,
Checkers the ground, through Twilight of a shade.
The Surplic'd Swans, new ravishing Tunes indite,
Doctors of Music in their Robes of White.
O would that Phaeton ruled this Radiant Sphere,
That we might have a Summer all the Year.
When I Would be Empress, when I take the Foil,
May all the Earth be made one Funeral Pile.
Autumn.
It Is time for Conquest, Victory should sue
For place, not be invited when it is due;
For these are but my Tenants, who thereby
Enriched, pay Tribute to my Treasury.
I keep the Keys of the great Exchequer, whence
Nature is furnished for her Years Expense.
I die the Grapes in Purple blushes still.
My Vintage does Jove's azure Wine-Tub fill.
In vain the Spring does smile, and Summer Crown
The Earth, since I can blast it with one frown.
If once I Rage, a Camp of Winds would split
The whole Creation with an Ague Fit.
And bandy Towers into the Air, until
They from their Stories fall to Chronicle.
Walls sleep without their Bed-staves, and each Bell
Struck Dumb with Noise, does ring out its own Knell.
Then let him private stand, who pleased can make
The World all Faint, but being angered Quake.
I raise such Floods, till Cities swim in Barks,
And floating Churches are become true Arks.
Winter.
What? has the cold of Cowardice so froze
My glowworm Soul, not to be thawed by those,
Who only brag of Colors? and whose Vaunt
Boasts in the Trappings of an outside Paint;
Whilst that the Cloven Earth does gasping lie,
And the Chill Fountains Terra 's Dugs drawn dry.
But Virtue is no Bawd, it still has been
Her modest Grace to keep her Court within.
See! how the Floods with admiration Tamed,
With wonder stand, in Summer only Lamed;
And Boreas (Winter Barber) shaves the Trees
By the grave Statute of my Diocese;
Whilst Snowy Juno scatters over my Stage,
Argent enough to make a Silver Age.
I am the Seminary of Valor, there,
Hectors do scarce contend with Tailors here.
Do but ascend; the loftier you stray,
The nearer Heaven, still the Colder way.
But I am too patient, Words do spend the sum
Of Wrath, since truest Fury still is Dumb.
Apollo.
More Monsters still? or Giants new alive?
Do Broods of Python swarm within my Hive?
Have I so often Kissed you with my Lips,
Unmasked from Clouds? and shined without Eclyps.
Was I chose Visitor to o'resee the Year?
That that a real Serpent should appear,
And prove my self a Traitor? have my sacred Fires
Kindled the ambitious Heat of proud Desires?
Is Gratitude quite extinguished, and will ye
Profane my Crown by Civil Blaspemy?
Either Unite your hands, or I Will awake
Egyptian Darkness, or the old Chaos make.
Wheel in a Circular Course, and let the string
Of Friendship be as endless as the Ring,
That ye may in a round Quadrature be cast,
For in a Globe there is neither first nor last.
[Exit, show in a Circle. Drink-Fight. This would have passed for an
indifferent Masque in Guild Hall, had it been Hammered out by a Company of
Joiners. But come! Let us retreat! This strong Beer will take Cold, and the
Wine will Freeze in the Rundlets. We'll carowse off some frivolous Gallons for
a Libamen to Bacchus, then have a Mess of Bones scru'd in, where every man
shall try the Dexterity of his Fortune.


SCENE VIII.
Shab-Quack. Oh! This Peace and good Government make's me sick at heart. It Is
but a dead time with me, when my Razors have kept Holiday these Two Months. I
wish I were a Journeyman in some Port-Town of Batavia, where the Mines are made
but Slaughter Houses, and Murder is become a Profession. Here Is so much
Patience, and Cowardice in England, that starve's up all the poor Chyrurgeons.
Were it not for the Valor of Gentlemen against Catch-Poles, and some Pathetical
Brethren, that in Zeal dare knock down their Fellows, we might e're this have
been all sent to the Highways and Almshouses. Oh! That Christians had but the
Charity to be wounded sometimes; for if they were but once suspected of a Cut,
I have as many Tricks as a Canker to blister a green Sore; but my Custom is so
slender, that I am forced to make my Bread of Saw-Dust, and to drink nothing
but Pump-water; a Mouse were a Sheriffs Banquet to me, and I Feast upon
Spiders, as familiarly as a Mountebank. I had a Pigeons Egg last Night for
Supper, but I was glad to lay up Orts till the next Meal, for fear I should
turn Epicure. A Sparrows Carcass would surfeit me, my stomach is so contracted.
For my Life has been perpetual Good Friday, nothing but a Fast. I have but
two Dogs in mine House and (alas!) they are fain to live like younger Brothers,
by their Wits. If my Prentice had continued with me till this time, we had been
presented to the Physick-School for Skeletons.


[They knock him within. Enter Win-all, the Host, all Bloody. Win-all. Help!
Help! Murder! O Mr. Shab-Quack, here is a Kennel of Furies have almost unrafted
my head for showing them the Reckoning. I profer'd them the Total Sum, and they
paid me in Fractions; but I Will make 'em know they have pierced a wiser Hogshead
than their own.


Shab-quack. Retire with speed, your Blood begins to curdle to a Jelly.


Exeunt omnes. SCENE IX.
Enter Drink-fight, Roger, Astrophil, with their Doublets off. Drink fight. A
Pox of this mangy Traveller, 'twas but an homely Trick of him to shift us this
weather, that is the naked Truth on it. 'Slid, how the Rogue has pared us 'zars,
my money slid away, as if it had been all Quicksilver.


Roger. Now could I find in my Heart to cry most devoutly. if my Tears would
but congeal to Silver, as the Hebiades did to Amber. I Will even be sick of the
Yellow Jaundies, and yet I cannot see any thing of the Color of Gold. Sure
Fortune's Wheell stands still: She was never unconstant to me, For I had always
Ill Luck. Well, we were predestined to be undone. Alas poor Captain!


Drink-fight. How now Sirrah, how dare you pity me?


Roger. Indeed my pity should reflect on my self: For I am now the most
transcendent Hyperboly of all Misery.


Drink-fight. Sirrah, thou lie, I scorn any man should be more miserable than
my self.


Astrophil.
(1.)
This Pipe's my Pillar of Clouds,
Such Meteors I love to utter:
More than Welch-men do Cheese,
Or an Englishman Ease,
Or a Dutchman loves Salt Butter.
(2.)
If Riches be but a Smoke,
And Fame be but a Vapor,
Here Is a rich Mine indeed,
In this fumy Weed,
And Honor enough in a Taper.
Oh, 'twould even make Heraclitus to laugh his Lungs out, to see the Distempers
of these two Wretches: He Is a Fool that cannot win without Joy, or lose without
Sorrow.

Drink-fight. Now do I find my self going into a pure Raskal. I could almost
find in my heart to turn valorous, and beat my self for being such an arrant
Coxcomb. What now, shall I turn Curate? For there is no Learning required to
that, but a lame Arm, and a loud Voice; Or shall I be a Noble-Man's Pander? But
a Pox on it, there be too many of that Trade already. But let me see, what
Religion is now in Fashion? Shall I be a Lay-Divine? For I could counterfeit a
complete Gogle. Pray God I be not honest: For then I am sure to live miserable;
but if some body should make me honest in spite of my Teeth, I hope it is nor my
fault. Well, I Will take care for Honesty be sure: I Will e'n turn Manciple, or
Lawyer's Clerk. If Heaven once give over to prosper Knaves why then Fortune
has Eyes.


Roger. Now will I just make my Will, and then hang my self, or else let out my
Soul at a Wicket. The first Legacy I bestow, shall be my former Mirth, which I
bequeath to all this Audience: my Madness, to the Commoners of Bedlam Hall: my
Stomach, to the Company of the Guard: my Poverty, to a College of Scholars:
mine Empty Head, to the Pope's Privy Council: my Hypocrisy, to a Banbury
Brother; my Treachery, to a Conspiracy of Jesuits; and my Soul to him that got
it.


Enter Win-all, the Host, with two Sergeants. Win-all. There the Sheeps-heads
creep without their Fleeces, surprise 'em suddenly.


Exeunt omnes running. SCENE X.
Enter Mr. Make-peace, in a Chair. Make-peace. Not yet returned my Son? Then
let me weep my Body dry to Dust, and make this Chair my Coffin.


Enter Win-all and Shab quack, with two Sergeants leading in Astrophil,
Drink-fight and Roger. Win-all. Sir! I have hither summoned the Delinquents,
and Mr. Shab-quack too, that he might witness how fataily my Skull was
battered, like a crushed Egg-shell.


Make-peace. What Astrophil? I am informed again; and whilst thou give me
Life, thou do requite my Gift of being thy Father. Methinks there is a young
Spring in all my Limbs, my Blood trips Coranto's in my capering Veins.


Astrophil. Sir! etc. --


Make-peace, Nay, I will not be guilty of the Cruelty, to hear thee entreat:
Thy Pardon be as plentiful as my Joy.


Shab-quack. Roger too returned! This is a day of Restitution. Rise, I forgive
thee thy Extravancy for this good Employment which you have sent me: It proved
the best Service that you performed.


Enter Humphry, with all their Money and Clothes. Humphry, Here I surrender up
all my Winnings, Sir, I found them after some false Enquiries, carrowsing at an
Ordinary there in a Disguise. I cogg'd into their Society: Afterward, with
false Dice, I heard 'em, naked of all, supposing Want to be the best Counselor
to call them home.


Make-peace. Thy Travel shall be abundantly rewarded --


Drink fight. Now is the Hermit drunk under the Table, and snorts as loud as an
Alderman at a Sermon.


Enter Hermit, with his Attire. Hermit. Will you buy any Botttles, Glasses,
Candlesticks? Will you buy any Chamberpots, Cushions, or Tobaccopipes, hoe?


Roger. How now Hermit! what, are you translating the Ordinary?


Hermit. Yes, I intend to turn Peddler of great Wares --


Win-all. Yonder is a Snail too, stealing my House away upon his Back.


Make-peace. Bridle your Indignation; I will recompense yours, and Shab-quack's
Damages with a double Interest: And because the Hermit is in a frolic Humor,
I Will bind him to you for an Apprentice; but the Captain I will richly furnish
for the Wars.


Drink-fight, Sir, I will live your Knight Errant, and fight for your Honor,
till my Flesh is all sliced in Gobbets.


Make-peace. Come, follow me all, and I will satisfy you with a pleurify of
Delights.


Exeunt omnes simul. Hermit. I am more proud of this Preferment, than if I had
been chosen Jupiter's Cup Bearer. I will get me a Tupster's red Nose
immediately, and be always drunk first my self, for the good Example of the
Guests.


Exit. The Epilogue.
Your Reckoning Bill's brought up, and now we stand
Suppliants to have your Score paid down at hand:
For every Line shall be your Page, to show,
Each Foot we write does make a Leg to you.
Then Pardon our Offenses, since each Letter,
Does mourn in black, and weeps to be your Debtor.
We never paid Fees for Comicks, or to sit
A Pupil entered in the School of Wit.
What e're was shown, was but our duties Thoughts.
Writ out in Errors, Scenes of Loyal Faults.
Adventured thus by him, who thought not meet,
Christmas should go t'her Grave without a Sheet.
FINIS

