THE DVKE OF LENOX HIS HONORABLE AND WORTHY SPEECH in the High Court of
PARLIAMENT in SCOTLAND.

October. 28. 1641.

Concerning the Kings Majesty's return into England.

And a certain affront which was given to himself, and the Marquisse Hamilton
When they first came to take their places in the Parliament House.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN THOMAS. 1641.

The Duke of LENOX, his Speech in the Court of PARLIAMENT in SCOTLAND, October.
28. 1641.
Concerning the Kings return home into England, and a certain affront which
was given to himself and the Marquisse of Hamilton, when they first came to
take their places in the Parliament House.
My Lords,

OF this most Honorable Convocation, my bounden duty commands me to be a
Speaker, which as yet have always bin silent, and which is not concerning any
mean matter, or the affairs of so little consequence, but that it concerns
both Kingdoms, and my own particular affront at my first coming to this
Assembly.

But first, I begin in my Kings behalf, who has been present here so long,
that others bemoane to my knowledge, his absence.

You cannot but think my Lords, that England will be contented without their
Sovereign, for a body without a head, what is it but dead, Commisioners are
left behind it is true, but yet the Land receives the more courage while their
King is present, concerning State affayires, then is to be conceived they can,
he being absent.

I very well know, that when his Majesty came first hither, it was not his
Royal intent to stay so long, but promised a speedy return, which is well
known unto your selves, as others, and yet do I perceive that you are all
sick of a lingering disease, that I am forced to confess that there have many
great disturbances concerning the State, and many Treacheries are daily
discovered, but yet my Lords consider, distractions are as well in England and
Ireland, as in this Kingdom, Religion there claymes its due, which is to be
preferred before a private danger, which is both wicked and pernicious to the
Common wealth.

The one may destroy some particular persons, but the other destroys a whole
Commonwealth, where but in part a Kingdom halts concerning Religion, great
danger must needs hang over the head of the whole, as long as error is
crowned, truth must consequently be dispossessed of its right and it behooves a
King to defend the right.

Why is our Sovereign styled the defender of the faith, but to defend the
righteous and just, for where there is neither right nor justice, Faith cannot
subsist.

To bring the first part of my intents to a period, it is requisite that the
return of the King be no longer delayed.

Let not England be deceived any longer of its diurnall expectation, least
danger be heaped on your heads, for why it is already suspected, that you keep
him here for no Loyal intents.

Although I must confess that his Entertaynement has been such amongst you;
that Envy it self, can find no just cause to complain, and ever since his
Majesty has been here, you cannot deny, but that he has been willing to
condescend to your Demands.

The Castle of Edinburgh is discharged of all it is forces, the Soldiers are
disbanded, and the Ordinances dismounted, although Carleile as yet have not
yielded to do the like, yet no wtong is offered by them, but they wish well to
both Kingdoms, and the Sovereign thereof.

His Majesty subscribes to any thing that is Lawful, and has yielded to all
things hitherto according to justice, and he being absent has given his power
into your hands, wherefore it is now requisite my Lords, that he return home
into England, all delay being put aside, so shall you stop the mouths of all
which be apt to report the worst.

Now my Lords, give me way to speak for my self, for I have hitherto spoken
in the behalf of my Sovereign the King.

When first I intended, according to my degree, to take my place in this house
of Parliament, both my self, and the Marquisse of Hamilton were disturbed, and
must not be permitted hither without a subscribing to the Covenant, which
command of yours we seemed not to disobey.

And yet daily do I hear mutterings and murmurings, as if both of us were
unworthy to receive such honors, and blame me not, if at this time you
perceive me untongue-tyed, so much as now at length I am forced to speak.

Can it be the lowliness or baseness of our births, which do force such ill
conjectures of us, or have you known us to be either Traitors or Rebels to our
King or Country, from whence I wonder then does issue, such unheard of Rumors,
I think, nay I dare avouch it, that neither of us in a just and right cause
would be Tymerous to loose our bloods in your defense.

My Lords, let not Loyal hearts be accounted as those which be treacherous,
let Caesar have his due, and let not the just be wronged, I know that there be
some here present, which wonder how my excitated passion, could be so long
cohibited, I have now utteedr my mind, judge of it as your Lordships shall
please; my Conclusion shall be as I said before, that Caesar may have his due,
and that the just may not be wronged.

FINIS.

