In honor of ABINGDON, OR ON THE SEVENTH DAY of Septembers solemnization 1641.

BY ^OHN RICHARDSON Sergeant of Abingdon in the County of Berks.

Printed in the year 1641.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL the MAJOR, BAILIFFS, and Burgesses of the Burough of
Abingdon, in the County of BERKS.
All Health, Happiness, and Prosperity.
WOrthy Senators, and loving Master^. It is not unknown unto you, what great
deliverances, what rich endowments (both natural and supernatural) and what
Halcion days, the propitious hand of mercy has continually conferred upon
this our flourishing Nation. Jf I should endeavor to set forth the riches, or
to give you a List of the number of them, I should swell this small Rivelet,
into a boundless Ocean of substance, and matter: and indeed my insufficient
undertakings were not able to effect such an unconceavable task, and labor
(the worth of them being not to be paralleld by any stranger Nation, and their
number being not to be cast up by the art of any mental invention) But yet, J
must not forget one, (and not the smallest) of our kingdoms benefits; namely,
(the unexpected making up of great Britains dangerous Breaches) The mercy was
great, and the miracle wonderful. I need not further enlarge my self, for the
several tongues of skillful Divines, have sufficiently dilated the story of
this blessed pacification: neither indeed is it the maine substance of the
business I have in hand. It was the Kings, and court of Parliaments good
pleasures to publish, and decree, that, on the seventh day of September last,
every parish should keep a Festival (religiously to be performed) in honor of
the great Peacemaker. And to show in what manner, fashion, and order it was, in
your famous Incorporation, on that day celebrated, J have (in this small Poem)
adventured to set forth to the view of this censuring age: And unto your
Worships J humbly dedicate the same, whose patronizing wings (I trust) will
shelter it from the dangerous assaults of any carping, or detracting Zoilus.
Your frowns will make me unfortunate; but your smiles will add an
encouragement to my weak and illiterate studies. Let this harmless and small
Pamphlet find acceptance, and favorable entertainment at your charitable
censures, and you shall always find me (as in duty I ought to be)

Your Worships obsequious Officer and servant. JO. RICHARDSON.

In honor of ABINGDON, OR On the seventh day of September's solemnization.
1641.
NOt far from fair OXFORD
Calena placed is
A pleasant Town, near silver Thamisis;
Where you may view the ruined Battlements
Of old king Cissas ancient Monuments
Where struts th'unparall'd, harmless, threatened Cross
(Yet lately blessed from Babylonish dross)
Where Aarons bells in Helens Church do ring
Peales, that do bless us from the poisoned sting
Of death eternal. Near the Churchyard Wall
Stands the fair structure of Christ's Hospital.
Where Royse his fruitful Nurceries supply
Great Pembrooks Gardens insufficiency.
Of things of late, that in this Town befell,
Something my oblieg'd Muse is forced to tell;
(Though but in rustic phrase) yet I Will express
To ABINGDON my love and thankfulness:
Yet I Will not Barber-like hyperbolize,
And sell my Customers a Chest of Lies:
No this I Will banish, thus I will not sin,
I Will write no more but truth, and now begin.
Tuesday (the seventh day of this last September,)
(Which day I Am sure our Children will remember
Was by the King, and Court of Parliament
Proclaimed a Festival, and to be spent
In sacred wise; because 'twixt Scots and Us,
A joyful peace is now concluded thus.
So soon this welcomed news was heard off here,
Grief Shrunk aside, no sorrow did appear;
Each Man by's Cheerful Visage, you would think
Naught but Nepenthes liquour then did drink.
The day being come, (I Will bar to complement)
And tell you briefly how the time we spent.
Ith'dawne of day, before Hyperious son
Bridled his horses, or his Course begun,
Old Helens trowling Bells such peales did ring,
And to our drowsy ears such tunes did sing,
(When honest Nick began to sympathise,
Striking up's Lowbells in melodious wise)
That we no longer in our beds could lie,
But each prepared for this days jubilie.
To Helens Courts (in the morn) at seven oth' Clock,
Our Congregation in great numbers flock:
Where we till Twelve our Orizons did send
To him, that did our Kingdoms Quarrels end.
And there two Sermons two Divines did preach,
And most divinely gratitude did teach.
At twelve the Priests lips blessed us; home we came,
And sung sweet Anthems to Iehovah's name,
At Two again (in Clusters) we did pack,
And filled the Church as full as it could thwack.
Till four we staid, and Sermon being ended,
Toward our triumphant Cross our course was bended.
And thus we marched. First with my golden Mace
('It Is fit I put my self in the foremost place)
I paced along, and after followed me
The Burgesses by senioritie.
Our Praetour first (let me not miss my Text)
I think the Clergymen came marching next;
Then came our Justice, with him a Burger sage,
Both marched together in due equipage:
The rest oth' Burgers, with a comely grace,
Walked two, and two along to the Marketplace;
And after them, hundreds both young and old
Crowding along, that time you might behold.
(Being come to the famous Cross, our journies end)
Her mounting Stayres in state we did ascend;
The Clerk was called, and he a Bible took,
The hundred and sixth Psalm he out did look,
Two thousand Quoristers their notes did raise,
And warbled out the great Creatours praise:
Their thundering Echo gave so great a shout.
Nicklas and Helen were quite baffled out.
Over my head I saw King David stand,
Listening toth'Musick, with his Harp in hand,
Sure when the Psalmist lived, with his sacred Lire,
He seldom played, or sung to such a Quire,
If either King could speak, he would swear by's Crown
No haire-braind Separatist would pull him down:
For why, this heavenly joy, we had so late,
Did seem, in part, the Cross to consecrate.
The Psalm is ended: but the Folk begin
Louder, and louder cry, God save the KING,
While Bonfires blaze, their caps are thrown away,
All to express the triumph of the day.
The Helvian liquor, and rich Maligo,
And English beer, our Senate did bestow:
No cost was spared, and yet I must confess,
I saw no show of brutish drunkenness:
Sure some diviner hand, that day did guide
The Vulgar, that they should not slip aside,
And f^^ther to set forth a greater joy,
Out comes the skillful Sergeant Corderoy,
With His his rattling Drums, and Fife, and Colors flying,
With His Musketteeres (and yet there is none feared dying)
Bravely they marched about; but made a stop,
When they drew near the well known Antelop;
A fiery peale they rung in the Senate Ears,
(Gallantly done by warlike Musketteeres)
Anon they made a Guard, my noble Master
Marched through them to the front, (out yet no faster
Then my Mace and I) safely did they guard
The Kings Lieutenant home, when in his yard,
Or Court, another peale they out did thunder,
Which made the thronging people shout and wounder*
Their Muskets having shot out all their powder,
They made their Throats their Muskets, and shot louder;
Such was their joy (a Barrel being spent)
In sober manner every man home went.
And them with speed followed my Muse and I,
To learn what further news we could descrie.
And now it is supper time. In every street
Neighbors with Neighbors at some house did meet
Their moneys joined together for a Feast,
And each to other is a welcome Guest.
(Supper being done) anon they 'gin to sing.
Some joyful Hymn (a joyful revelling)
Travel my Muse, go, wander up and down,
Search into City, Village, Hamlet, Town,
Tell me at thy return (if thou can tell)
Where any Feast with ours could parallel.
And yet this was not all; for what was spent
On Irus Crew, made the full complement
Of this days jubilie, this was the best
Of Sacrifice, this seasoned all the rest.
Upon this day the ^oore were not neglected,
Thirteen or Fourteen pounds were here collected*
And some (no question) out of Charity,
In private gave to their necessity.
Thus have I showed you in a home spun way,
(Yet true enough) how we this happy day
Did from the morning to the evening spend;
But I am weary, and I Will make an end.
POSTSCRIPT.
THus to the general view a Seriants quill,
Ventured at last to show her weaker skill.
Such friends, that at her Errors will connive,
Humbly to thank, and gratify she will strive.
But let detracting fools about them look,
Her Master is a subtle Tenter-hook;
He Will quickly snap them, if such chance to be
Within the Verge of his authority.
But if sh'ath written any blamefull act,
'Twas her dull ignorance, and no wilful fact.
Sic ex officio allusit IOH: RICHARDSON Serviens ad Clavam Burgi de Abingdon in
Com^ Berks.

FINIS.

