THE MIRROR OF MERCY IN THE MIDST OF MISERY: OR, Life triumphant in Death,
where in Free Will is abolished, and Free Grace exalted. WITH The large wonders
of Loves wounds.

Written in a fit of Sickness, By JEREMIAH RICH.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Nath: Brook, at the Ange. in Corne-hill, 1654.

To the Right Honorable, the Lord JOHN BRADSHAW.
I Have read of some of the Saints of old, that have prayed for life, as David
and Hezekiah; others that have desired to be dissolved, as Paul and Eliah; yet
those that desired to dye, had abundance of contentment here, and the others
that labored for life, had assurance of glory hereafter. Alas my life was not
worthy the name of life, 'twas not a life, 'twas but a piece of childhood
thrown away; yet in my sickness I desired to escape death, by dying daily,
since I have been taught, that he that is dead while he lives, shall live when
he dies.

How direful are the thoughts of Death! how grievous the remembrance of the
Grave! yet when we call to mind how it was sweetened by our dear Savior,
methinkes Death is not so dreadful, nor Life so desirable: Death is but a
freedom from danger, and the bank of Rottenness, is now a bed of Roses, where
Innocence may dwell secure, nothing assaults us there; I have thought to dye,
is less than to be borne, it is a quiet resting from all Iniquity, a conclusion
of troubles, an end of fiery trialls, where in dust we shall be lost a while,
as is the Sun, that must permit the base and sordid Earth to smother up his
Glory for a night, that the next morning when he arises, as from a bed of Roses
burnished in all his bravery, he might be the more wondered at; so when our
hearts are pure, and when our sighs are past, and when our griefs are gone,
and when our wiped eyes shall weep no more, then nor will it be long) we shall
be snatched up from the conversations of Sinners, to the habitations of Angels,
where Mortality shall be swallowed up of Life.

May it please your Honor, I thought to have done something in answer to
Free Will, but that I wanted Free Will to do it, therefore I have left the
Matter almost as imperfect as the Author, yet had I had time, I had either
added more, or have done this better.

As it is, I humbly offer it to your Honor for a Memento mori, that when we
put off our garments of Mortality, we may launch into the gulf of ever blessed
Eternity; I mean at that time, when we have time to say no more, but in manus
tuas domine commendo spiritum meum.

Your Lordships devoted Servant. Jer: Rich.

TO THE LADIES AND Gentlewomen of ENGLAND.
IT has been reported by some, (who have had more vices in their mouths, than
virtues in their minds, that what Books I have printed formerly, were not mine
own; because (they have said) my countenance does not promise so much. I could
answer them, but I will not brawle with such poor blasts, for Solomon says,
that which is done, has been done, and there is no new thing under the Sun;
therefore since my adversaries have not wit enough to rule like Judges on the
Bench, I will let them braul like Prisoners at the Bar: I confess
Righteousness does cross the recreations of the rich, and Purity is against
the opinion of the poor; Piety has been estranged from Princes, and Poetry is
a mystery to Pedlers, therefore my Poems are unfit for the Pockets of the one,
or the Pallats of the other. Indeed though I have been persuaded by some
eminent persons, yet I never did intend to write again, till Providence gave
me such an occasion to Pen my strange recovery from Death, which I have vowed
to bear about me, as a perpetual memorial.

Thus from the secresies of night, have I stolen Time from sleep, to picture
out from my vetired thoughts, the melancholy of my mind.

And Ladies I present it to you.

It is a Mask of Cupid and Death; you cannot run from the one, though you may
rail at the other; and you will have no reason, for though the first part be
fearful, the last is delightful, that if one cannot win you, the other may
wound you; let it lie in your laps, and at least be read by your lips, or hold
it in your hands, till you have it in your hearts, that it may help to make you
lovely with inward graces, when age and sickness with their ashy hands, have
swept the beauty from your amorous eyes.

Jeremiah Rich.

The mirror of MERCY IN The midst of MISERY.
WHen Kingly Phoebus drove his Chariot down
Into the Southern Kingdoms, there to crown
Those People with his glory, when the Air
Was cold, intemperate, neither foul nor fair,
But wondrous various, and the Earth the whiles,
Casts off her amorous glaunces and sweet smiles,
Her costly Ornaments, Livery of Green,
Her Robes of Gallantry, and lies unseen,
Lamenting for her Lover, when she feels
Delay waits on his absent Chariot wheels:
Just then it was, when Titan's Throne was gone,
And Cinthia does possess the darkened throne,
Usurping to her self half of the year,
And rules it with her sable Hemisphere.
When you might see Nights Empress ride in state,
And all the Stars and Royal Armies wait
Upon her high Commands, when you might see
The Giant Orien in the Canopie,
Walking the nightly Circles, as if none
But he should rule the World; Nights sable Throne
Is drawn by winged Pegasus, and she
With Cyreus, Procean, and Andromache
Rides over the milky way, when Sol retires,
To light the World with their dim feeble Fires.
It was October, and the very day
Sol entered into Scor^io, then I say,
When all my Actions were unsound, uneven,
Me thoughts I heard a threatening from Heaven,
Which filled my troubled fancy full of fears,
And ringed Deaths Alarm in mine ears.
Am I a God? and did I rai^e this World
From her first Chaos, to have blackness hurld
Against my sparkling Throne? Shall my pure eyes
Behold these Sins and base enormities
Without revenge? What! did my fingers frame
This Universe for the glory of my name,
And made Man Lord of all, that he might be
In a capacity to honor me?
And am I thus rewarded? I Will go spurn
Away the World, her glory, and I Will turn
Time from his Chariot wheels, I Will rend in sunder
Her Axletrees, and with a clap of Thunder,
I Will puff this spacious Fabric aside:
And blast these mortals in their height of pride.
At this I started: my distempered brains
Did ache, my head was tortered with great pains,
My body shivered, and my blood did boil,
Like fiery Aetna, or the burning oil
That Drunkards quaffe in Hell, my heart was saint,
My tongue too weak to utter a complaint,
Though I were full; I knew not what to say,
Nor scarce could tell where 'twas my torment lay.
Sometimes I burnt like the Promethean Fire
That came from Heaven, and sometimes my desire
Cooled as the angry North, when Jove makes bold
To cl^ath the Universe with freezing cold.
Sometimes I was in Heaven, or else not far
Below it, where I saw each wandering Star
Move in their several Orbs: Sometimes mine eyes
Beheld great wonders, as if all the Skies
Were paved with Pearls and Rubies, then I Would run
To view the glittering Palace of the Sun;
Where I beheld how Phoebus drove his throne
Over the Spangled vault, and I made moan
He went so swift away with hot desire,
Lashing his Horse with whips of flaming Wier.
Then to the middle Region of the Air
My fancy would retire, to view the rare
Agreement of the Elements, how they
Keep in their bounds, and every hour obey
The Ordinance of Heaven, and then my mind
Would think how clouds rode on the winged wind.
Now horrid Aeolus who is heard too often,
And wide-mouthed Boreas raises storms aloft;
^he sable Clouds have blotted all the Skies,
And to the apprehension of all eyes
^ave banish^d the Suns glory, all is black
With angry Clouds, the Poles do seem to crack,
The Axeltrees to rend, the Fabric shakes
The Exalations, and the Vapors makes
The flashy Lightnings and the Winds to fly,
With Thunderbolts from Jove's Artillery.
Then, on the sudden, all is hush and gone,
And smiling Phoebus in his kingly Throne:
The roaring Thunder now is quite given over
And angry Jove will fire his Guns no more:
Neptune appears to calm the swelling maine,
Delus and Boreas now are friends again;
The Clouds are vanished, and the Heavens do smile,
As if they did but fright us all this while;
And all was done in jest, but to invoak
Us to believe a God, with that I'woke.
What horrid shape is that, that calls dim Night
To hide my torments, that abjure the light?
With that like thunder, or like flashy fire,
His fury rose, Wherefore do thou inquire?
Says he, I am the King of fears, and I
Was sent with summons from Eternity:
I dwell in that dark Vault where the black line
Of Death is drawn, where Pluto, Proserpine,
Proud Beelzebub, and Mephestophilus,
Pale-sac'd Oblivion, horrid Cerberus,
Millions of Haggs and fearful Furies haunt,
Grim Charon, and the churlish Rhadamant,
Where Etna's hill does pour her hideous flames
Into the starry Region, and proclaims.
A terror to the world, by soaring higher
Than flashy lightening or feeble fire;
While the amazed Mariner from a sarre,
Looking aloft admires what blazing Star
Threatens the aged Moon, because they be
Fearful fore runners of a tragedy.
At this! turned my face, and wept, till all
My ch^^k^^ were bathed; and is my Funeral
So sudda^ly to be, and is there none
Will send a sigh to heaven, a tear, a groan?
Will no one beg for me that heaven would stay
His hand a while and give me longer day?
Unhappy m^ther, where are all your gains?
Poor satisfaction for your nine months pains;
Was it for naught but this? oh rather why
Did! not weep a shower of tears, and die
Within my Nurses arms? Then might I have
No fostering, but a cradle and a grave.
Oh beauteous Innocence, how blessed art thou!
Sweet Virtue too! oh might I tarry now!
How should I love thee! then I should not fear
To fly into the bosom of my Dear:
Where lifted up, ravished I should behold
That shining City built of burnisht gold,
Like to transparent glass, then should I dare
To travail through the dwellings of the air,
To immortality, where I might see,
Wonders denied to our capacity;
There is perpetual Youth, perpetual Spring,
^o evening cold, no heat, nor no such thing
^s time or feeble age, nor timorous fear,
^nvy, deceit and pride are strangers there.
^here is no dread of horror to perplex^,
^o poverty to curb, no care to vex,
^o fear^ of Thieves to rob, no Moth to rust,
^o winking fraud, no trembling distrust;
^o trading there, nor trafi^king for toys,
^ut every man his own desires enjoyes.
^here troops of glorious Angels shall surprise
Having rare pleasures sitting on their eyes)
^he new-come Soul, in white transparant vailes
^esembling Snow, their garments decked with trailes
Of Orient Pearl, with which you may behold
^right Diamonds, their girdles are of Gold;
their eyes like morning rays, but shine more ra^e,
^ike threads of fringed Gold, their frizled hair,
their countenances sweet, where Love incloses
^he Lillies with a bed of fragrant Roses,
and send a thousand thousand graces down
from their fair eyes, to welcome me, and crown
My Soul with endless pleasures, and delights
Of rarities their Snowy hands invites
^o their rare walks, where that Immortal love,
^ts richly shadowed in a hallowed grove:
^here pleasures still are lengthened with device,
their food is swelling fruit of Paradise;
Where on a bank of Violets our ears,
shall drink the ravishing music of the spheres:
While we sing Hallelujahs to it, and cry
No Joy; no triumph to Eternity.
Oh! If the King of Heaven would please to smile,
And to my days add but a little while;
A little, little longer, that poor I
Might learn to live before I come to dye,
How should I prize it? then with regenerate fear,
Would I go bathe my eyelids with a tear
For my black crimes; how should I slight this ball
Of Earth, and tread, and trample upon all
The glory of the world: then should my days
Be past in purity, and spent in praise:
But now I see my laboring sands are run
From times swift hour glass; the days bright Sun
Is hurryed to the shades, where envious night
Will hide the luster of his glorious light;
And now it is vain for me thus to implore,
I must be gone and shall see Man no more.
Death.] I have out-stayed my patience, let us away
Together, yonder comes the dawning day,
And still we linger on, cease thy vain prayers,
They are too tedious, and my weighty affairs
Will not admit delay; thy weak desire
Is vain, thus, thus I Will quench my flameing Ire.
Time.] Hold, I command thee hold, or by my powers,
Years, ages, seasons, months, days, minutes, hours:
And by the spangled Palace of the Sun,
By all their glories, ere my glass is run,
Strike if thou dare strike; look here this hand,
Has brought from heaven, a powerful countermand.
I Will puff thy power away, and banish thee
To that low vault of black eternity;
Stand back, or to the shades thou shall be hurld,
I Will make thee cease triumphing over the world.
At this Death vanished; and who ever saw
Those timorous people, that were struck in awe
With that great Comet, that did once appear
Within the Horizon of our Hemisphere,
May guess how we all wondered at the story,
Being much amazed at this Persons glory:
Therefore 'twixt grief or fear, joy, hope, or rage,
I thus replied:
What mean these Changes? What has Time or Age
To do with us? What sudden Change is this?
What glorious Guest? What Bird of Paradise
Does here attend us? What bright A^gel's he
Has left the Palace of Eternity,
To grace my Funeral with his Presence? O
Perhaps he comes but to increase my woe,
And tell me what high glory I have lost,
And what rare pleasures; oh my hopes are crossed!
I have offended Heaven by sin, and now
He Is angry, and does furrow up his brow;
Or else it may be he is come to jest
A while, and rock me to eternal rest,
And in a trance show me that glorious Throne,
Where high borne Saints attend the Holy One,
Glob'd by the breath of Angels, that poor I
M^ghtin my sorrows, Swan-like, singing, die.
So said the Vision, then approached nigher
Rare flashes of delightful love and sier,
Glanced from his eye, his tressels dangled down
By Art, his head was arched with a Crown,
And in his hand a glass that made such way,
Whose laboring sands strove to outrun the day,
And tire his horse; the mantle that he wore
Lapt under his right arm, embroidered over
With stars of orient Pearl, that strove to shroud
Their glimmering glory in an airy Clowd;
It was of Azure and the purest die,
Not much inferior to the midday sky,
When Sol is in his glory; 'twas made fast
With a rich Diamond, his face surpast
The Queen of Love, and his right arm did hold
A rising Sun imbost with purest Gold.
Thus in this gallant posture having laid
His hand upon his hour-glasse, he said,
Time's Message.
Know fearful mortals, I Apollo am,
Who hearing of these sorrows, hither came,
From my bright Palace, and high spangled Throne,
Aloft, to put a period to thy moan:
I dwell above, higher than Eagles wings,
The breath of Fame, or majesty of Kings;
There, where the lovely grey-ey'd morn perfumes
Her rosy Chariot with Sabean fumes,
Where Geminies are linked with Cupids Yoaks,
And Jove sits crowned with a grove of Oaks,
From Jealous Juno, where Sols horse to gain
The olympic hill, does champ the frothy Reine
In fury, and with flaming nostrils dare
The frozen Artique, and the snowy Bear.
It Is I, that chase the regions of the night
Away, those horrid shadows that affright
Languishing Lovers; whose unknown desires
Are virtuous, those circles of blue fires:
That do from the infernal darkness rise
Amain, and glaunce before unquiet eyes,
That none of these from the Iberian glades,
May black the world with their inveterate shades;
And so it was in that same hour, when thou
Did open thy lips in that most holy vow:
That if the King of Heaven would please to smile,
And to thy time add but a little while;
Then thou would spend the remnant of thy years
In raining from thy eyelids showers of tears
For thy black crimes, and then thy following days,
Should pass in purity, and be spent in praise.
Heaven heard thy words, and his all-piercing eye
Relented for thy sorrows, he did spy
Thy low estate, and sent me post away,
To stop deaths hand, and give thee longer day;
And here my message ends, all thy score
Is wiped away, see that thou sin no more,
Lest Heaven be deaf, when next thou do complain,
Live happy, thus I turn my glass again.
Simile.] At this Time vanish too, and I began
To gather strength. Have you beheld a Man
New risen from a swound, whose wandering eyes
At first can scarce discover where he lies,
Till by the help of Art and Nature he
Gathers a little more capacity
To know the standers by, and with some pain,
Gets up upon his feeble feet again.
So I recovered, new risen from the dead,
And live to pay what I have promised.
Which I shall do, but this discourse I Will wave,
Only three words I have brought from the grave
Unto three sorts of persons, theyl refer,
To th'Souldier, Poet, and Astrologer.
And first to thee thou Noble Son of Fame,
That from deep wounds did strive to make thy name
Ride over the world, and for a little breath
Of praise, durst gaze upon the face of death:
I like that humor well in them that do
Such things with Valor, and with Virtue too;
But you Hells Instrument that often dye
The earth with crimson blood, until the cry
Of Widows, Mothers, Orphans too, are feign
With showers of tears to wash it white again.
You that dispeople Earth, and poison Air,
And murder young and old; both soul and fair,
Children and Scholars, these that cannot stand
Against the opposition of your hand;
That strew your walks with blood, and fire, and pay
The tribute of a bleeding wound a day:
Thou can not sight with death, he with a frown
Will make thee trembling lay thy weapons down,
Like a base coward, though thy body be
Walled round about with armor Cap-a-pe.
And you that by the magic of your quill
Write language that can make alive, or kill,
And with your brazen Epitaphs endeavor
To make the dead survive, and live for ever,
That out-charme Orpheus, Amphion, Mercury,
Apollo, Cleo, or Melpomene,
That write in hidden mysteries, and can prate
In rapture, and are Poets Laureat:
Ye Sons of Phoebus, you that can display
Upon the top of high invention, say,
What will you answer Death? Will all the charms
Of Rhetoric, redeem thee from his arms?
Or if the twy fork'd mountain hide thee, will
Death fear to clamber up Parnassus hill?
No: then thy sweetest lines and choicest sense,
High Rhetoric is but fruitless eloquence.
Thou can not charm him with a lyrick strain,
Nor can the Muses fetch thee back again.
And last, to thee, that unto Heaven do fly,
And with the Eagle make thy nest on high;
That with thine Ephemeridis can see
Saturn, Jove, Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercury,
With all their Angulars, and Variations,
Their Sextiles, Squares, Trines, Retrogradations,
Conjunctions, Oppositions, fixed Signs,
Circular, Ecliptique, Equinoctial Lines,
And calculatest for the following year,
Stars, Tropicks, Horoscoqe, and Hemisphere;
And art exceeding skillful in the seven
Celestial Orbs, say Register of Heaven,
Why do not fly from Death? D^st thou not care
For the grim Monster? Why do not prepare
For his approach? Or is thy wisdom shown,
In telling others fortunes, not thine own?
Were I a Merlin or a Rabulis,
Skilled like to Prolomee, or opernicus,
I Would take the winged morning and go shroud
Into the bosom of an airy clowd,
Or saddle winged Pegasus, an^ flee,
With the swift Eagle and Andromeche
Into Joves palace, where obscured I
Might live eternally and never dye.
But Oh, that will not be, there is a power
Higher than these and that same dismal hour
Of death is hid from all, who can withstand
The blow, and ward the terror of his hand:
And on the other side, so no disease
Can take us off sooner then heaven please;
No evil constellations of the Stars,
Perils at Sea, nor wounds of bloody Wars;
Dangers of death, nor sorrows which impair
Our health, infections nor corrupted air,
Which I have found, when I lay at the door
Of death, and all my hopes were given over.
Just then Sols Chariot being in his fall,
Entered the house, they Domus mortis call;
And Luna entered Scorpio, which to me,
Presaged nothing but mortality.
And yet I live, and better too, for here
I behold Angels of a higher Sphere,
Which sung me amorous Eclogues: lullabyes,
And charmed soft sleep into my troubled eyes,
Eased my deluded fancy, put my brain,
And my Souls Organs into tune again:
Oh how shall I adore you! you whose fires,
With hallowed flames so sweetly did inspire
This better soul of reason: and did see
My pain, and came from Heaven to pity me:
How shall I serve you now? and die so pure
That I may come to that sweet place where you are;
Where Saints and Angels arm in arm do walk,
Through those blessed groves: whose sweet discourse and talk
Is love: where we each other may behold
In everlasting glory uncontrolled;
To all Eternity: And Oh my God!
Hide all my faults in love, let not thy rod
Afflict for ever: why do thou take such pains
With worms? Oh wash away my guilt stains
With thy dear merits, that which is above
Desert, and crown me not with Laurels, but with love;
And then, Oh then! though foolish fancies fill
My measured lines, and undervalued quill
With scorn, and though the basest of all men
On earth slight the Geometry of my Pen;
Yet I will now go soar a little higher,
And light my blazing torch with holy fire;
That my poor Tapor may resemble thine,
Whose sparkling glories are of fire Divine;
And when these lips shall fail to speak, Oh then!
When all my earthly work is done, and when
My pen is dulled, and when I shall restore
Nature her debt, when I shall be no more:
Then grant without a blemish I may flee,
Into the Palace of Eternity:
Or show me here the promised Land, that I
May live, and wander thither when I dye.
Draw me, and I will run after thee.
THus I, poor I, in Pilgrims weed obscure,
Surround the world, yet feign away would fly
To Heaven, for alas I am too sure
That if I am entangled here I dye.
Yet when I see this price is got with pain,
I set me down, and count my labor vain;
Resolving to stand still, or wander back again.
2.
Sol's flying Horse, whose nostrils vomit flames,
And from their Lungs spit forth quotidian fire,
His Whips of flaming Wyre their speed proclaims,
Yet their Immortal spirits scorn to tire,
Till down th'Olympick hill they make their way
In fresh cariere, and Tytan's glittering raye
Does hurry to the shades, and Sol has done the day.
3.
But oh I tire; some Angels from above
Lend me your aid; is there no gentle hand,
To guide me to the Pasace of my love,
And lead me prisoner to the promised land?
Alas these up-hill ways are hard to trace,
I Am unacquainted with that holy place,
But run quite out of breath ere I begin the race.
4.
My weak desires are but like sudden flashes
Of Lightning in unwholesome troubled air,
And sin like Thunder every minute dashes
Me down, my deeds are far more foul than fair:
When shall I end my race that run so slow?
Or how escape from Death that do not know
The way that leads to Life? where, whither shall I go?
5.
If! should fly to wealth, that's but a trouble,
And who ^an glory in uncertain gain?
And if I sly to beauty that's a bubble,
Wealth is but want, and pleasure is but pain;
Earths gain is loss, her sweets are all but sour.
Her highest joy is vanished in an hour,
Aals all flesh is grass, Death crops the fairest flower.
6.
To Heavens high Palace therefore will I steer
My wandering course, Oh that some gentle wind
Would fill my Sails! why should I tarry here,
And in this veil of misery be confined
To sin and sorrow? Lord let these my ways
Be led by thee, and I will waste these days
Which now I spend in Tears, in speaking out thy praise.
7.
Behold my Body how obscure it lies!
Alas Free Will is but an idle story,
Can my dead heart, or these my Leaprous eyes
Direct me to the Palace of high glory?
Phoeb with her sable Hemisphere would stray,
And every wandering Star would lose his way,
If Sol should hide his face, the giver of the day.
8.
Let Love and Terror both together awe me;
I am the Star, be thou my glorious Sun,
Thy light must guide me, and thy love must draw me,
I have no strength to stand, no power to run:
Oh wound my bosom with an amorous dart
Of holy fire! the thoughts of what thou art,
Invites, incites, delights, my joy, my love, my heart.
The Soliloquie.
IT was in the day, when the Soul was armed with Virtue and unarmed
Innocence; singing her Epithalamiums among the trees of the Garden, like a
Bird of Paradise. 'Twas then, when she could spread her airy wings, and fly to
Heaven, chaunting her sonnets (with the Hallelujahs of Angels) in her welltun'd
Lays) to the delight of her Lover. Before, Sensuality, Security, Pride,
Discourtesie, Opinion, and Disdain, had blinded those well-form'd eyes, and
blackt so fair a face; but now instead of Aspiring, he is Descending; instead
of soaring to Heaven, he must go sow the Earth, where his sweaty Pain must
curb his aspiring Pride.

This was the day, if it might be called day, the latter part whereof was
Tragical; wherein (I think) the Sun was muffled in a black, mantle of clouds
which resembled ink put into water; and like a curtain of night did overspread
the Universe, as if they meant to banish out the day; or like another Phaeton
into some unknown world to drive the flaming throne. The Heavens, that
sometimes seemed to smile at Man's Innocence, upon whose well-form'd body, if
the Sun in his pride had shot a burning ray, then gentle Zepherus with soft and
silken wings would fan cool air upon him. But now the thundering Heavens and
stormy Winds strive which shall be loudest; the first with their horrid cracks
do shake the Fabrique, as if they would break the Axletrees of the Earth, and
hurl her from her Artique and Antartique Poles: The other with roaring gusts
of wind boil up such mighty waves, and shoot such angry surges at the Sun, as
if they meant to drown the day, or in their fury to wash away the world.

Thus Man is thrust out of Paradise, and instead of having converse with
Angels, he is become a companion for Devils; he that aspired so much after
knowledge, knows nothing now but that which he would not know: ah me! how is
the beauty of Innocence become a map of misery? the Man that was made Immortal
to live, has now received Sentence to dye: ah me, how are the mighty fallen!
he that was once the Image of Heaven, the Glory of the Earth, the wonder of the
World, the pride of Nature, and the Angels true Idea, is now a curse to the
Earth, and an offense to Heaven, borne to misery, and banished out of glory:
whose days of life are hasting, whose death comes on poasting, having no power
to lengthen the one, nor friends to lament the other.

The symptoms of Immortality are gone, and sin has puffed his power away; he
that climbed, can hardly crawle, and he that had Feathers to fly, can scarce
find Feet to follow; for so much do the words of our subject import: Draw me,
and I will run after thee.

And now with a free will answer me, all free welwillers, you that have still
the power your Father had in Paradise, that can overthrow Sin, and conquer
Satan; shut up Hell, and open Heaven; and baffle all those principalities and
powers, temptations and corruptions, which often in our Journey to Heaven do
make us lie becalmed; does not thine eye check to see our subject? does not thy
heart smite thee to read thine inability?

Peradventure thou will ask how God draws the Soul? I could answer several
ways; God is not tied to the education, condition, means, time, matter, nor
manner of his creature: And his ways are above our thoughts, as far as an
infinite Creator is beyond a finite creature: it is the prerogative of his
grace, to draw one man one way, and another man another way; all of which for
their number and nature are past our finding out, nevertheless, I shall name
five ways, and they be these; By his Works. By his Word. By his Lash. By his
Light. And by his Love.


First, God draws by his works, and this I believe, would puzzle the
Intellects of Angels to rehearse, who I think are the fittest Orators to utter
the glory of his greatness; since they are not clouded with a veil of flesh,
but can behold those works of wonder, in a more perfect form, which I believe
does not a little amaze those glorious creatures, while they bow before the
Immortal throne.

What means the forming of this spacious universe, and the setting so fair a
fabric in such a curious frame; the Imperial Heavens, where Argel^sing
Hallelujahs. I shall not speak of that sense, it passes the highest capacity;
and in relation of which, many abler pens than mine have been already dulled;
it being circkled with such brightness and glory, in such a capacious Orb,
that no mortal can behold and not drop down and dye.

And when Aurora sets open her golden gates, in what a Majesty the Sun arises,
as from a bed of Roses, to rouse up sleepy mortals, and lend his light to all,
unmuzling Darkness from the lower World: And with what swiftness does he
hurry through the Zodiac, adding Summers heat, and Winters cold, and sometimes
a Medium when he mingles his sire with the cold and freezing Air; and how
welcome is his approach to the Earth, who against the return of his Chariot
wheels, does cast off her mantle of mourning, and adornes her self with
costly fruits, sweet flowers, perfumed finells, rich odours, amorous glances,
sweet smiles, beauty, bravery, dignity and glory, wrapped in a robe of the purest
dye, and flourishing in a never-fading livery of green.

Beside, the Moon, Planets, and fixed Stars, and all those Royal Armies that
spangle the Canopie, that in their nightly Watches, they might adorn the
darkened Throne, when Darkness draws a sable Curtain over the Sky, and the
Sun has done the day: What shall I say, for the time would fail me to tell
you of the Royal Armies of Heaven; their secret workings in their several
Orbs, the Golden Mines, costly Jemms, rich Jewels of the Earth, her pompous
Apparel, delitious fare, Physical Herbs, gallant Fruits, sweet Flowers, the
wonders of Art, the hidden fecresies of Nature, that lie in the boundless
Earth; unfathomed Sea, unseen Fire, and perfumed Air.

What mean the shining Lamps of Heaven, that chase away darkness from the
world; the dividing of the unruly Elements, the hanging of the Earth just in
the Center of the Heavens; her wondrous motion between the two Poles, her
equal distance from the flaming Chariot of the Sun, and the hidden region of
Fire, lest with contagious heat our hearts should fail, lest we should suck
up hot lightning, and embrace in our bosoms Fire in the stead of Air.

The works of God have in all ages drawn Souls, as may witness the Plagues of
Egypt, the Prosperity of Israel, the overthrow of Nations, the clashing of
Kingdoms, the dividing of the red Sea, the Manna in the Wilderness, the
thundering of the Law on Mount Sina, the Birth of our Savior, the deeds that
he did, the Sick that were healed, the Eyes that were opened ^^e Devils
dispossessed, the Wicked converted, the Lame that were cured, the Lepers that
were cleansed, the Dead that were raised, the calming of the Sea to the
Disciples, the Holy Ghost that was given to the Apostles, the draught of Fishes
to Peter, the Vision from Heaven to Paul. These works of God (I say) have in
all ages wrought on both Sinners and Saints, causing the one to admire, and the
other to adore.

Secondly, God draws by his word; and if it were demanded what word? I should
answer, the sweetest words that Art or Love can frame, the word of the Gospel,
what directions, dehortations, what councels and comforts? what inticements and
allurements? every Line is penned with Love, every Page has its promise, that
he that runs may read; and if it were not so, how should the poor Pilgrim
wander to the holy land? when on the one hand the world presents him with
riches, and rarities, honor and pleasure, presumption and pride, dignity,
vaineglory, stately buildings, costly, fair, trampling Horses, rich Jewels,
rare Music, inchaunting faces, amorous glaunces, sweet smiles; when his
journey to Heaven is strewed with Briars and Thorns, difficulties and dangers,
afflictions, desertions, trialls, temptations; being despised, disgraced,
afflicted, tormented and abused with envy and folly, discourtesie, disloyalty,
opinion and disdain, and how often do these poor Souls strike Sail, and
lie becalmed? when the Heavens are covered with blackness and darkness, and
the Sun of glory is mantled in a sable cloud, and has turned the glorious morn
into a gloomy day.

Therefore the Almighty wisdom, thought best to draw by his word, and no part
of his word so prevalent as promises, to support the Soul in the midst of
sorrow, they being the promises of this life, and of that which is to come; the
promises of pardon of sin, of rest for the Soul, of protection from danger,
of deliverance from Fear, of communion with the Spirit, of fellowship with the
Son, of eternal life, and the Fathers love; and how exceeding great and
precious are they? great in the superlative, the greatest. All that we have,
are nothing to promises: they are like Spikenard in the Kings Palace, or Manna
in the Wilderness: or Solomon's Chariot paved with Love, or Balm in Gilead, or
Moses rod, or the ointment poured on Jesus Christ, or that perfume that ran
about the head of Aaron, being for our security in the possession of the Prince
of Peace, built upon the rock of ages: the Usurer (it may be) has rusty
prosperity, the high-borne flashy dignity, the Prodigal a puff of Pleasure,
the Soldier a blast of honor: But tell me thou Silkeworme, or speak thou
glorious slave, how long will they last?

Many men have great Estates, but they have but a little time; the children of
Israel murmured for want of bread, and 'twas that which made Hagar sad, when
her bottle of water was out, but you that travel to the holy land, your water
shall never fail. Consider then how they ennoble the mind, how they make us
partakers of the Divine Nature, how they purge away Sin, and sanctify the
Soul, how in all afflictions they give us strong Consolations, that there is
no danger but we shall be delivered from it, no cross but we shall be able to
bear it, nor no duty but we shall be able to do it. Consider how they open
the Ears, how they enlighten the Eyes, how they direct the Feet to walk, and
teach the Fingers to fight; how they give us rest for weariness, courage for
faintness, and kindle fire in the stead of fear.

Object. But it may be objected, why does God make promises of reward, if the
Creature cannot work? or why does he command, when we have not ability to obey?

Answ. God gave Man his portion in Paradise, he was endued with excellency,
when he came out of his hands, and God is not bound to give him a new stock,
though he has found out many inventions to run out the old. God is no more
bound to preserve us, than he was to create us, therefore Man's inability does
not discharge him from his duty, God still reteineth his prerogative royal,
though we have lost a Subjects Loyalty, he has not lost his Kingly Dignity,
but still may command, though we (poor we) have no ability to obey! God calls
on all men every where to repent, will it therefore follow Man can repent? No,
but it is our duty to do^ it, and our misery that we cannot.

But farther, God has made an everlasting covenant with us, and works that in
us, which he requires of us, and has undertaken to do that which he has
commanded us to do; John 6.5, 6. therefore having removed this Objection, let
us go forward to see what strong consolation promises do afford us; the truth
of it is, the promises are those that make our lives comfortable in the world:
we are traveling to Heaven, and all the portion we have is in promises, to
assure us we shall lack nothing in our Journey, Heb. 6.17, 18. Thy portion is
in thy Fathers hand, and therefore whether it be losses, crosses, temptations,
desertions or persecutions that trouble thee; be contented, for ere long thou
shall pass through all thy poverty, and when thou come home, shall feed on
husks no more; what joy will the Father and all his holy Angels make at thy
arrival? then all tears shall be wiped from thine eyes, and thou shall soon
forget thy light afflictions, and momentany miseries, when thou shall sit
smiling in eternity, and thy head impaled in such an exceeding weight of glory.

Thirdly, God draws by his Lash: Before I was afflicted, I went astray, but now
I have learned thy Statutes, Psalm. 119.67. but there being so many things
extant for the supporting of afflicted Souls, I shall only say thus much,
that conquering is as well by str^^king as striking; howbeit our Heavenly
Father knows best how to drive one, and draw another; who are to be affrighted
with a frown, and who to be allured by love; Linen is made whiter by Bucking,
and Woolen cleaner by Beating; Sufferings and Sorrows come not upon us without
a cause, though to them that have too little Faith, or too much of slavish
fear, they serve but as Water in the Ship, or rough Winds to the Sails, that
sinks the one, and blows away the other, because they see not the hand that
sends them, but like the Dog, bite at the Stone, and mind not the Man.

Fourthly, God draws the Soul by his Light: when night appears in her
spangled Canopie, and mounts her darkened throne, to follow her flying
predecessor; when with too long delay she shakes her dewy locks, as she rides
upon the backs of downy Ravens sleek and sable Plumes, and hurles black
darkness from her Chariot wheels, wrapping the world in a Mantle of mourning,
by the charming power of her sable Hemisphere: then the forsaken Universe is
lost a while, and drowsy Mortals (rockt in her charming lullabies) in the
midst of danger sleep secure: notwithstanding the terrors of the night, and the
dangers of the dark, those fearful visions, and strange apparitions that
affright languishing lovers, and sometimes glaunce before unquiet eyes.

Thus the poor Soul, in the time of Ignorance, is like the Egyptians that
grovelled in the dark, or the blind Sodomites that could not find the door,
who were (in the midst of distraction) hurried to destruction: the first buried
alive in the Water, the last burned to death in the Fire. Alas there is no
coming to Paradise by pleasure, nor gaining Heaven by honor; not Honor nor
Dignity, Pleasure, vaineglory, a Kingly Throne, nor a transitory Crown. It is
not coin can purchase Canaan, nor Money merit Mercy; Nay, to come nearer, it
is not Earths happiness, nor the Creatures holiness, Man's sincerity nor his
minds purity, that can merit Heaven; not by Prayers nor Promises, Duties nor
Endeavors. Which when the Sun of Righteousness has discovered to the Soul,
(when he sees there is no contentment in the Creature, till it centers in the
Creator; no satisfaction in it self, no rest in the Soul, but that the
redemption thereof depends on another) therefore in a self abhorrencie, he
mutters to himself these or the like speeches.

The World shall never have my heart no more, no, though I should sit at the
upper end thereof in Princes Palaces, and had the peculiar treasure of Kings;
though I were dressed in robes of the purest die, and fared deliciously every
day; though I were drawn in a Chariot of Ebonie, or sat upon a chair of
Down, or did ride upon the wings of Fame; though I had stately buildings, and
could for recreation retire a while into curious Gardens, rare Walks, and
gallant Groves, where I might hear the birds sing out their ravishing tones,
in a well-measured evennesse, and be lulled asleep with the still music of
murmuring Water, and perfumed Air; though I had all the beauties of the
Arcadian Court, and had every room adorned with White, Green and Blue
hangings, fastened with Cords of fine Linen and Purple, and Silver Rings, and
though my Bed were of Gold, hung round with Diamond and Pearl, and stood upon
a pavement of Red and Blue, and White and Black Marble.

Deluding Vanities, I Will tear you from my heart, what do you here weak
chains? my Pride presumed once you had the power to fetter Hell, and guard me
from the terrors of the evil day; I once believed you could have brought
content, when your delights dropped in my Soul like dew into the bosom of a
flower; and thou poor flattered heart, whom often I have esteemed pure; I
thought my prayers once would open Heaven, and bring down Guardian Angels from
the Canopie of Love, to catch my Orizons, and bear my night oblations to the
holy one; but light does chase these black delusions now, like darkness from
the rising of the morn; since I my self am nothing, I Will go to him that has
the treasure of all: If he will please to except me, I will cease to be my
own, and live to his glory (no otherwise) that I might redeem those
vaine-spent hours which I have thrown away.

Fifthly and lastly, God draws the Soul by his Love: And here (sweet Readers)
I should indite an Epithalamium of Love, but having lost my best Fancies with
my Fortunes, I shall rather darken than dignifie so rare a Subject, set Hills
on Hills, till they aspire above the lofty Alps, whose proud imperious
Piramids, may serve as a Rampant against the Suns rage, and all is below
Love; it is not the treasure of the world in one, the wealth of Tagus, nor the
rich Peru, nor Pearl enough to pave the Courts of Kings, mountains of Silver,
nor mines of golden Ore, that can buy Love: It is the mirror of Earth, the
majesty of Heaven, the ornament of the Soul, the beauty of the Body, the glory
of the Spheres, the upholder of the Universe, the delight of Man, the Dignity
of Angels, the map of Honor, and the worlds great wonder. Which when the Soul
once tastes, how is it raised with Joy? how ravished with Delight? how rich is
he in Adversity? how merry in Misery? reckoning his Poverty, prosperity; his
Afflictions, felicity; his Disgraces, high dignity, as having nothing, yet
possessing all things; delighting in company, yet loves to be alone; praying
for life, yet desirous to dye; counting his days but hours, and yet his
minutes years.

And though this Soul may be as unwelcome to the Peacocks of the world, as Ink
upon their Gorgets, Water in their Shoos, Dirt upon their Cheeks, or Ashes in
their Eyes, yet he is borne of the Family of Heaven, and lives more high than
they. His Drink is Wine of Consolation, his Bread the food of the Gospel, his
clothing the Armor of Righteousness, his Shield, the Shield of Faith, his
Dowry the Kingdom of Glory, his Recreation is Religion, his Bed the bosom of
Abraham, under the Canopie of Love, surrounded by Guardian Angels; where he
does (as well he may) teach sorrow how to sing, sighing his crying Elegies in
Heavenly raptures, sending many a groan to Heaven, that he might be dissolved,
till soft and silken slumbers close his amorous eyes.

But is this Act our own? can the blind eye put a difference 'twixt light and
darkness? can fordid Earth outvie the shining Heavens? or a Candle vie with
the glory of the Sun at the top of noon day? can deformity become purity? or
Devils plead with holy Angles? can Poverty purchase Dignity? or the thing that
is sensual become supernatural? Oh no! It is the work of the Creator,
therefore bow not thy glory to the Creature. That God should come a wooing to
thy Soul, to thee that had no comeliness nor beauty! that God should love
thee, who had no loveliness in thee! that God should lay out so much, and
yet look for so little! that God should speak to thee, when Man only spoke to
others! and that thou should feel his work, when others did but here his
Word! that God should sum up thy Sighs, and bottle up thy Tears, and for a
little insamy crown thee with a Crown of Glory! that God should convert thee
in the morning of thy days, and let others go on till the evening of their
age! that he should give thee a token of Heaven, when so many thousands drop
into Hell! that thou should be converted with joy, when others have had
thunder claps of Mount Sinah ringing in their ears, while they have sailed
through the Red Sea of sorrow, in the midst of the valley of Achor; thou have
been drawn by the still voice of a promise, thy ways were strowed with Roses,
thy footsteps washed with butter, and thou have been allured by Love, and then
that God should Metamorphose thy nature, and turn thee from a Nabal to an
Abigal; from a Demos, to a David; from a Judas, to a John; from a Publican, to
a Puritan; and then lead thee by an Eye of Faith, and the powerful Arm of
Love to trust thy Soul upon his bare word to all Eternity, whether thy
Judgment may be Life or Death.

The SOULS Trance.
Soul. I Shall never be able to get any ease for my trouled heart, just such
another fit of amazement fell upon me, when Tread of the Vision from Heaven,
that shone about the head of Paul, then was I in as great a straight as now;
therefore I will say with him, Lord what will thou have me do? If Man in
Innocence, who was a piece of Excellency, the Image of Heaven, Companien of
Angels, and Lord of Earth, had then no power to stand, how then shall be secure
from a fall? If he that resembled Heaven could not, then I that am like to Hell
shall not; Oh my heart! how happy had I been, if I had died as soon as I was
borne, or if these wretched eye had never seen the day, then had I not seen
mine own deserved overthrow: but I will reason no more, the remnant of my
days that I shall languish here, I Will give to Contemplation, and pass my
wearyed time in Tears, and see if in the midst of sorrow I can weep my self
away, and like a hunted Partridge hide my self, -- For I
Must waste my Soul in sorrow till I dye.



Christ. What Man art thou, that when Nights gloomy shades has drawn her
sable Curtain over the Sky, and banished out the Day, durst stand to question
Heaven; whose sacred name, thy black unhallowed tongue ought not to mention,
but on thy knees with reverence: say, can thou plead with him at whose
command attend those sulphurous flames which Aetna's fiery mouth does vomit
into Air, why is thy heart so full of carnality to dispute of Man's ability?
and question Heavens love, -- were all the powers of Hell come down in Battle
array, to bear thee captive in their furious Arms, though they should
surround thee with hot Lightning, and cast their fiery darts to wound thee, as
thick as Atoms in the Air, yet I alone would stand thy fierce assault, and
with a blow, I Would quell their pride, and set my Prisoner free.


Soul. How comely is deformity beautified at thy approach? and all that
blackness chased away, that darkened my understanding with a frown; resembling
the majesty of the Sun ushered by glory from his shining throne, but as it
would be presumption in me to think I merit forgiveness from thee, so would
it be rebellion to refuse thy proffered love, which is everlasting life, but I
am unworthy.


Christ. Poor Soul, remember how dear thou art in Heavens eyes, 'twas not the
treasure of a thousand Worlds, Mountains of Silver, nor Mines of Gold,
promises of Men, purchase of Crowns, policy of States, purity of Saints, nor
power of Angels, that could redeem thee from eternal death, till I did pay the
price, and wilt not thou believe me now? except my profferred love, and let me
lead through this darkened vale; thou can not find the way alone, see if I
will not bring thee to my Fathers house, and lay thee under the Canopie of
Love; though dangers were before thee as thick as Stars above thee, my hand
should crush them all, and with an angry breath, I Will blast their fury in their
height of pride.


Soul. Oh my dear let me not see paradise in a vision! that when I wake it may
appear a dream: I know thou can do all things, but I am so stained with
Spots, and dressed in rags of such deformity, that I shall but fall as dirt upon
thy Cheeks, or Ashes in thine Eyes; the best I have is but unwilling
willingness, why do thou descend below thy incomparable throne, to trouble
thine ears with me? Alas what can I give thee for all thy pains, but
Rebellion? and sure the saving of such a wretch as I, will not advance thy
glory: but speak apace my Sighs, my best Orators, I feign would resign my will
to thee for ever, Oh guide and direct me for I am wholly thine.


Christ. How comely are thy eyelids in their Tears, which sit upon thy face
like Arythrian Pearl, with a Vermylian dye, they shine like to the eyelids of
the morn, for when the Sun retires behind a cloud a while, to weep alone
unseen, methinkes he looks like thee; those drops upon thy cheeks, are like
the early dew that comes to kiss the Rose, and in a Summer morn, does fall
into the bosom of a flower; the Courts of Kings, or Princes Palaces, are poor
habitations, I had rather live with thee than with the greatest Monarchs of the
World.


Soul. Oh what is there in me worthy of love? I shall be the unworthiest
Instrument that ever was made to celebrate thy praise; The Organs of my soul
are all untuned; and every noble faculty of my spirit is obscure; I am poor
and despised, and the world rejects me, but it is no matter, if thou will love
me, though I be hated of all: but how shall I spend my weary hours when thou
art gone away?


Christ. I Will send the Spirit to bear thee company, when thou do sit alone,
and sometimes dropst a tear, his hand shall wipe it away, and glad thy heart;
teach sorrow how to sing, and when thou walk abroad, a guard of Angels shall
secure thee from injury my love.


Soul. When I am sad alone, my busy thoughts shall fly on wings of
contemplation, and see thee in Heaven, and I will watch and pray till stealing
slumbers with soft and airy wings, shall bring my languishing Spirit, to the
Visions of Eternity, where I may dream of thee; and when I wake, I Will walk and
view the world, and when I see the spangled Canopie, and behold the wondrous
motion of the Orbs, I Will think upon thy glory there.


Christ. I Will go prepare a place for thee, a place in eternity above the teeth
of time, there where the grey-ey'd morn ushers the flaming Chariot of the day,
surrounded in brightness and glory, where we will dwell in temples not made
with hands, in streets of Gold like to transparant glass; and when the
houre-glass of thy life is run, and time has brought thy journey to an end, I
le dress thy temples in a victors Orb, and arch them with a Crown.


Soul. Well, while I live here, I Will be exceeding humble, (and if I can holy)
in all my actions, I Will resemble thee. If sinful thoughts begin to stain my
Soul, I Will weep them over ere I have thought them out. If I am abused, I will
get upon the wings of prayer, and tell thee all my wrongs, my life shall be a
continual repentance; I will not back-slide, rather than so, I will wast my
Soul with Sobs, and Sigh away my Body into air.


Christ. Farewell, dearest farewell, make have and meet me in Heaven, let not
the assaults of sin daunt thee, but with an Heroic heart stand the fiery
trialls; remain as spotless as my love; I will go before to the Palace of
Peace, situated in Eternity, the purest milk white robes shall be our
vestments for the Marriage day, and our Music the Halleluja's of Angels, run
then with patience, for when thou come to the end of the race, I will welcome
thee home, -- And we will knit fast the bands
Of Marriage, and in glory join our hands.



Soul. And does this empty world deserve thus much of me, to steal my heart in
the prime of all my age, that I should lift up my voice in my best tunes,
chaunting amorous Sonets hourly to its praise? no, every of these have left me
now dull melancholy, the picture of my sorrow, Oh how the object of my Souls
delight did please himself to encourage me! did I enjoy that happiness for
ever! I should have some of Heaven here, but now what joy have I to live, whose
life is but a trouble? this world, this poor, this low, this transitory world,
is but a scene of sorrow, it is but a dying life, or living death, and that
which troubles me is, how long it will be ere I shall have his company again:
when he went away, me thoughts he resembled the flod Sun, when down the
Western world he drives his teem, leaving the Universe in a mantle of
mourning, and I could wish my night were coming too: why do I languish thus?
since I cannot see his face, I will go hear his word, that I may learn to
do his will, methoughts he had me fight against temptations, and look for
fiery trials, I will do it; and for the love of him I will pass a thousand
dangers, -- -- In which my courage shall,
Stand up Victorious, or in battle fall.



Ye Sons of Honor, Heirs of Glories Crown, whose sacred feet must trample the
Holy Fields; what is it that makes you sing in sorrow, and glory in your shame?
that crowns your hearts with courage? and beautifies your faces with a smile?
that sets fortitude upon your brows, and places sweetness in your amorous
eyes? that does advance you in adversity, makes you rich in poverty, and glory
in indignity, is it not Love (...) what is it that will keep up your spirits at
that Dreadful Day, when the Trumpet shall be sounded, the World shall be
startled, the Graves shall be opened, the Dead shall be raised, and the Unjust
shall be Judged? will it not be Love? when the Fabric of the World shall be
shaken, and the Axletrees or the Earth broken, and Time shall lose his way,
when the Kings of the Earth, and all their mighty Armies shall look pale, and
their winged Bulwarks grapple, and their battered Kingdoms fly about their
ears in clouds of dust, when the Spheres are sweltting in flames, the Earth
surrounded by fire, and bufling winds beat Thunder out of Air; when with
terror from on high, the day shall be as black, as if Don Phoebus frighted from
his chaite, left ugly darkness on his Chariot wheels: and indeed, Love may be
compared to Wine, with which Kings sometimes have drunk themselves to such a
height of kindness, that they have remembered Majesty no more: alas every
Christian has his cross, every day its difficulty, every time its trouble,
and every action a a several temptation; the best of what is here, is but
Sunshine mixed with Rain, sweet with four, and every smile intermingled with a
frown; but then ye shall put off your fl^shly garments ^^corruption, and be
dressed in the habit of Heaven, out of the ward^^p of glory, and be entertained
with the pleasures of Paradise, where there are incomparable delicates for the
taste, sweet persumes for the smell, rare music for the Ear, ravishing
objects for the Eye; where thou shall lie on a Bed of Roses, in swelling soft
Eternity, and be lul'd in Angels arms; but it being beyond description, too
high for imagination, impossible for the mind to conceive it, unlawful for
the tongue to utter it, I shall conclude the Book, for methinkes a gloomy Cloud
does stop the passage of my Pen, and I can write no more.

FINIS.

