Shorthand yet shorter: OR, The Art of SHORT-WRITING advanced in a more swift,
easy, regular, and natural Method than hitherto.

WHEREBY The former Difficulties in placing the Vowels are removed; they, the
Dipthongs and Consonants, further contracted; the Particles, Pronouns, Degrees
of Comparison, Persons, Moods, Tenses, Contrarieties, Repetitions, Sentences
Negative and Interrogatory are shortened.

The Rules are plain, easy to be remembered and applied to any other
Shorthand, that such as have learned other Authors may have hence a very
considerable help to write more swiftly without altering their Foundation.

By GEORGE RIDPATH.

If any desire to be expeditiously taught, the Author may be heard of in Eagle
and Child Court in St. Giles in the Fields, near the Church, or upon the Scots
Walk at Exchange-time most Saturdays.s

London, Printed by J. D. for the Author, 1687.

To the Right Honorable PHILIP Lord Wharton, Baron of Wharton.
My Lord,
BEing about to publish the ensuing little Book, These are humbly to beg your
Lordship's Patrociny, which I am emboldened to do on the following Reasons.

First, Because it had its Birth under your Lordship's Roof, while I had the
Honor to be one of your Lordship's Domestics.

And in the next place, because it is in it self improveable for promoting of
Piety and Business, in both which respects your Lordship has rendered your self
eminent amongst those of your Rank.

By a long and undaunted owning and professing of the former, both in public
and private Capacities, your Lordship is no less signalized than your renowned
Ancestor was at the famous Battle of Solan Moss, where he purchased Victory
for his Country, entailed Honor upon his Family, and enrolled himself in the
Registers of Fame as a Hero of the first Magnitude, whose Achievement
occasions one of the noblest Passages that the History of the Kingdom affords.

By your Lordship's Skill and Dexterity in managing the latter, you have
aggrandized your Revenues, and made them more adaequate than formerly to the
Splendour of your Family.

These things being considered, it seems very natural for this Enchiridion to
cast it self at your Lordship's feet and beg your Protection, which tho the
subject matter thereof be but mean, and seemingly below your Lordship's
Grandeur to Patronize, yet being the best way I can conceive my self able to
express my Gratitude for Obligations I am under to your Lordship, I hope it
will be taken in good part from him who shall always look upon it as his Honor
to have been, and ambitious still to entitle himself,

My Lord, Your Lordship's much obliged, and very humble Servant, Geo. Ridpath.

Courteous Reader,
THE Usesulness of Shorthand is so generally known, and readily apprehended,
that it is needless for me to say any thing in its Commendation, and therefore
I shall here only give an Answer to an Objection some make against it, and an
account of this present Essay.

Object. It teaches to spell false.

Answ. They will scarcely be capable to learn this Art, that are not
beforehand able to read and write, and consequently so acquainted with the
Rules of spelling true, that they will be in no hazard of learning to spell
false.

I desire such also to consider that there is a great difference betwixt
spelling false and short; for in this Art we acknowledge that the leaving out of
superfluous Letters is enjoined, but will not so readily grant that therefore
we teach to spell false. Some able Critics in our Language do wish that this
Method were more in Practice; for as it is no Perfection in any Language to
have more Letters in its Words than are sufficient to sound it, it can be no
injury to it to have what is unnecessary expunged; and surely if this course
were taken it would make our Language more easy to our own Youth to read, and
to Foreigners both to read and speak. These Considerations have prevailed with
the French of late to leave out a great many of such Letters as they do not
pronounce; and since we Apify them in many worse things, it will be no great
Crime to do it a little in this.

In the next place, I desire such Objectors to consider, that we do not teach
them to write the same way in Long-hand that they do in Short, but make the
difference between the two plainly appear, and consequently teach true spelling
in their Sense over again, for the Examples are first given as they should be
in Long-hand, and then as they should be in Shorthand.

But some will still object and say, that by writing Shorthand they will get a
habit of spelling false.

Answ. They may with as much Reason argue against learning Latin and French;
because in the former they are accustomed to pronounce all the Letters, and so
because they read fine fine, in Latin they must needs read the English Word
fine so too; or because they are accustomed to read nostre notre in French,
they must needs read the English word Oister Oter too; or because in
Arithmetic we express Numbers by Figures, we should in other cases get a habit
of doing so too. But the contrary is so evident, that to make such Objections
would be justly accounted ridiculous.

I shall now give you an account of this present Essay, as follows.

Being very desirous to learn Shorthand, I perused all the Authors I could
meet with for that end, but missing that Satisfaction I expected in them, I set
about this Composure for my own use. In prosecution of which I discovered
several considerable things (not taken notice of by former Authors) that fall
very naturally under Rules of Contraction, which after several Years Practice
and Experience of their Usefulness, I now publish for common Benefit in the
ensuing Method.

1. Here is an easy Alphabet, in composing whereof I took care to make the
Characters distinct in their shapes, and easy to be joined together, which
several of our late Authors not observing, have discouraged their Learners on
that account in the very Threshold.

2. Here are all the double Consonants (except two) entirely framed of the
Letters of the Alphabet, whereas others make such Marks as have no dependence
upon the same, and is consequently a double charge to the Memory.

3. You have here the places of the Vowels in better order than hitherto;
others having assigned the place of a and e both at top, and o and u both at
bottom, or a just above the Letter, and u just underneath it; the inconvenience
of both which Methods you may see by these Examples, for according to the
former, where e and u are only distinguished from a and o by their greater
distance from the Letter before them, if one were writing in haste it will be
difficult to keep due distance, and so the places being the same, there is
hazard of confounding words of different Signification; or if, according to the
latter, one were to write Baruch, it must be writ thus r / b, and then one is
at a loss where to join ch; or humane, it must be writ thus h / m, and then you
are at a loss again where to dispose of your following Letters, and so of all
words of these sorts: but both these Inconveniences are avoided here, as you
may see by looking upon Figure 3 in the Copper Plate.

4. All others having enjoined the proper Character of a Vowel to be writ when
it begins a Word, instead thereof I have ordered a prick to be put in the
Vowels place, which is sooner writ than any other Character, and will be also
more beautiful.

5. Whereas others have only given a general hint, and some few instances to
leave out superfluous Letters, I have given a particular account of them all,
with Directions to know when they are to be left out, which must needs be a
considerable help to the Younger, who cannot discern them, and the Elder who
have not leisure to consider which they are.

6. I have given you such Rules for exchanging Letters of like sound, by which
one may often serve for two or three, and such a plain Table of Syllables for
beginning and ending of words as has more dependence upon the Alphabet than
any yet extant.

7. You have here Rules how to express the words of, to, with, from, by and for
without writing any thing for them, and such a short way of expressing the
small Particles a, the, this, that, these, those, and the Pronouns ours, yours,
theirs, etc. and the degrees of Comparison, or the words more, most, than of
the, among them, etc. as was never hitherto published by any.

8. Such Rules for shortning the Persons, Moods, and Tenses as will be of
exceeding good use, whereby the words thou, he, we, ye, they, let, wish, may,
can, might, ought, would, should, may, or can hereafter are contracted, the
words do, am, was, have, had, shall and will are left out.

9. The Moods, Tenses and Persons, are improved in the same manner in Sentences
Interrogatory and Negative.

10. You have here Rules for contracting of short words when they come
together, and for abreviating of long words, expressing of Contrarieties, and
Repetitions as short as any yet extant; which, being well adverted to, will
sufficiently supply the want of, and be much more useful and practicable than
such Tables (wherewith some Authors abound) which have neither sufficient
dependence upon the Letters of the Alphabet, nor do naturally represent the
thing signified; and consequently are difficult to learn, burdensome to the
Memory, and hard to retain; as may appear by this instance: Some Authors
prescribe ab to be writ for abominable, and such like, which with as much
reason may signify absolute, abundance, and any other word that begins with ab,
whereas by adding an m in the place of o according to the Rules here given, the
root of the word is fully expressed, and consequently no doubt what it is,
neither does it occasion any burden to the Memory, nor difficulty in reading,
both which are necessary Consequents of the former Method.

11. You have here a Table of Analogical Marks, wherein the Characters for the
most part represent naturally the thing signified, and will consequently make a
quick Impression on, and be no burden to the Memory.

12. You have also a Specimen of other Tables, with Directions how to compose
them if so be you approve of them.

I desire the Ingenuous Reader before he gives his Censure of the Work, to
consider well the constant use there will be of the abovementioned Rules for
shortning and leaving out of words which are so common in all Discourses, and
in the next place to consider the natural Method in which they are laid down,
so as they may be quickly learned, and not burdensome to the Memory to retain;
and I doubt not but he will easily be persuaded, that besides the removal of
former Difficulties, there is a very considerable Essay made here toward the
Improvement, if not Perfection, of Shorthand.

I shall conclude with some Directions for the better learning this Art.

1. You are desired either to unfold the engraven Sheet at Page in which the
Examples are, and let it lie before you, turning from the Rule to the Example
in the said Sheet to which the Number will direct you; or to cut it out, that
you may have it ready on all occasions, and by laying the Book upon it, and
moving it to the several Examples, they will be as readily seen against every
Rule as if they were writ on the same Page.

The Reason of my taking this Course was both to avoid the Expenses of
engraving the whole Book, and because I judge it a readier way of teaching; for
having once read over and understood the Rules, the unfolding of this Sheet,
and looking upon the Examples, will instruct you sufficiently without turning
to the Book; the Sheet is also more portable upon all occasions.

2. Learn but a little at a time, lest you make it burdensome to your self; the
best way is to write the Examples over and over, till you can do them readily.
But be not discouraged tho you cannot read what you write at first, for that is
common to all Beginners.

3. Observe there are several things peculiar to the Scottish Dialect which are
marked S, so that the English Learner may omit them; and that there are several
Anglicisms, or things peculiar to the English Dialect, which are marked A, so
that my Countrymen may do therein as they judge best.

4. If there be any thing you do not understand, advise with those of riper
Years and Understanding.

5. Such as have learned other Short-hands, and desire a further improvement,
are desired to peruse the whole Book, wherein they will find several things of
good use, but more especially the Contraction of the Verbs, Moods, Times, and
Persons. I hope you will excuse the length of this, seeing it serves both for
Preface, Contents, and Directions.

Farewell.
1. NOte that there are two Characters for I, the first of which must always be
used instead of J Consonant, as in these words,

Jerusalem. Jericho.
There are also two Characters for S, that the Learner may take which of them
he shall find most convenient to join with other Letters. See the Alphabet.

For the better understanding of the following Rules, the Learner is desired to
observe that the Letters a, e, i, o, u, are called Vowels, and the rest of the
Letters are called Consonants.

It must be observed that the Letters J and V coming before themselves, or any
other Vowel in the same Syllable, are Consonants, as in the words

Judah, Virtue.
2. When two or more Consonants come together, they must be joined one to
another without taking off the Pen. The most difficult are given you for
Examples in the Copper Plate at the Figure 2. but all of them except th and wh
are the Letters of the Alphabet, and so will be easily learned.

3. How to express the Vowels.
When a word begins or ends with a Vowel, the said Vowel must not be expressed
by its proper Character, but by a prick put in its place: which that you may
the more easily remember and understand, observe that their places are
according to their rank in the Alphabet, viz.

a Being the first Vowel, has the first place, viz. a little higher than the
following Letter* but not just over it. See the Copper Plate at fig. 3. e Being
the second Vowel, has the second place, viz. just against the upper corner of
the following Letter. See again at fig. 3. i Being the third Vowel, has the
third place, viz. just against the middle of the Letter. See fig. 3. o Being
the fourth Vowel, has the fourth place, just against the lower corner of the
following Letter. See fig. 3. u Being the fifth Vowel, has the fifth place a
little lower than the following Letter, but not just under it. See again at
fig. 3.
You must also take notice that the places of the Vowels are the same after a
Consonant as before one, and that the Letter y when joined to a Consonant has
always the sound of the Vowel i, and therefore is expressed in the same manner.
In the next place observe carefully the places of the Vowels about the Letters
l and s, you will easily understand these things by viewing the Examples at
fig. 3.

4. When a Vowel comes between two Consonants, it is to be expressed by putting
the latter Consonant in its place. See fig. 4.

In this Art we do not regard true spelling, but for swiftness sake leave out
all the Letters that are not pronounced in speaking; which that you may the
better understand, I have given in the following Tables a particular account of
all such Letters, with Rules how to know them and when to leave them out; the
Learner must write them in Shorthand Letters till he can do them well.

1. e may be left out before d in the last Syllable of a word, as for ruled
ruled. wiped wiped. striped stripped. 2. before st, as for know know. 3.
before th, as for knows knowth. 4. before neth, as for ripeneth ripneth. 5.
before l, as for council councl. 6. before m, as for them thm. 7. before n, as
for taken takn. 8. before r, as for cooler. coolr. 9. as it may be left out in
all these eight cases abovesaid before those Letters in the last Syllable, so
it may be left out in all such words as it is not pronounced in when it is the
last Letter of the word, viz. after b, c, d, f, g, k, l, m, n, p, q, r, s, t,
u, v, w, observe the Examples, which the Learner is desired to write over in
the Shorthand Characters until he be accustomed to leave out the Letters which
are here left out. bribe brib. Spice Spic. wide wid. Knife Knif. Sage Sag. make
make. stale stal. Name Nam. none non. wipe wip. risque risq. hare har. case cas.
hate hat. In such cases as one word may be mistaken for another, as hate for
hat, the Learner may add a prick in the Vowels place to distinguish. due du.
live live. owe ow.

How to express Dipthongs.
5. When a Dipthong (which is two Vowels together in the same Syllable) begins
or ends a Word, observe which of the Vowels is most sounded in pronouncing the
Word, and write a prick in that Vowels place, and if the Dipthong be in the
middle of a Word, put the Consonant which follows next after the Dipthong in
the place of the Vowel which is most sounded. See Fig. 5.

The following Table teaches which of the Vowels should be writ in all
Dipthongs.
ae e Eneas Aeneas ai a ar Air au a adience audience A ay a play pla ea e se
Sea A ei e ven vein eo o jopardy Jeopardy eu u nuter neuter A ey e pre prey ie
i li lie oa o ror roar oe o do do For ou write u as fund for found S ua a guard
guard ue u du due ui i gilt guilt eau u Buty Beauty A jew u adu adieu A uai a
qal quail These are Tripthongs uee e qen Queen uea e qesie queasie aw a la law
ew u nu new A ow o slo slow A eou u rightus righteous

6. If neither of the Vowels can be spared, as in the word Oil, boil, etc.
observe in the beginning of a word to write the proper Character of the first
Vowel, and put the Consonant in the next Vowels place.

In the middle of a word write your last Vowel in the first Vowels place.

In the end of a word do the same. See the Examples at Fig. 6.

Of Semi-vowels and Mutes.
When any of the Letters l, m, n, r, x, z, (which by the Latins are called
Semi-vowels) come after a Vowel (in the beginning of a word) before another
Consonant, the said Vowel may be left out; sor none of those Letters can be
pronounced without sounding a Vowel before them, as l is pronounced as if it
were writ el; which of the Vowels must be pronounced, the sense will teach.

The same Rule holds as to these Mutes b, c, d, f, g, p, t, except when any of
them are joined with l or r. Observe the Examples in the following Table, and
write them over so often in the Shorthand Letters till you can readily write
them, or any other Examples of this nature.

Amnon mnon. already lredy. for unready nredy. argue rgu. expect xpect. Ezra
zra. obtain btain. adjust djust. for off-going fgoing. Ignominy gnominy.
up-going pgoing. out-last tlast.

When two Consonants of the same sort come together either in the middle or end
of a word, one of them may be left out and yet the Pronunciation not wronged,
as will appear by these Examples in the Table.

attain atain. attribute atribut, aggravate agravat. careful carful. fearful
ferful. sinful sinful. Sinfulness Sinfulnes. err er. Firr Fir.

It many times happens that two Consonants of different sorts comes together,
and yet one of them may be spared without marring the sense of the Word,
concerning which take the following Rules.

b may be left out in the end of a word after m, and when it comes between a
Vowel and t, lamb lam dumb dum debt det doubt dut c may be spared before k or
q, and after s, and after x, acknowledge aknoledg acquaint aqant Disciple
Disiple excess xes d may be left out before g, as and sometimes after n, Judge
Jug grudg grug Handmaid Han-maid Friendship Frienship f when it is not
pronounced before t, soft sot A after ater A g may be left out betwixt a Vowel
and n, and when it comes between n and th. rein reign. soverain sovereign.
foreign foreign. lenth length. strenth strength. S gh when it comes between a
Vowel and t, rit right. A mit might. A sit sight. ugh after a Vowel through
through. h when it comes in the end of a word after a Vowel it may be left out
in the word him, when the foregoing word ends with a Consonant or with e after
a Consonant, or with h, and when it comes after r, and after c, as and after x,
Sela Selah. Noa Noah. let im let him. hurt im hurt him. smite im smite him.
take im take him. catch im catch him. reach im reach him. Retorik Rhetoric.
Rum Rheum. Scem Scheme. Scolar Scholar. xort exhort. l in the words will and
shall, before not, and by Scottish Men, and those of the North of England after
a, so before f, w'ont will not. shall not shall not. sma small. S fa fall. ca
call. haf half. caf calf. n when it comes after m in the same Syllable. contem
contemn. S condem condemn. p when it comes between m and t, contemt contempt.
xmt exempt. t before ch and after p, strech stretch. corrup corrupt. S the in
the words them, these, those, when the words going before end with e or a
Consonant. tak m take them. writes write these. takes take those. w may be left
out before r, and sometimes before h. rit write. A hol whole. A

Of exchanging Letters.
Many times one Letter may be exchanged for another, and so one serve for two:
observe the following Table.

c ch Baruc Baruch. A f ph Filip Philip. gh laf laugh. A tuf tough. k ct ak
act. S ck attak attack. write x for cc xes access. ks thanx thanks. cts distrix
district. S s ce defens defense. q qu qery query* sh sci conshens Conscience.
tio conshenshus conscientious. conshonabl conscionable.

The Learners are desired to write over the Examples in these Tables until they
can readily write them, leaving out the superfluous Letters, the benefit they
will quickly find in exercising them in the Shorthand Letters.

The Reader is referred to Fig. 7. in the Copper Plate for Syllables to begin
and end words, and Examples how to make use of the said Syllables.

The Learner is also desired to take notice that any Consonant being dashed
through in the place of the respective Vowel, the said dash signifies ar, er,
ir, or, ur.

And that a very little Line over or under a word, if it be only so big as to
distinguish it from a prick, signifies the words over and under.

And that a Shorthand p joined above any word signifies upon. See the Examples
for each in fig. 7.

8. How to write the small words, a, the, this, these, those, that.
For a, write a prick above the word toward the left hand.

For the, a prick over it to the right.

For this and these, write two pricks in the Line asquint going upward from the
left to the righthand.

For those, write two pricks in the Line asquint going downward the same way.

For that, write a prick under the Line toward the right hand. See the
Examples of each in in fig. 8.

9. The words my, thy, his, ours, yours, theirs, are called Possessive
Pronouns, and must be writ thus.
For my or mine write a prick higher than the Line at an equal distance from
the word that goes before it and that which follows.

For thy and thine write a prick in the middle betwixt the words.

For his write a prick against the lower Corner in the middle betwixt the words.

For ours double the pricks in the first place.

For yours double them in the second.

For theirs double them in the third.

See at fig. 9. for the Examples.

If the word self come after any of these words (which frequently happens)
write a very small Shorthand s under the said word.

If the word own (which also frequently happens) come after, add one prick more
under the said word.

See the Examples at Figure 9.

10. How to express the words of, to, with, from, for, by.
For of write the following word a little higher than the Line off from the
corner of the word that comes before it. See fig. 10.

For to, write the following word nearer to it in the same place, but remember
to keep such distance as that it may not be mistaken as part of the former word.

For with, write the word that follows it near the middle of the word that went
before it, keeping due distance to avoid mistake.

For from, write the following word at a double distance from the word that
went before it.

For by, write the following word near to the under corner of that which went
before it, but so as you may keep a due distance from that word.

For for, write the following word in the same place at a greater distance.

See the Examples at fig. 10.

But in case the Learner think these Rules intricate or hard to observe, I
refer him to figure 11. where there are other ways to express the said words as
short as any has hitherto been published, and which must be used however when
such words begin a Line, and before the Possessive Pronouns, observe fig. 11.

12. How to write the Degrees of Comparison.
When the word more, which the Latins call the sign of the Comparative Degree,
comes to be writ, it may be signified by a little mark toward the lefthand.
See fig. 12.

The word then comes very often after words of the Comparative Degree, which
may be known either by this word more which is the sign of it, or by its last
Syllable, which in the English Language always ends in er, and is either
compared with others or it self, as wiser than he was, wiser than you; I say in
such case the word than may be left out, for it cannot but be read by the sense.

When the word most, which the Latins call the sign of the Superlative Degree,
is to be writ, it may be signified by the same mark as the Comparative Degree,
only set toward the Right Hand. See Fig. 12.

The words of the, in the, among them, etc. do often come after the words of
the Superlative Degree which are known, either by this sign most, or by its
last Syllable, which in the English Language is always in est, or st, and
speaks always of a Person or thing in the highest or lowest Degree, as the
wisest of the two, the richest in the Town. In such cases the said words of
the, in the, etc. may be left out, and yet the sense will easily discover which
should be read.

See the Examples one after another, fig. 12.

Of Verbs, Tenses, and Moods.
A Verb is a word that signifies the Person or thing spoken of, either to be
doing something to others (and then it is called Active) or that something is
done to, or suffered by the said Person or thing, and then it is called Passive.

13. The words, I, thou, he, we, ye, they, do often come before Verbs, and are
called Persons. See for their Characters, fig. 13.

There are three times of doing or suffering, viz. the time past, the time
present, the time to come.

We express the time past by the words have, have been, had, had been, did and
was.

We express the time present by the words do and am.

We express the time to come by the words will, and will be, shall, and shall
be.

Now according to the order of Nature, and not of Grammar, supposing that many
may learn this Art, that never learned that, I have put the time past first,
the present in the middle, and the time to come last.

14. Therefore when the word have comes either after any of the words I, thou,
he, we ye, they, or any other word, it is not to be writ, but the word that
comes after it is to have the first Letter of it writ higher than the corner of
the word before it, which being the first place is the place of have, which is
the sign of the first time. See fig. 14.

Instead of the words have been, write after the same manner, but because that
is a Passive Signification, it must be distinguished by putting a little stroke
on the back of the first Letter of the word that comes after have been. See the
Example, fig. 14.

For had and had been, write in the same manner, only let the word which comes
after had be writ at twice so much distance from the word that goes before it,
as the word was that came after have, and let the word that comes after had
been, have a stroke put on its back according to the former Rule. See the next
Example* fig. 14.

When the word did comes after any of the Persons, or another word, it is not
to be writ, but signified by its place also, which is just against, or even
with the upper corner of the word that goes before it, and therefore the word
that comes after it must be writ in that place at such distance as it may not
be confounded with the word that goes before it.

See the next Example, fig. 14.

For the word was it must be expressed the same way, but with this difference,
that being of a Passive or Suffering Signification, a little stroke must be
added to the back of the word that follows it, as formerly. See further fig. 14.

The time present being between that which is past, and that which is to come,
you must put such word as comes after do or am just against the middle of such
word as went before them, only putting a stroke upon the back of such word as
comes after am, because it is Passive. See fig. 14.

The time to come being the last, you must put the word that comes after will
or shall against the lower corner of the word that went before them, allowing
double the distance from that word for shall that you do for will: and for will
be and shall be, adding a stroke upon the back of the word that follows them
because of the Passive Signification. See fig. 14. adhuc.

Some perhaps may object that the places of the Tenses, and the places of the
words of, to, etc. are confounded, but there can be no hazard of mistake in
that, if it be considered that a Verb never comes after any of these words
except to, concerning which you have a Rule in its place, and at first dash it
will be seen that the word so placed as is directed here, is a Verb.

Note that have and has must be expressed the same way as have, had the same
way as had, did the same way as did; wast and were the same way as was, do
and does the same way as do; and shall and wilt the same way as shall and will.
See the last Examples, fig. 14.

The Persons or Words which go before them will easily show which should be
read.

15. There are several ways of expressing our selves in doing or suffering,
which the Latins call Moods, some of which fall under our Consideration in this
Art. And first,

The Imperative or commanding way, or Mood, wherein we express our selves (when
we command) by the words do, let, or be, as do you go, let us come, be you
obedient.

The Persons or Words to which these words of command are usually affixed or
joined, are me, thou, him, us, you or ye, and them: concerning which observe
the following Rules, viz.

To the first Letter of every such Person join over it in a commanding manner a
straight stroke or shorthand l, and to distinguish be, because it has a
Passive Signification, put a small dash on the back of the said stroke, observe
the Examples fig. 15. where you must also take notice that for the word us
there is a Shorthand s.

16. Secondly, there is the Optative or wishing Mood, wherein we express our
selves by the word wish, which is to be signified by a stroke put under the
Person in a humble manner, but when the word wish comes after any other word it
is to be expressed by putting a Shorthand w under the said word. See fig. 16.

17. Thirdly, there is the Potential Mood or way, whereby we express what may
or ought to be done, which we do by the words may, can, would, should, might,
ought, may, or can hereafter; concerning which observe that except have, had,
or hereafter come after any of them, they do all belong to the present time,
and therefore in that case the word that comes after any of them must be set
just against the middle of the word before it.

The way to express them is thus.

If any of the said words may, can, etc. come after a Person, then the first
Letter of such word must be joined to the Person which is enough to express any
of them, but because several of them, as may and might, can and could, begin
with the same Letter, you must distinguish them thus; write the first Letter of
might and could close to the upper corner of the Person, and join the first
Letter of may and can to the lower corner of the Person, see the Example in
fig. 17. where you must also take notice that to express the Passive
Signification of be and been, etc. there is a little dash put upon the back of
the first Letter of the word.

If the words may or can, etc. come after any other word, then the Persons, I,
thou, etc. you must put the first Letter of such of them as it happens to be,
above the Verb, but you must distinguish may from might, and can from could as
formerly, and observe to add the little dash for the Passive Signification. See
and observe carefully the Example in fig. 17.

Sometimes the Optative and Potential come together, observe the last Example,
fig. 17.

18. Fourthly, there is the Subjunctive Mood, which some also call Conjunctive,
because it does not complete a Sentence except another Verb be subjoyned or
conjoined, the signs by which we express it are the words when, if, seeing, as
when you come; you see that something more is to be expressed or understood, to
make the Sentence complete, as when you come you shall hear.

The manner of expressing these words is thus, you must when they come after
any Person, or other word subjoin, (that is to say join to the lower part of
it) a Shorthand wh for when, f for if, s for seeing. See fig. 18.

Sometimes the signs of the Optative, Potential, and Subjunctive, come
together, as in this Example, I wish when you come you would stay. Concerning
which see the last Examples of Figure 18.

19. How to express to and to be, which Latins call marks of the Infinitive
Mood, I refer you to Figure 19. where you have Examples how to use them. As
also to express the must which is called a Gerund, by putting a Shorthand in
under the Person or last Letter of the Word before it.

Of Interrogatory Sentences.
20. For the words commonly made use of in asking Questions and their
Characters, I refer you to number 20. in the Copper Plate, but take these
following Rules for the use of them.

1. If they or any of them come before any of the Persons, I, thou, he, etc.
you must put the said Person in the place of the sign of the time that goes
before it, as in this Example, What have I? you must first write the Character
for what and put I in the place of have, which according to former Rules is
higher than the upper corner of the word going before it, at such distance as
it may not be taken for part of that word, and so of all others of this sort.
See fig. 20.

If the Verb come after the Person, as in this Example, what shall I do, write
as before, only put the Verb against the middle of the Person which is the
present time, and so of all others, observing the former Directions for
distinguishing one Mood or way from another, and the words that are Passive
from the Active. See fig. 20.

But it must be observed that the signs of the Optative or wishing Mood must be
joined to the lower part of the word of Question, as in this Example, what
wishes he for, the sign of the Optative Mood must be joined to the lower end
of the word what* See fig. 20.

The signs of the Potential Mood may, can, should, etc. must be joined to the
head of the Person, after any such word of Question, but because of may and
might, and can and coulds beginning with one Letter, join might and could to
the upper corner of the Person on the left side, and may and can toward the
lower corner on the same side. See fig. 20.

The signs of the Subjunctive Mood when, if, and seeing, being always to be
read before the Person, there is no difficulty in them. See Figure 20. adhuc.

21. When a Question begins with any of these words do, did, have, had, will,
shall, write the Person that follows after any of those words, and put a prick
close to the back of the Person to show that it is a Question, and put the
following Verb in its proper time. See fig. 21.

But if the word wish come after the Person, join the mark of the Optative to
it, and put the Verb in its proper time. See fig. 21.

If the words may, can, should, would, etc. come before the Person, they must
be joined to the upper part of it as formerly, remembering also to distinguish
between may and might, can and could, and betwixt words of a Passive
Signification and others, according to former Rules. See further, fig. 21.

Observe if the said words in asking a Question should come before any other
word but the Person, the first Letter of each of them must be writ above the
word they come before, but remember to write may and can below the word. See
further fig. 21.

Note that tho at first one would think this last Rule is confounded with that
in Number 17 Page, yet there is no hazard of mistaking one for the other; for
the signs of the Potential Mood in that Rule are always to be put above or
below a Verb, but here never.

Of Negative Sentences.
22. When the words not, never, neither, come either before a Verb or any other
word, they may be expressed thus, not by a Shorthand n put upon the back of the
first Letter of the word that follows it, never by the same dashed through,
neither by a Shorthand th joined to the head of the n. See the Examples fig.
22.

Of contracting little Words when they come together.
23. Many times little words coming together may be joined so as to be much
shortened, especially if all of them end and begin with Vowels, or if the former
end with the Vowel, and the latter begin with h, as com on for come on, t'us
for to us, t'im for to him; and often when the first word ends with a
Consonant, and the latter begins with a Vowel, as think ont for think on it.

The Rules for such Abbreviations are these.

When two or more words come together, one whereof ends with a Vowel, and the
other begins with a Vowel or h, the last Vowel in the first word may be left
out, and the first Consonant of the next may be put in the place of the Vowel
that goes before it, as tak n for take on, where ( e) is left out in take, and
n put in the place of o against k; and so words beginning with h after one that
either ends with a Consonant, or Vowel, h may be left out, and the Consonant
which comes next after it may be put in the place of the Vowel that went before
it, as tak n m for take on him, where m is put in the place of i against n and
h left out.

When one Word ends with a Consonant, and another begins with a Vowel, write
the Consonant which comes after the said Vowel, in the place of it, against the
Consonant before it, as break open write the p in the place of o against the k.
See the Examples, of fig. 23.

Of Contrarieties.
When Words or Sentences which are just contrary one to another come together,
the contrary part may be signified by a backward c thus, good and) for good and
bad, Heaven and) for Heaven and Hell; whosoever believes in Christ Jesus shall
be saved, but) for whosoever believes not in Christ Jesus shall be condemned.

Of leaving out Syllables.
There are Syllables which are common for ending many words, as ed, est, eth,
etc. which for swiftness sake may be left out, and yet the Sense not be marred
to any understanding Person; for if the root of the word be writ, the Sense
will easily direct to the last Syllable, as if one should write thou understa
me, sense will teach that it must be read thou understandest me, so thou lov me
for love, teach for teach; and so of any other word.

list of shorthand entities

list of shorthand entities

Many times half a long word may be left out, and yet be easily read, as Comis
for Commission, Command for Commandment, and thus, the unright Pers. shant
inher the Kingd. of Heav. will easily be read, the unrighteous Person shall not
inherit the Kingdom of Heaven.

These last Rules being well considered, will be found more useful and
practicable than Tables of Marks for words, as is hinted more at large in the
Preface.

Of Repetitions.
In case of Repetitions, consider if the Sense may not be complete, tho the
word repeated be but once set down, as instead of whatsoever things are true,
whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, etc. write whatsoever
things are true, honest, just, etc.

Or if the Repetitions follow one another immediately you may write down the
number under the words to be repeated, as for The Temple of the Lord, the
Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, write, The Temple of the Lord.

I shall now give you the Names of the Scripture Books contracted, as they use
to be quoted in Authors, which you may practice in your Shorthand Letters
according to your Rules until you can do them perfectly.

Genesis Ex. Lev. Number. Deuteronomy. Jos. Judge. Ruth. Sam. K. Cr. Zr. Neh. Est. Job. Ps.
Prove. Ec. Cant. Is. Jer. Lam. Ez. Dan. Hos. Jol. Am. Ob. Jon. Mich. Nah. Hab.
Zef. Zec. Hag. Mal.
Note that any number of Psalms above 66 may be expressed by the Figures only
without mentioning the Psalm, it being known that there is no other Book has
above that number of Chapters.

For Chapter write Cap.

For Verse write ver.

Mat. Luke Mar. Jo. Ac. Romans Cor. Gal. Of. Fill. Col. These. Tim. Tit. Ph. Heb.
Ja. Pet. Jud. Rev.
Note that I have writ f for ph, because it is sooner writ, and cr for chr,
because h is not sounded after c.

Here follows a Table of Analogical Marks which will quickly be learned, most
of the words therein being signified naturally by the Marks, for which I refer
you to the Copper Plate at the end of the Book, where you will find them
numbered as the words are here: so that if you look for the same number there
that you find against any of the Words or Sentences here, the Mark against
which the said number is placed signifies the same.

I did not think it material to bring them into exact order of Alphabet, which
I hope the Learner will excuse, for they will be attained at twice or thrice
writing over.

A.
1 Altogether. 2 all that is in the World. 3 Angel. 4 Angels that fell, or
fallen Angels 5 Antichrist. 6 Apostle. 7 Apostles of Christ. 8 false Apostles.
9 to ascend.

B.
10 Back to back. 11 Babylon. 12 come out of Babylon my People. 13 thou
Hypocrite, thou can not see the Beam that is in thine own Eye 14 to
backslide, or backsliden. 15 backward. 16 black. 17 before. 18 behind. 19
before and behind. 20 above and below. 21 belong. beginning of the World (...)
(...) 25 near the beginning. 26 at the beginning. 27 after the beginning. 28
from the beginning. 29 from the beginning to the end. 30 from the 11th to the
14th. 31 the 14 and 15 compared. 32 good beginning. 33 bad beginning. 34 about
the beginning. 35 between. 36 both together. 37 bottomless Pit. 38 blind. 39
before the Foundation of the World. 40 beneath. 41 broad Gate, or Way. 42 broad
is the Gate that leads to Destruction, and many there be that enter thereat. 43
broken Cistern that will hold no Water. 44 broken. 45 broken in pieces. 46
broken in two.

C.
47 Christ. 48 Christian. 49 Christianity. 50 Christ coming into the World. 51
Christ came into the World to save Sinners. 52 Cross. 53 Christ's Humiliation.
54 Christ's Exaltation. 55 Christ sits at the right hand of God. 56 Christ's
Ascenfion. 57 Christ's Burial. 58 Christ's Death. 59 Christ's Resurrection. 60
Christ crucified. 61 Christ will come to judge the World. 62 Christ's Blood. 63
Christ sweat drops of Blood. 64 the Blood and Water that came out of Christ's
side. 65 the Sufferings of Christ. 66 Children of Christ. 67 in Christ. 68 in
and through Christ. 69 in and by Christ. 70 through Christ. 71 out of Christ.
72 near Christ. 73 far from Christ. 74 from Christ. 75 by Christ. 76 rely on
Christ. 77 forsake Christ. 78 many are called, but few are chosen. 79 in
Covenant with Christ. 80 Christ received into the Heart. 81 Cross of Christ. 82
he that will be my Disciple, must take up his Cross and follow me. 83 Jesus
Christ. 84 Christ Jesus. 85 our Lord Jesus Chr. 86 Church. 87 Church of Christ.
88 Reformed Church. 89 Church of Rome. 90 Church of England. 91 Church of the
Jews. 92 corrupt Church. 93 Church militant. 94 Church triumphant. 95 suffering
Church. 96 Church of God. 97 Covenant of Works. 98 Covenant of Grace. 99
Covenant. 100 broken Covenant. 101 Covenantbreakers. 102 in Covenant with God.
103 Conscience. 104 Conscience awakened. 105 bad Conscience. 106 seared
Conscience. 107 Circumcision. 108 uncircumcision. 109 coming into the World.
110 compassed. 111 compassed about. 112 compassed round.

D.
113 Darkness. 114 blackness of darkness. 115 Devil. 116 the Children of the
Devil. 117 the Devil can turn himself into an Angel of Light. 118 the Devils
believe and tremble. 119 Chains of darkness. 120 Doctrine. 121 point of
Doctrine. 122 1st, 2d, and 3d, Doctrine. 123 false Doctrine. 124 corrupt
Doctrine. 125 Doctrine of Devils. 126 downward

E.
127 Eye. 128 Eyes of God. 129 Eyes of the Lord. 130 Eyes of Angels. 131 Eyes
of Devils. 132 Eyes of the World. 133 Eyes of the People. 134 proud look. 135
even. 136 equal. 137 unequal. 138 uneven.

F.
139 Fall headlong upon. 140 fall headlong into the bottomless Pit. 141 from
the one side to the other. 142 from one end to the other. 143 from top to
bottom. 144 Foundation of the World. 145 before the Foundation of the World.
146 Fragments

G.
147 God. 148 great God. 149 God in Christ. 150 God in Christ reconciling the
World. 151 Gospel. 152 Gospel of Christ. 153 go forward. 154 go backward. 155
go to the left hand. 156 go to the righthand. 157 go upward. 158 go downward.
159 go up and down. 160 go forward and backward. 161 go out of the World. 162
gathered together.

H.
163 Heart. 164 upright Heart. 165 covetous Heart. 166 Heart set on the World.
167 Heart set on Christ. 168 double Heart. 169 hard heart. 170 soft Heart. 171
contrite Heart. 172 broken Heart. 173 contrite and broken heart. 174 false
heart. 175 unclean Heart. 176 rotten Heart. 177 Hypocrite in Heart. 178
headlong. 179 heavenly. 180 in Heaven. 181 God in Heaven. 182 with God in
Heaven. 183 Christ in Heaven. 184 with Christ in Heaven. 185 Saints in Heaven.
186 with Saints in Heaven. 187 Angels in Heaven. 188 with Angels in Heaven. 189
Hell. 190 in Hell. 191 Devils in Hell. 192 with Devils in Hell. 193 Souls in
Hell. 194 wicked in Hell. 195 the wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all the
Nations that forget God. 196 Flames of Hell. 197 Torments of Hell. 198
Purgatory.

I.
199 Idolaters. 200 idolatrous. 201 Idolatry. 202 In the middle. 203 Jesus
Christ the second Person of the Trinity. 204 inseparable 205 inward or inside.
206 innumerable.

K.
207 King. 208 Kingdom. 209 Kingdom of Heaven. 210 Kingdom of Christ. 211
Kingdom of Satan. 212 Kingdom of the Earth. 213 Key that opens and none can
shut. 214 Knowledge 215 Knowledge of God. 216 Knowledge of Christ. 217 knowledge of
my self. 218 knowledge of thy self. 219 knowledge of our selves. 220 knowledge of
your selves. 221 knowledge of themselves. 222 knowledge of the Lord. 223 knowledge
of the Lord J. Christ.

L.
224 Labyrinth. 225 little. 226 long. 227 Lord. 228 longer. 229 longest. 230
Lord God. 231 Lord Jesus Christ crucified. 232 look unto Christ. 233 look unto
Christ on the Cross or Christ crucified. 234 they shall look unto him whom they
have pierced, and mourn. 235 look up. 236 look down 237 look forward. 238 look
backward. 239 look before and behind. 240 look round about. 241 look above 242
look below. 243 look on this fide. 244 look on that side.

M.
245 Magistrate. 246 Minister. 247 mistake. 248 great mistake. 249 foul
mistake. 250 greatly mistaken. 251 foully mistaken. 252 Mystery. 253
misunderstood. 254 to mediate. 255 thou Hypocrite, thou can see the Mote that
is in thy Neighbors Eye, etc. 256 Man Men. 257 upright Man. 258 upright way.
259 fallen Man 260 righteous Man. 261 sinsul Man. 262 in Man. 263 between Man
and Man. 264 bloody Men. 265 damned or reprobate Man.

N.
266 Narrow way. 267 New Testament. 268 nevertheless. 269 notwithstanding. 270
numerous.

O.
271 Outside. 272 outward. 273 Old Testament. 274 Our Father which art in
Heaven. 275 Providence 276 Prudence. 277 Papist Popish. 278 Protestant. 279
Prison.

Q.
280 Quarter. 281 quarterly, or 4thly. 282 quartered. 283 quartering 284 in the
4th place. 285 Question. 286 in question. 287 without question. 288 under
question. 289 questioned. 290 questionless. 291 hard question. 292 plain
question. 293 questioned about. 294 intricate question.

R.
295 Round. 296 round about. 297 run headlong. 298 run backward. 299 run
headlong into the bottomless Pit.

S.
300 Sharpsighted. 301 Sword. 302 Sword of God. 303 flaming Sword. 304 Serpent.
305 crooked Serpent. 306 break the Serpent's Head. 307 old Serpent. 308
scattered. 309 Sacrament. 310 holy Scripture. 311 through Scripture. 312 by the
Scripture. 313 Shipwreck 314 having made Shipwreck of Faith and a good
Conscience. 315 straight gate. 316 strive to enter in at the straight gate.

T.
317 Trinity. 318 Trinity in Unity, or one God and three Persons. 319 Mystery
of the Trinity. 320 first Person of the Trinity. 321 second Person of the
Trinity. 2 third Person of the Trinity. 324 Tempter Temptation. 325 in
Temptation. 326 fall into Temptation. 327 many Temptations. 328 from Tentation.
329 in the way of Tentation. 330 out of the way of Tentation. 331 great
Tentation. 332 through the strength of Tentation. 333 fall by Tentation. 334
fall before Tentation. 335 under Tentation. 336 tremble. 337 doubletongued. 338
Lord's Table. 339 come to the Lord's Table. 340 at the Lord's Table. 341 go
from the Lord's Table. 342 worthy receivers of the Body and Blood of Christ.
343 unworthy receivers of the Body and Blood of Christ. 344 Profaners of the
Lord's Table.

W.
345 Wilderness. 346 World. 347 beginning of the World. 348 end of the World.
349 old World. 350 this World 351 the World that is to come. 352 in the World.
353 in this World. 354 in the World to come. 355 both in this World, and in the
World to come. 356 neither in this World, nor in the World to come. 357 World
without end. 358 greatest part the World. 359 least part of the World. 360
Corruption of the World. 361 corrupt World. 362 The Devil, the World, and the
Flesh. 363 the World shall be burnt with Fire. 364 without God in the World.
365 round about the World. 366 up and down the World. 367 through the World.
368 from one end of the World to the other. 369 Worshippers of God. 370 Word of
God. 371 Works of God. 372 Works of Creation. 373 Works of Providence. 374
Vengeance 375 to bring down Vengeance on their own head.

Y.
376 You. 377 every one of you. all of you. 378 in you. 379 at you. 380 near
you. 381 on both sides of you. 382 above and below you. 383 even with you. 384
higher than you. 385 lower than you. 386 behind and before you. 387 through
you.

There are another sort of Tables called Classical* on account of which some
value their Invention very high; they are composed after this manner, by making
any Letter or Character you please have eight or more different Significations,
by putting a prick or any any other mark you will at top and bottom, and three
on every side, as in this Example. b balance. b belied. ^b billows..b bolster.
b bulwark. b blameless. b^ blindfold. b. blotted.
and so of all the Letters of the whole Alphabets which are extant, and as many
more as you can invent. But for my own part, I do not much approve of this
Method, it being very burdensome to the Memory, and when learned, difficult to
retain. The best composed Tables that ever I saw, containing a great many words
which very rarely occur; and indeed, I think it impossible to compose such as
shall be of constant use (except one accustom themselves to write only after
one Man, and then it is not worth the while to do it) for there is as much
variety of expressing Conceptions (upon the same Subject) as there is of Faces.
But if the Learner think well of that Method, he may by this Example compose
Tables to himself which he will more easily remember, than those of another
Composition, for which the Authors have no reason to show, but only because
they will have it so: And tho it (it is true) there is no Art either to be
invented or learned without some burden to the Memory, yet there is a great
difference betwixt bestowing Pains in learning that which is a Rule in all
cases of that sort; and that which serves only one case, and such as perhaps
seldom occurs, and such are most of their Tables.

I had composed Tables of my own that had some more reference to the things
signified than those I now mentioned, and consequently less difficult to learn;
but upon the very same Reasons I have here given, I omit them, only giving you
a Specimen of them, that if they seem plausible to you, you may exercise your
own invention in framing them according to the following Examples.

I made all the Capital Print Letters to signify the Titles and Attributes of
God the Father, which begun with the said respective Letters, as A to signify
Almighty, All-seeing, All-sufficient, and All-wise distingushed one from
another by a prick put at the upper corner on the left side for Almighty, at
the lower corner for All-seeing, at the upper corner of the right side for
All-sufficient, and at the lower corner of it for All-wise, and so of all the
Letters of the Alphabet; and then all the small Print Letters to signify the
Attributes of Christ, and some of them those of the Holy Ghost, and the other
sorts of Letters to signify the good and bad Qualities of Men and Things in
the same manner.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
EPist. Dedic. line penult. for and ambitious, read and is ambitious. Page 6.
l. 11. f. Page r. page 29.


