LETTERS OF THE Cardinal Duke De RICHELIEU, Great Minister of State TO LEWIS
XIII. of France.

Faithfully Translated from the Original, By T. B.

In Two Volumes. VOL. I.

LONDON, Printed for A. Roper, A. Bosvile, and T. Leigh, in Fleetstreet, School.

portrait of Cardinal de Richelieu EMINENTISS^ ^DVS IOANNES DV. PLESSIS.
CARDINALIS. RICHELEVS. etc:


To his Excellency, Sir Joseph Williamson, Knight, one of His Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, Keeper of the Records of State, a Member of the
Honorable House of Commons, and one of His Majesty's Embassadors-Extraordinary
and Plenepotentiaries for the Treaty of a General Peace.
SIR,
THis having been esteemed one of the best Pieces of the Ablest Minister of
State in the Age wherein he lived, I thought I could not do a greater Justice
to his Memory, than to address these Remains of his to a Person whom the
Greatest, Wisest, and Best of Monarchs has made Choice of to be employed in the
most Important Treaty that ever concerned Europe; as one, who by a Consummated
Experience in Negotiations of this Nature, has approved himself an Able and
Faithful Minister.

Nor can such a Work as this be Dedicated to any Person, more properly than to
your Excellency, since it consists of Letters of State, and some of the
Choicest and most Useful Instructions relating both to War and Peace, during
that Great Man's Administration, and which may be of Public Benefit at this
Time.

May the Success of Your present Negotiation answer the Expectation which Your
Country has of Your Great Abilities, such as may establish Christendom in a
firm Peace, and lasting Tranquillity.

This I conceive is the best Apology can be made for the Presumption of

Your Excellency's most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, T. B.

THE PREFACE OF THE PUBLISHER.
THE very Name of Cardinal Richelieu is enough to set a Value upon the
Collection of Letters that are here published. The least Productions of so
great a Man cannot but find an Universal Esteem. This Illustrious Minister not
only signalized himself by his extraordinary Address in the Management of
Affairs, but reduced that difficult and mysterious Art into certain Maxims. He
was not only acquainted with the most refined Politics, but he likewise writ
concerning them with a Penetration and Exactness that are admirable. His
Politic Testament sufficiently confirms the Truth of this Assertion. That
incomparable Piece has been deservedly looked upon as the best in its kind; and
In his Speech to the Gentlemen of the Academy.
Monsieur de la Bruyere, who, as he is one of the most profound Authors of this
Age, is Master of the greatest Politeness, thought himself obliged to take
Notice of that everlasting Monument of his great, Abilities, and considers it
as a Work that deserves to live for ever.

If these Praises are due to the Politic Testament of Cardinal Richelieu, as
must be acknowledged on all hands, it may safely be affirmed, that they belong
as justly to the following Collection of Letters. We may in them discover the
same Genius, and the same Solidity; with this difference however, that whereas
in the abovementioned Book, Matters of State are barely delivered in Rules and
Precepts, we behold the Cardinal in these Letters, acting by those Rules and
Precepts upon all emergent Occasions. Here we behold his incomparable Address
in the happy managing of the nicest and the most perplexed Negotiations, his
indefatigable Activity, his great Foresight, which extended it self as well to
small as to great Affairs; his prodigious Intrepidity, that engaged him in the
boldest Undertakings, which generally succeeded with mighty Glory to him. In
short, That Superiority of Genius, which elevated him even above the Prince he
served, and made him formidable to the Grandees of his own Country; nay, to all
the Princes of Europe.

These Letters are written upon different Subjects, and are addressed to
several Persons; however, they all along preserve the Character which is
suitable to them. That Simplicity of Style which is perpetually visible in
them, is so far from being Disadvantageous to them, that it only makes them
more grave, and more proper for the Person that composed them. Every one knows
that it would look with a very ill Grace for a Minister of State to affect that
scrupulous Nicety and Politeness of Language in his Dispatches, which sits well
upon none but one that is a Bel-Esprit by Profession. Here the whole is
accommodated to the Subject: The Reader will all along discover abundance of
pretty Maxims, and judicious Reflections; but they are every where employed to
the Purpose, and without the least Spice of Affectation. Besides these things,
which are without doubt sufficient of themselves to raise the Curiosity of the
Reader, he will meet with a world of Remarkable Passages that fell out under
the Reign of Lewis XIII. and are to be found no where else; I mean some
particular Circumstances that have escaped the Diligence of the Historians of
those Times, and could never have been known but for Cardinal Richelieu, or
other Persons that were actually in the Bottom of those Affairs.

Since the World received the Letters of Cardinal Mazarin so favorably, I may
without Presumption dare to say, That they will read these with greater
Pleasure and Profit; for there is much more of Action, more particular Things,
and a greater Variety of Matter, than the former do contain. The Reader need
only compare these two Collections, to be convinced of the truth of what I have
advanced.

ERRATA.
VOL. I. Page 169. Line 31. for Monsieur de Nesmes, read the Bishop of Nesmes.
p. 174. l. 23. for Plat r. Plan. p 248. l. 1. for the Count, r. the Count de
Soissons. p. 253. l. 30. where the Reader meets the Word Madam put by it self,
there, and in several other places, he must read, the Duchess of Savoy. p.
307. l. 4. for her Son's States, r. her Son's Country.

Vol. II. p. 1. l. 11. for Monsieur of Savoy, r. the Duke of Savoy. So Monsieur
of Lorrain, in any other place, for the Duke of Lorrain. p. 89. l. 1. for
Monsieur de Bourdeaux, r. the Archbishop.

LETTERS OF THE Cardinal de Richelieu. VOL. I.
LETTER I. To * * *
SIR,
IT IS an unspeakable Joy to me to find by your Letter, that his Holiness has
condescended to grant me that Dignity, which the King was willing to have me
honored with, since so authentic an Approbation will without question cover
those Defects that I may be guilty of: I shall think my self extremely happy,
if while I serve the King and State, he gives me as frequent opportunities of
serving the Church, as I do, and ever shall desire to have so long as I live.
In the mean time I give you a thousand Thanks for the great Satisfaction you
have expressed upon this Occasion, humbly begging you to believe that it will
be a most particular one to my self, when I shall have an Opportunity to
convince you by the Effects rather than by Words, that I am,

SIR, Your most affectionate Brother, to serve you, The Cardinal de Richelieu.
Compeigne, June 19, 1624.
LETTER II. To Monsieur de Herbaux at Rome.
SIR,
I Have received the two Letters which you sent me enclosed in that of the
Sieur Rabbi, on the 9th. of August, with a Cipher to them, in the same Packet.
I thank you for the good Advice you sent me, and have not failed to acquaint
the King with it, as I was obliged to do, for his Service, and your
Satisfaction: We shall make use of it as Physicians do of innocent Remedies,
that never hurt. His Majesty is resolved at any rate to ridd himself of this
Affair of the Valtoline, provided his Honor will not suffer by it. As for my
self, I cannot sufficiently admire how the Pope comes to stir himself no more
in a Business of such vast importance, not only to the Church, but to
Christendom in general. I am very well satisfied that the Interest of Urbin,
where he apprehends the Spaniards concern themselves in favor of the Great
Duke, makes him act with so much reservation upon this occasion. But then it is
as plain, that there are other general Interests, that more nearly regard the
common Good of the Church, and consequently that of the Holy Chair, which ought
to incline his Holiness to put an End to this Affair; it being certain that
things are sometimes carried farther than one could have imagined at their
first starting up, and that if France engages her Word to other Princes and
States, that are willing to assist her in this Conjuncture, it will be no easy
matter to bring her off again. I can assure you, his Majesty is so strict an
Observer of his Word, that when he has once given his Promise, nothing in the
World can induce him to violate it. From this Affair I pass to the Dispensation
for the Match with England, and must tell you, the King is extremely surpised
at some Reports that come from Rome, that the Pope will not allow it upon lower
Terms than he granted that with Spain: It Is enough, as I conceive, for the
obtaining it, that the King shall procure such Articles (...) are necessary for
the Salvation of the Princess, and all her Family, and that there be room to
hope that the Catholics of England will be gainers by the Marriage: Now the
Affair is not only in this Condition, but we have procured more advantageous
Terms, as Monsieur de Berule will inform you farther. Thus his Majesty having
done every thing for his Holiness, that could be expected from a Christian
Prince, and one of his known Piety, there is not the least Appearance to
believe he will receive any other Treatment but what he may justly expect.
There is no necessity to stick to the Articles of Spain, but only to see
whether those of France are lawful and sufficient. Now since they are really
such, what a Displeasure will it be to his Majesty, to receive a Refusal, which
may, perhaps, carry him to some Extremities, that I would not by my good Will,
so much as think of. Not to insist upon the Zeal I have for his Majesty's
Interests, I should rather choose to suffer the severest Loss, than that ever
things should run to such a Crisis, which without doubt will prove prejudicial
to the Church. I conjure you to represent at large to his Holiness, all that
has been hinted to you in this Letter, and to assure him, that as upon a
Refusal of the Dispensation, a World of Inconveniences will inevitably follow,
so that abundance of Good may be expected from his Holiness's speedy dispatch
of it. Pray continue to write to me, and I will take care to answer your
Letters, and to make it appear upon all Occasions, that I am,

SIR, Your most Affectionate, etc. RICHELIEU.
St. Germains, Aug. 22, 1624.
LETTER III. To * * *
SIR,
I Showed the King your last Letter, which I can assure you has been thoroughly
considered, and you will find by the Effect, that your Advice will be always
regarded as it deserves.

Monsieur de Bethune will communicate to you part of the Dispatch, that was
sent to him by the Courier, and that will sufficiently instruct you what is to
be done in these present Occurrences.

I cannot imagine but that the Pope must think of accommodating the matter of
the Valtoline, because many Inconveniences may happen upon his not doing it,
which you so well know, that I will not pretend to lay down the particulars
here.

I judge it very proper for our Affairs, that you should recover the Diurnal of
the Sauvages: To effect which, you may promise as far as a Pension of fifty
Crowns reaches. In doing this you may use such measures as you think the Affair
will require, but you must not exceed the aforesaid Sum. Assure your self that
N^s^r will mind his Business better for the time to come, that he has hitherto
done.

As for what relates to the Breviary, there will no more mention be made of it
here. The Person about whom you writ to me, being sent with all the requisite
Submissions, to preserve every one in his Rights, and this has taken away all
Jealousies.

The Letters of 49. shall most assuredly be kept Secret: The same shall be done
if you think fit, with those of 41. With this^ conclude my Letter, and
earnestly desire you to believe that I am,

SIR, Your most Affectionate Brother to serve you, RICHELIEU.
Sr. Germains in L^ye, Sept. 12, 1624.
LETTER IV. To * * *
SIR,
I Am extremely glad that the Proposals which Monsieur de Bethune has been
ordered to make to the Pope, have been judged reasonable. I shall exceedingly
wonder, if his Holiness does not hasten on his Part, to determine this Affair,
as he is obliged in Interest, considering what ill Effects may happen upon his
neglect of it. If his Majesty's Council had been six Months ago such as it is
at present, we had taken wholesome Resolutions here much earlier, and so Matters
might have ended according to all our Desires: But then it was impossible. What
gives me the greatest disturbance is, that we loose a sine Opportunity of
advancing the Interests of Religion, all long of this unfortunate Affair, to
which, I hope, Heaven will put a speedy Conclusion. I can positively assure
you, that nothing shall be omitted for the future, to rid us fairly of it, no
more than I shall be wanting in my own particular, to testify to you upon all
Occasions, that I shall be ready to serve you, who am,

SIR, Your most Affectionate Brother, RICHELIEU.
St. German in Lay, October. 23, 1624
LETTER V. To * * *
SIR,
SInce I received your Letter of the seventh of October, you know what has been
the Success of the Valtoline. For this reason I shall forbear to say any thing
to you about it in this Letter. Nor shall I here trouble you with the
Particulars of the Match with England, but inform you of them by the Courier,
whom the King will dispatch to Rome upon this Occasion. In the mean time I
conjure you to rest fully satisfied of my Affection to you, and assure your
self that I am,

SIR, Your most Affectionate Brother, RICHELIEU.
Paris, Nov. 8, 1624.
LETTER VI. To * * *
SIR,
I Have received your Letters, in answer to which, have abundance of things to
say to you, and particularly about the Affair of the Valtoline, but that I am
satisfied that you have been already informed of them by the Marquis de
Coeuvres, who I suppose does not fail to write often to Monsieur de Bethune.
You Will find the Articles of the Marriage with England are all agreed upon; so
that nothing is wanting now to put an End to this Affair, but a Dispensation
from his Holiness, who without doubt will most readily grant it, since the
Condition are so advantageous to Religion. So soon as it is dispatched, which I
hope will be done with all convenient speed, Madam will set forward for Great
Britain, where she is impatiently expected, as we are informed by the
Ambassadors of England. Their Majesty's are extremely well pleased with this
Alliance, and you will readily own that it is not without good reason. And now I
passionately wish for an Opportunity to let you know with what Sincerity I am,

SIR, Your most Affectionate, etc. RICHELIEU.
Paris, Nov. 26, 1624.
LETTER VII. To * * *
SIR,
IN answer to yours of the 19th. of the last Month, I can positively assure
you, that for the time to come the King will omit nothing that may be necessary
to re-establish things in the Valtoline, as they ought to be. The Pope cannot
take it amiss, since it is really for the benefit of Christendom, and of the
Holy Chair; and indeed it is not reasonable that the Spaniards should press the Sea of St. Peter so nearly, that his Successors may come to be incommoded by
it. The King's Council will vigorously second his Majesty's Inclinations upon
all these Occasions. In the effecting of this, his Majesty has no intentions to
disturb the Repose of Christendom, but only to maintain his own Reputation. I
am satisfied you are of the same Opinion in this Matter, with my self, who am,

SIR, Your most Affectionate Brother, RICHELIEU.
Paris, Dec. 19, 1624.
LETTER VIII. To * * *
SIR,
THE King is extremely concerned that he is not able to comply with all that
the Sieur de Nardy demands in his Holiness's Name. If the Spaniards were not a
sort of People that would certainly take Advantage of every thing, the Requests
of his Holiness have always such an Influence upon his Majesty, that he would
freely grant them. If the Pope were inclined to dispose of one part of France,
he might do it without control; but notwithstanding this Deference to his
Holiness, and the Affection which the King has for his Person, his Majesty is
obliged to manage himself with this caution in the Business of the Valtoline. I
will not take upon me here to acquaint you with what, may and what may not be
done, referring my self as for that, to Monsieur d' Herbault; but this I will
tell you, that the King, who for his part has no intentions to make War, does
not think himself obliged to a Cessation, and that he pays so profound a regard
to the Person of his Holiness, that let this Matter be accommodated how it
will, it will be much more agreeable to him, if it is done before him and by
him, than if concluded in any other place, or by any other means whatsoever.

The Advices you received about the Hugonots, are but too true. Those People,
instigated by the Devil, or something as bad, have already begun to show their
ill Inclinations, having entered the Port of Blavet by Surprise, and landed
with some Pieces of Canon, with which they battered the Fort two Days, and
thought to carry it by Treachery, or by putting the Garrison in a Fright. The
King has already received the News, that the whole Province marched to their
Relief; upon which the Enemy got aboard their Vessels again, to save
themselves, but took away two or three Ships of Monsieur de Nevers, that were
then in the Harbor. These Attempts have been so far from hindering his
Majesty's Designs, that he has already got together six Thousand Men in
Bretagne, and six Thousand in Poictou, and reinforced the Armies of Champagne
and Picardy, with twelve Thousand Men, and two thousand Horse; so that without
any magnifying of Matters, the King pays at this present time sixty Thousand
Effective Men in his own Kingdom, and six Thousand Horse. I hope God will give
a good issue to his Majesty's Affairs. In the mean time I assure you that I am,

SIR, Your most Affectionate, etc. RICHELIEU.
Paris, Jan. 27, 1625.
LETTER IX. To * * *
SIR,
LEt your Speculative People at Rome make what Reflections they please upon the
Enterprise of Monsieur de Soubize, yet here we are in hopes that he will do us
no great Mischief. The King, to render his Design ineffectual, has equipped
thirty Vessels of five hundred Tun each, which will infallibly reduce him to
his Duty. Nor is this all, for his Majesty, to secure himself of those of the
pretended Reformed Religion, who would have been glad to see new troubles in
his Kingdom, and remove to those places where they look upon themselves to be
the strongest, has brought into the Field in Languedoc and Poictou, six
Thousand Foot, and five Hundred Horse in each of those Provinces. His Majesty
has taken this Course to keep all quiet at home, and at the same time continues
to act abroad, pursuant to his first Resolutions. And although so many Affairs,
which he has upon his Hands at once, engage him in an extraordinary Expense:
Nevertheless, Heaven be praised, he has found out a way to support them,
without incommoding himself, having this Year provided above six Millions, to
answer all Emergencies. This is what I had to communicate to you upon this
Subject, entreating you earnestly to believe that I am,

SIR, Your most Affectionate Brother, RICHELIEU.
Paris, March 13, 1625.
LETTER X. To * * *
SIR,
THough I writ to you yesterday by F. Joseph, and sent you Word that we were
upon the Point of entering into a Conference with the Legate, yet I thought fit
to take Pen in Hand again, to acquaint you that the King and his Ministers are
entirely well satisfied with his Person. As for what relates to his Proposals,
he demands that there be a Cessation of Arms, that the Forts of the Valtoline
be put into his Holiness's Hands, and that the Valtolines be exempted from the
Government and Jurisdiction of the Grisons; all which his Majesty and Council
have absolutely refused for several Reasons, some of which you your self have
often laid down in your Letters, and the rest you may find in the Letter which
his Majesty has writ to Monsieur de Bethune. All that I have to tell you upon
this Subject is, that the Negotiation is spun out so long, that I am afraid it
will not have that Effect, which it were to be wished it might have, for the
Good of Christendom. If the Legate makes any other Overtures, that may be
embraced without hurting the Reputation and Interests of his Majesty, both he
and those that have the Honor to be of his Council, will be extremely glad to
give all imaginable content to his Holiness and him. I am,

SIR, Your most Affectionate Brother, RICHELIEU.
Fountainbleau, June 21, 1625.
LETTER XI. To the King, upon his Promotion to the Dignity of Cardinal, 1622.
Out of Monsieur du Puy's Cabinet, MS. 569.
SIR,
AS God showers down his Blessings upon his Creatures, not to receive any thing
from them, since of himself he possesses all; but only to render them more
happy, and more capable to accomplish his Will; so your Majesty, who is a
lively Image of the Divinity, will not think it strange, if in thanking you for
the Honor to which your Goodness has raised me, I can do nothing else but
profess an entire and religious Obedience to your Commands, and assure you that
I would rather choose not to live at all, than fail to employ my Life and
Dignity (which I owe to your Majesty's Bounty, as I do every thing I possess)
perpetually in your Service. I beg of Heaven that it will permit me to be so
happy in this Design, that my Actions may signalize me much more than the
Purple, with which you have been pleased to Honor me. Then, SIR, and not till
then, the Satisfaction I begin now to receive, will become perfect; for the
only Passion I have in the World, is by all imaginable Demonstrations to
convince you that I am,

SIR, Your Majesty's most humble, most obliged, and most obedient Subject and
Servant, RICHELIEU.
Lions, Sept. 23, 1622.
LETTER XII. To the King.
SIR,
I Am sensible that as a Subject cannot, without a Crime, become troublesome to
his Prince, by making importunate Demands, so he ought not to refuse the
Effects of his Liberality. Though I have hitherto preserved my self from the
first of these Inconveniences, yet, to my great regret, I find my self
constrained to fall into the latter, humbly imploring your Majesty not to be
offended that I cannot accept of the two Abbeys which you have been pleased to
bestow upon me. If I presumed to make this Supplication without Cause, I
confess it would be very criminal; but since it is grounded upon Reason, I Am
persuaded you will approve of it. Your Majesty knows that both these places are
become vacant by the Death of the Grand Prior. Now as I was a Member of your
Council when the Interests of your State obliged you to cause his Person to be
apprehended, I should act directly contrary to my Conscience, if I should raise
to my self any Advantage by his Misfortune, or share in his Spoils. I have
already received several Marks of your Majesty's Bounty; and since you have
upon this occasion declared your Inclinations of conferring others upon me, I
can assure you that I will never be so ill advised as to refuse them, if your
Service does not oblige me to the contrary, as my own Sentiments do in this
matter. I conjure you, SIR, to accept of these Considerations, and to rest
satisfied, that the only Interests I will cultivate, during the whole Course of
my Life, shall be yours, and the Honor that may be acquired by serving so
great a Prince. I am,

SIR, Your Majesty's most humble, most obliged, and most obedient Subject and
Servant, RICHELIEU.
Siran, Feb. 15, 1629.
LETTER XIII. To the Queen, upon the taking of Privas.
MADAM,
THat your Majesty might be fully informed of all the remarkable Occurrences
that happen here, I have dispatched this Bearer to you with all speed, to
acquaint you that five or six hundred Men, who had retired into the Fort of
Thoulon, having surrendered themselves at Discretion to his Majesty, the King
was resolved to have part of them hanged, another sent to the Galleys, and the
least guilty among them to be pardoned. But so it fell out, that as the Guards
were entering the abovementioned Fort, to prevent any Disorder, some Hugonots,
more desperate than their Fellows, and among the rest one Chambelan of Privas,
who had, as long as he was able, opposed their Surrendering at Discretion, by
representing to them, That such People were generally hanged for their pains;
and that it was better to die by Fire, than by a Halter: I Will immediately, said
he, having a Match in his Hand, set Fire to the Powder. And had no sooner said
so, but was as good as his Word. The Fire destroyed some of them; and others in
the Fright threw themselves from the Bastion on which they stood, clearly out
of the Fort, which was encompassed with the whole Army; for we were forced to
block up the place before they would surrender: But the Soldiers imagining that
they had blown up the Guards, who it seems were upon a high Platform above this
Bastion, fell so outrageously upon these poor Men that leapt down, that they
killed above two hundred of them, and that with such Fury and Disorder, that
several of the Army were slain there, and some principal Officers had much ado
to save themselves. Dr. Mullot fancied he should have been dispatched thither
as a Minister, but at present is more vexed at the Quality that has been given
him, than at the Danger he underwent.

It looks as if it were a particular Judgment of God upon this City, which has
been always the Seat of Heresy in these Quarters. At first it was not resolved
to abandon it to Pillage, but at Night its Fate was decreed, so the Gates were
left open, for the Soldiers to march in, and plunder it. All Endeavors were
used to save it from being burnt, but in vain, for not one House is left
standing in the Town, but all buried in Ashes. Nothing was omitted that might
serve to preserve those that were retired into the Fort of Toulon, from the
Fury of the Soldiers, but they were constrained to expose themselves to it,
leaping down from their Fortifications, and giving the Soldiers an occasion to
exercise their Rage upon them with Fire, with which some desperate Fellows
among them, thought to have burnt themselves with the King's People.

Heaven was so kind to me, that I did not behold this cruel Scene; for the
small Fatigue I had undergone for about seven or eight Days, during the Siege,
constrained me to keep my Bed that very Day, on which these Wretches were used
in this manner.

This involuntary Rigor which befell this City, and the Clemency that his
Majesty has showed toward those places that surrendered freely, will convince
the rest how much they are obliged in Interest to make their Peace in time, and
not stay till they are constrained to return to their Duty. And indeed in these
Parts, four or five small Cities, but well fortified, have already surrendered,
viz. Bastide, Vagnac, la Tour de Salvas, and Baulines. Chabrille is to wait
upon the King to Morrow, and yield up to him all the small Castles of
Boussiers, and the Baulines, which were looked upon to be the strongest of the
said Places.

On the Tenth Day after the Trenches were open, Privas was taken, although the
Fortifications of that Town were exceeding strong.

It Is impossible to relate the several Cruelties which these Rebels have used
toward the Catholics. Among others, after the Siege was begun, they took the
Guardian of the Capuchins of Valence, a Man of an excellent Life, and singular
Learning, and they treated him in so barbarous a manner, that they would not
kill him outright, till they had first cut off his Nose, and plucked out his
Eyes.

St. Andre, and Ten or Twelve of the principal Leaders, are taken Prisoners.
Several are in the Hands of some Gentlemen of the Army, who will endeavor to
save them, for the great Sums of Money they offer for their Lives. Others have
made their Escapes. And this, Madam, is an account of what has happened to
Privas.

The King will not part these two or three Days from hence, because he is
obliged to stay till the Artilery comes up, which cannot be done so speedily in
such an unpassable Country as this is. So soon as he has resolved upon the
Place where he is to go next, your Majesty shall with all Expedition be
informed of it. In the mean time I beg you will do me the Honor to believe that
no Man in the World is, or can be, with more Sincerity than I am,

MADAM, Your most humble, most obedient, most faithful, and most obliged
Servant, RICHELIEU.
Privas, May 13, 1629.
LETTER XIV. To Monsieur Ville aux-Clers.
SIR,
I Send you these few Lines, to tell you, it is the King's pleasure that you
should dispatch a Courier to the Marshall d' Estree, with a Letter from his
Majesty, bearing Order for him to make no difficulty to march the Troops that
are in Compeigne, pursuant to what Instructions he will receive from Monsieur
de Saint-Chaumont, to whom the King has communicated his Intentions upon this
Subject. In the mean time I remain,

SIR, Your most Affectionate, etc. RICHELIEU.
Leuville, June 2, 1631.
LETTER XV. To the Duke of Hallwin.
SIR,
Although I writ to you two or three Days ago, yet I take occasion to send you
these few Lines, to inform you that Orders are dispatched to Monsieur le Camus,
to cause such Fortifications to be made at Narbonne and Leucate, as you and he
shall judge necessary to put both those places in a good Posture of Defense.

There are likewise Commissions sent down to you, to raise four Regiments, and
three Troops of Light Horse, in case you think there will be occasion for so
many. The manner of doing it is wholly left to your own Discretion, being
empowered to act according as you see the Necessity and Service of the King
shall require it. Besides that his Majesty's Interest demands it of me, be
assured that I shall take as much care of your Concerns, as you your-self can
desire from any one, who is truly, as I am,

SIR, Your most Affectionate Servant, RICHELIEU.
Royaumont, March 16, 1635.
LETTER XVI. To the Marshall de Chastillon.
SIR,
I Cannot sufficiently express to you how entirely his Majesty is satisfied
with your manner of Commanding his Army. The greatest Pleasure you can do him
is to keep it as complete, and in as good Order as possibly you can. I am
extremely well pleased that Monsieur de Breze is pitched upon to serve the King
in conjunction with you, knowing that he will honor you, and live after such a
manner with you, that it will be to your mutual Satisfaction. As for my self, I
shall be very proud to have an opportunity to convince you that I am,

SIR, Your most Affectionate Servant, RICHELIEU.
Ruel, April 11, 1635.
LETTER XVII. To the Cardinal de la Valette.
My Lord,
Although it is a needless Precaution to put you in Mind of being upon your Guard
at Metz, knowing you will take all the care that can be desired, yet I thought
my self obliged to inform you, that we have received Advice that the King's
Enemies have a Design upon that place. I Am persuaded you will give such effectual
Orders where you are, that you will let them find no opportunity to put what they
threaten in execution. His Majesty is very well, God be praised, and Monsieur
came this Day to see him. We have no News here that is worth the while to send
to you: So that nothing remains for me, but to assure you of the Continuance of
my Affection and Love to you, and that I am,

My Lord, Your most Humble, and most Affectionate Servant, RICHELIEU.
Ruel, April 12, 1635.
LETTER XVIII. To the same.
My Lord,
COlonel Hebron will particularly inform you of the Affection I have now, and
will still preserve for your Lordship, which is so great that neither Absence
nor Time shall ever cause the least Alteration in it. At present I shall only
conjure you to repair your Fortifications with all possible Expedition; and so
soon as they are in such a Condition, that your Presence will be less necessary
where you are, than it is at present, I am of opinion it will be highly
expedient for you to visit the Marshall de la Force's Army, where, without
question, it will be very advantageous. After which I hope we shall be so happy
as to see you shortly in your Frontier. In the mean time, assure your self, I
beseech you, that no Man can be more than I am,

My Lord, Your, etc. RICHELIEU.
Compeigne, April 29, 1635. I earnestly beg of you before your Departure to the
Army, to leave such good Orders behind you, that there may be no danger of a
Surprise.



LETTER XIX. To the Duke of Hallwin.
SIR,
I Have received your Letter, together with a Memorial of what things you judge
to be necessary at Narbonne. In answer to which, finding by your Account that
there are no more than fourscore thousand weight of Powder in that Place, of
which there are eight thousand weight spoiled; and that there are sixty
thousand in Tolouse, fit for use, I judge it expedient for you to take one half
of that, and get it carried thither as soon as possible. Monsieur d' Arpajon
has likewise sent me Word, that there are not above six or seven hundred
Bullets, so you will find it expedient to cause to be cast in the neighboring
Places, so many as may make 'em up six thousand of all the Sizes of the Pieces
there. As for your Provisions, if there is the least Appearance that the City
will be besieged, in such a case you must seize all the Cattle that are in the
Country, that you may have Victuals sufficient.

Above all, it is necessary that you should have fifty thousand weight of
Powder, thirty or forty thousand weight of Lead, fifty thousand of Match, six
thousand Bullets, Corn sufficient for a Year; and if, besides all this, any
thing more be wanting, it is generally to be found in such Cities as that, which
are never unprovided of such things which are of necessary use to 'em. I desire
you to take care to see all this performed, and be assured that I am, and ever
will be,

SIR, Your most Affectionate Servant, RICHELIEU.
Peronne, May 6, 1636.
LETTER XX. To the Cardinal de la Valette.
My Lord,
THE Sieur Ferrier being gone to visit the Marshall de la Force from the King,
about an Affair which he will communicate to you, I thought my self obliged to
inform you by him, what his Majesty's Thoughts are in relation to your self, I
mean about the commanding of his Troops, which he ordered to meet about
Langres. You must know then, he is so perfectly satisfied, not only with your
Affection to the Prosperity of his Affairs, but with your Merit and Experience,
that of his own proper Motion he formed this Resolution, not judging it fit
that a Person of your Condition should remain in his Army without Authority. I
am so much the more pleased at the choice he has made of your self upon this
Occasion, because it will give you an Opportunity to discover your Worth to the
World every Day more and more, and I am assured you will fully answer the
Opinion and Confidence that has been always reposed in you. In the mean time I
desire you to depend upon my Affection as fixed and immovable to you: No Man
living more esteems you, or wishes your Happiness with greater Zeal than my
self, who am,

My Lord, Your, etc, RICHELIEU.
Neufchastel, May 15, 1635. P. S. You will do well to consider deliberately
what to enterprise with the Army that you are to command. The Sieur Ferrier
will tell you how many different Thoughts we have had of that Matter here. If
we could but beat Monsieur de Lorrain with the Troops that the Marshall de la
Force commands in those Parts, then we ought to employ the abovementioned Army
in the Affair that Colonel Hebron and I talked about at Compeigne. We expect
the return of the aforesaid Ferrier, to know whether we must reinforce Monsieur
de la Force only with Horse, or Horse and Foot together.



LETTER XXI. To the same.
My Lord,
THE Bearer hereof will acquaint you with more than I thought convenient to
commit to Writing, the Ways being neither free nor safe. Only this I will
assure you, that in whatsoever Place, or whatsoever Condition I happen to be, I
am, and ever shall be, as much as you can desire me,

My Lord, Your most Affectionate, etc. RICHELIEU.
Chateau-Thierry, May 20, 1635.
LETTER XXII. To the Mareschals de Chatillon, and de Breze.
Gentlemen,
AS I cannot sufficiently express to you how much the King is satisfied with
the Service you have lately done him in the management of his Army, and in the
Battle you have fought with the Enemy, so it is as impossible for me to describe
to you my own Joy in particular, at the great Advantage we have gained, and the
Glory you have acquired by so gallant an Action. I can assure you that this
happy Success has but answered his Expectation, who always promised himself a
Victory equal to what you have gained, from the Goodness of God, the Justice of
his Cause, and from your Courage and Prudence. He has commanded a public
Thanksgiving to God, to whom we must attribute so great and so considerable a
Victory. The King does not question but that you will continue to act for his
Service upon all Occasions that shall present themselves for the future, as
well as you have hitherto done, which has given him all the Satisfaction
imaginable, as you will find more particularly by his Dispatches; to which
referring my self, I shall conclude this, with assuring you of the Continuance
of my Affection, and that I am,

Your, etc. RICHELIEU.
Conde, May 30, 1635. P. S. Since this Dispatch was shut up, we have received
Advice, that the Marshall de la Force, after he had encamped four Days within
Cannonshot of Duke Charles's Army, during which they had perpetual Skirmishes
on both sides, has at last obliged the aforesaid Army to retire, with the loss
of nine hundred Men upon the Spot, four hundred Prisoners, and a great deal of
Baggage, without the loss on our part of above twenty, comprehending the slain
as well as wounded in the Number.



LETTER XXIII. To the Cardinal de la Valette.
My Lord,
I Cannot sufficiently either praise or blame you for your manner of managing
your self where now you are, and exposing your Person to all Hazards, as we
hear you do. The Abbot of Coursan, who will part from hence within a Day or
two, has a great deal more to tell you from me. In the Interim rest assured
that no Man living is more sincerely than I am,

My Lord, Your most Humble, etc. RICHELIEU.
Conde, June 1, 1635. P. S. I conjure you to have a care of your self, and
engage Monsieur de la Force, as much as you can, to make the best Advantage of
the Victory which God has given to his Majesty's Arms, by driving, if possible,
Duke Charles on the other side the Rhine, now Feuquieres and Bellefonds have
joined him. Commissary Rose is gone to conferr with Monsieur de la Force.



LETTER XXIV. To the same.
My Lord,
I Have ordered the Abbot of Coursan, whom the King has sent to the place where
now you are, to communicate his Instructions entirely to you. Continue, I
beseech you, to manage Affairs so as may be most advantageous to his Majesty's
Service. If we could beat Duke Charles beyond the Rhine, or lock him up in some
commodious Place, so that he could not come back to the Franche-Comte, we might
soon expect to see the happy effects of it, nor should you be without a
considerable share in them. Let me prevail with you to continue in the Army
where you are, till such time as you see what can be done against the aforesaid
Duke, with the Re-inforcement of the Sieur de Feuquieres, and that of
Bellefonds. It Is of no small importance to beat the Iron while it is hot upon
this Occasion, not only for the great Consternation the Enemy is in, but
because it is to be feared that Duke Bernard wont let you have the Germans long,
but will call them home. If once Duke Charles were beaten, or retired beyond
the Rhine, I would desire you to come hither with all speed, that you might
receive a more honorable Post in the Army, whither I find your Inclination
carries you.

While you tarry where you are, I conjure you not to expose your Person, as you
have too often done. Excuse me if I tell you, your Honor does not require, and
the King's Service cannot suffer it. Besides these Considerations, the Passion
I have for you, as well as my own Interest, constrains me to tell you, that you
cannot more sensibly oblige me, than by altering this Method.

Though the Victory which it pleased God to give the King in Flanders, may
possibly have arrived to you already by common Report, yet I thought my self
obliged to communicate this good News to you, knowing what an extraordinary Joy
it will give you, as well for the Reputation that his Majesty, as for the Glory
that your Friends have acquired by it.

Above five thousand of the Enemy fell upon the place, fifteen hundred were
wounded, and thirteen hundred taken Prisoners, among whom is the Count de la
Feire, Governor of the Citadel of Antwerpe, and Lieutenant General of the
Army; Don Alonce Ladron, Mestre de Camp of a Spanish Regiment; Sfondrate,
Mestre de Camp of an Italian Regiment; the Count de Willerval; and several
others of Quality, with a great number of Officers: They have lost sixteen
Pieces of Cannon, which is all they had; and all their Baggage; which is so
much the more considerable, because, as it is said, there were two Wagons full
of Money, fifty or sixty Colors or Flags. There goes a flying Report, that
Prince Thomas is slain, and the Count d Bucquoy wounded in this Action; but
this wants a farther Confirmation.

The King has not lost above fifty Men in this Action, among whom there is but
one Captain, and some other Officers; and an hundred and fifty wounded; which
renders this Victory the more complete.

The Army of the Enemies was composed of sixscore and ten Regiments of Foot,
and fifty Troops of Horse, that were the best they had.

This is all I had to communicate to you in this Letter, referring my self for
the rest to the Abbot of Coursan, who will assure you that his Majesty is in
good Health, and that I am with all imaginable sincerity,

My Lord, Your most Humble, etc. RICHELIEU.
Conde, June 2, 1635. I have perused what you sent me, concerning la Coudargis
and Valin, whom I shall remember. Pray remember me to Monsieur de Turenne, and
assure him of my hearty Affection to him. When you come into these Parts, we
will consider of the best Methods how to serve him.

You may if you please, acquaint the Gentleman, who married the Lady of
Montpellier, that I am extremely well satisfied with his Deportment upon the
Occasion you writ to me about. No Body has spoken a Word to the King to his
Disadvantage, as I find by your Letter he seemed to apprehend.


Addition.
My Lord,
I Add these few Lines to the Letter I writ to you this Morning, to tell you,
that being informed from good Hands, that you frequently do things which your
Quality and Condition ought by no means to permit; You must excuse me, if I
conjure you to remember that a Person in your Station may very well discharge
the part of a General, without running the hazard of a private Musqueteer. Once
more therefore, I beg of you to be determined in this Affair by the best of
your Friends, and most faithful of your Servants,

The Cardinal of Richelieu.



LETTER XXV. To the Duke of Hallwin.
SIR,
FInding by several of your Dispatches, how desirous you are to fight the
King's Enemies in your Frontier, I take this Occasion to acquaint you, that his
Majesty is not displeased at your Proposal, provided you don't engage his Arms
and Reputation unadvisedly, and that you attempt nothing, the Success whereof
is not only certain, but wholly advantageous to the Prosperity of his Affairs.
For I don't think it by any means advisable for you to take the Towns,
Villages, and other unfortify'd places that lie near you; since besides that
it is impossible to keep them, such a Procedure would oblige the Enemies to
retaliate the same upon us, and so fatigue our Troops, that in case any
important Action should happen, we should certainly come by the worst of it. If
I were not well acquainted with your Prudence and Judgment, I should write a
great deal more to you upon this Subject, but that were to call both of 'em
into question, since I am satisfied no Man knows better than your self, what
may be useful or disadvantageous to his Majesty's Service in the Quarters where
now you are.

In a Word, Sir, if you find your self in a Condition to take any place of
importance, I would advise you to attempt it; but unless you have some notable
Advantage in prospect, I think it will be your best way not to begin a War in
your parts, from which you may receive as much good as harm.

Monsieur de la Urilliere has sent you so particular an Account of every thing
that has happened here, that nothing remains for me to say, but to assure you
of the continuance of my Affection to you, and that I am, and ever will be,

SIR, Your most Affectionate Servant, RICHELIEU.
Ruel, June 4. 1635.
LETTER XXVI. To the Marshall de Chatillon.
SIR,
LOng before I received your Letter, wherein you give me an account of the
Battle between our and the Spanish Army, I had rejoiced with you and Monsieur
de Breze, for the Victory which God was pleased to give his Majesty upon this
Occasion, not only for the Glory and Reputation which France will derive from
this good Success, but likewise for the Honor you have hereby acquired, the
increase of which I no less passionately desire, than your self can do. It lies
in your Power still to draw the best Advantages from so glorious a Victory; but
you need not be reminded of doing that, for I doubt not but that every thing
will be performed, which your Prince may expect from your Prudence, from your
Affection, and good Conduct. One of the most effectual means, in my Opinion, to
bring this about to the advantage of his Majesty's Affairs, will be for
Monsieur de Breze and you to live in so perfect an Union and Intelligence, that
nothing may be ever able to alter it. Besides the Service of the King, who
requires you to keep a good understanding among your selves, you will also
answer my Prayers, who desire the same of you; and indeed it is so visibly the
Interest of you both to live after this manner, that I am satisfied neither of
you will omit any thing that may contribute to so good an End. I have writ to
the Sieur de Breze upon this Subject, and am mightily mistaken if he will not
do every thing on his side that can be expected from him.

Once more I conjure you and Monsieur de Breze, to live together in the best
Understanding that may be, because otherwise his Majesty's Affairs will receive
a considerable Prejudice by it. By some of the Enemy's Letters, which we
intercepted, we find they don't a little depend upon the Division that, as they
pretend, has hitherto appeared between you, and that they flatter themselves
with hopes of reaping great Advantages by your not agreeing. They likewise make
mention that you and Monsieur de Breze have refused to take Orders from the
Prince of Orange, which I cannot believe, since it is one of the Articles agreed
upon in our Treaty. Pray send me an Account of this, and of all memorable
Passages that happen in your Parts, and be assured that I am as much as it is
possible for any one to be,

SIR, Your, etc. RICHELIEU.
Bois-le-Vicomte, June 8, 1635.
LETTER XXVII. To the Cardinal de la Vallette.
My Lord,
SEnding the Bearer hereof to the Messieurs de la Force, to condole with them
for the Loss of Madam the Mareschal's Lady, I was willing to acquaint you by
the same Opportunity, in what Condition I am at present, least the News of my
illness should give you any inquietude.

The Distemper I had at Bourdeaux is now come to visit me the third time, and
in the same place, but with this difference, that it is not accompanied with
the same Accidents that attended the two first. I was lanced yesterday about
five a Clock in the Afternoon, which was very painful to endure; but with this
good Success, that within a Moment after the Operation was over, I found
extraordinary Ease. So that at present I am free of my great Pains, and hope in
a little time to be perfectly cured. Let this set you fully at ease, for God be
praised, the danger is over. I have writ so particularly to you by the Abbot of
Coursan, that I have no more to send you, but the Continuance of my Affection
and Service, and that I am with all sincerity,

My Lord, Your, etc. RICHELIEU.
Ruel, June 5, 1635.
LETTER XXVIII. To the Marshall de Chastillon.
SIR,
THE Messieurs de Charnace, and d'Espenan, will give you so particular an
Account of what Resolutions the King has taken, upon the Account of their
Journey, and the Condition in which they found Affairs in these Quarters, that
I need not give my self the trouble to say any thing concerning them: For which
reason I shall content my self with telling you, that his Majesty having
occasion for Persons of your Merit and Consideration, to act in several places,
desires you will immediately repair to him upon the receipt of his Orders. I
have no more at present, but to assure you that I am with all sincerity,

SIR, Your, etc. RICHELIEU.
Ruel, July 31, 1635.
LETTER XXIX. To the Cardinal de la Valette.
My Lord,
J Am extremely pleased with your giving Galasse the slip, as well because it is
for the King's Service, as for your own Glory in particular. I hope from your
Conduct all that may be expected from a Person who has Zeal and Application
joined to his great Abilities; and I promise you that nothing in my power shall
be wanting, to make the King's Armies under your Administration, leave off
their old Licentious Habitudes, and be brought under good Discipline, as they
ought to be. To effect this, great Vigor must be shown on your part, it being
utterly impossible without that to bring Matters to such a pass, as you and I
desire they should be, for our Prince's Service. You will find by the exemplary
Punishment which his Majesty inflicted on a hundred and fifty Officers that
absented themselves from the Army in Lorrain, that there is no other way to
remedy Disorders but this. This Severity will most assuredly be continued, and
indeed without it all will be lost. In the Name of God, never pardon any of
your Deserters, but make remarkable Examples of them. One single Instance will
make you dreaded as long as you live, and put you in a way to be thought
Merciful ever after.

I have already sent you Word, that for the future you shall be abundantly
supplied with Bread. To convince you of that, I promise you that Nancy and Metz
shall never be without sufficient Magazines.

As our Forces increase every day, it will be much easier to make such good
provision for our Convoys, of Corn, and other Necessaries, that our Carriages
may be no longer incommoded.

Our four thousand Dragoons are arrived, besides 1700 more that are to be sent
to you, and a thousand to Monsieur de la Force. Five hundred of them are
quartered at Toul, to secure the abovementioned Carriages, and another five
hundred in other places, that were judged the most important.

If you have occasion for no more Troops than what you have already with you,
which I cannot believe, considering what a necessity you have for Provisions,
we are of opinion that out of the remainder of those that are designed for you,
a small Body should be formed at Metz, to clear all those places that annoy
your Carriages, and particularly Cirk. For this end Bellefonds is sent to Metz,
to receive two or three Regiments that you want, and all the Dragoons that are
designed for you, as also Canillas, who is in Burgundy, and the remainder of
the Horse, which you are to have, that with these Forces he may possess himself
of that troublesome place, that has so long incommoded you. If you believe that
some other Design may turn to better Account, it is but sending word to the
abovementioned Sieur de Bellefonds, and he will follow your Orders.

On the Twentieth of this Month, the Messieurs de Angoulesme and de la Force
will be reinforced with Matignon's Regiment of Horse, and above 2500 Gentlemen.
Besides this, we shall have at Langres, a Body of eight hundred Horse, and a
thousand Dragoons, to hinder the Enemy's Insults on that side. The Levies of
the Switzers are completed. We are raising twenty Regiments, and four thousand
Horse, as I have sent you Word already; and besides this, we are going to raise
two thousand Horse of new Cavalry, which you writ to me about, that will only
carry a Cuirass, a Helmet to cover the Cheeks and Nose, a Carabine, and a
Pistol; and I believe we shall call them the Hungarian Cavalry, unless Monsieur
Hebron gives us a better Name. There is no question but we shall have Forces
enough; all the difficulty will be to employ them well. Endeavors will be used
on one side, to beat back the Duke of Lorrain. As for you, My Lord, I don't
doubt but you will do what impossible. The King has not ordered what you are to
do, but has that good Opinion of your Prudence and Conduct, that he leaves you
to act at your own Discretion; for he knows you will weigh every thing
deliberately, before you take the last Resolutions.

Monsieur Servien has sent you a very large Letter, which will excuse me from
running into farther Particulars. I can only assure you of the continuance of
my Service and Affection to you, who am; and ever will be, without the least
Alteration,

My Lord, Your most humble, etc. RICHELIEU.
Ruel, Aug. 11, 1635.
LETTER XXX. To the same.
My Lord,
SInce I writ you a Letter some five or six Days ago, which you will receive by
this Packet, I have received yours by Monsieur de Cressia. I cannot express to
you how overjoyed I am at the Success of your Journey. I only hope the End will
prove as lucky as the Beginning.

Monsieur Boutheillier will fully answer you as to all you can expect from him.
The King reposes so entire a Confidence in your Affection, your Judgment, and
Prudence, that he leaves you wholly at Liberty, to act as you shall see
convenient.

I here send you the Ordinance his Majesty has made against the Officers that
absent themselves from their respective Posts in the Army which is now in
Lorrain, under the command of the Messieurs d' Angoulesme, and de la Force.
Pray publish it in your own Army, where, I conjure you, to continue to punish
those that are wanting in their Duty; for it is evident that under our present
Circumstances, nothing will make a General to be revered, and capable of doing
the King's Business, but a steady Hand, and impartial Severity. I can assure
you that his Majesty will not spare the most cunning of them all; and it is
necessary that those who command his Armies, should do the same. God be
thanked, his Majesty is in good Health. As for my self, I am, and ever will be,

My Lord, Your most humble, etc. RICHELIEU.
Ruel, Aug. 14, 1635.
LETTER XXXI. To the same.
My Lord,
You Will find, that as soon as you gave us to understand by your Dispatches,
that you desired the rest of the Troops, that were designed for you, to come up
and join you, we quitted our design of besieging Cirk, that so they might
immediately march to join your Army. I will not trouble my self to send you
more Particulars, which will be sent to you from the Secretaries of State. Only
this I will tell you, that the King is resolved to go in Person into Lorrain.
Before his Departure, the Messieurs d' Angoulesme, and de la Force, will be
strengthened with the addition of above 4500 Gentlemen. The King will be at St.
Dizier on the sixth of September, at the Head of 15000 Foot, and 3000 Horse,
besides the abovementioned Troops. If by that time the Duke of Lorrain is
beaten back, his Majesty designs to march as far as Metz, to support and back
you. Thus, I hope every thing will succeed according to our Desires. His
Majesty being sensible of your Prudence and Loyalty, leaves you at full Liberty
to act as you shall judge most expedient. I have no more at present, but that I
shall be eternally,

My Lord, Your most humble, etc. RICHELIEU.
Ruel, Aug. 18, 1635.
LETTER XXXII. To the Duke of Hallwin.
SIR,
NOT being able to find among my Papers, the Draughts of Perpignan, Barcelona,
and Salces, I write you this Letter, to desire you to send them to me, and
withal, take care they be as true as is possible. I should be very glad to know
whether some Attempt might not be made against Perpignan, and the means how to
carry it on, so as to have a prospect of Success. You Will meet with several
People in the Frontiers, that can instruct you particularly in these Matters:
As for Instance, about the Ways through which your Cannon and other Provisions
are to pass; as also about the true State of the Place, the Number of Men in
Garrison there, and what quantity of Victuals and Ammunition they have. In a
Word, gather the best Informations you can, and send them to me by the first
Post; so that upon these Directions we may see what is fit to be undertaken
there for his Majesty's Service. In the mean time rest assured that I am,

SIR, Your most Affectionate Servant, RICHELIEU.
Conflans, Aug. 22, 1635.
LETTER XXXIII. To the Cardinal de la Vallette.
My Lord,
I Am exceedingly surpised at what you tell me in yours, dated the 23d. of
August, viz. that you had not received several Letters which I sent to you by
the Couriers. I can assure you, that not one has parted from this place, but I
did my self the honor to write to you by him. I cannot tell whether I must lay
the blame upon them, or the Secretaries of State, to whom for the most part I
give my Letters. All imaginable Care has been taken here, to reinforce your
Troops; but the Enemy is so considerably increased on the side of the Duke of
Lorrain, that having formed two considerable Bodies, one of which being
commanded by Leinon, they have thrown into S. Michel, and other places near
you, it was judged necessary to employ part of the Re-inforcement designed for
your self, to compose a second Body, in order to go and meet with Leinon. So
soon as they have either routed, or driven him back, you shall be recruited
with a Dozen Troops of Horse, and a Thousand Dragoons.

Five Regiments likewise will be sent to Metz, to strengthen you; but because
they are new-raised Men, and it is to be feared that the greatest part of them
will Desert, I leave it to your Consideration whether it will be the best way
to make them march as far as your Quarters, or rather to keep them at Metz, to
be employed in case of necessity, with six thousand Switzers, that are to keep
the Field.

The King is gone in Person to the Frontiers of Lorrain, to carry on the War
more vigorously against Duke Charles, and Leinon. This is all at present from,

My Lord, Your most humble, etc. RICHELIEU.
Sept. 10, 1635.
BILLET. To the Cardinal de la Valette.
COnsidering in what a Condition the Cardinal de la Valette, and the King's
Affairs are, the King gives him power to treat with Duke Bernard, and offer him
four Millions of Livres yearly, making the best and cheapest Terms he can with
him, and endeavoring to spare out of that Sum seven or eight hundred thousand
Livres, for the Landgrave of Hesse.

LETTER XXXIV. To the same.
My Lord,
IT IS impossible to tell you how overjoyed I was at the News of your marching
near us, when you could do nothing at a greater distance, and that you have
made so glorious a Retreat, that you beat the Enemy. Knowing how negligent and
careless People generally are, I have sent Monsieur de Mande, whose active
Temper you must needs be acquainted with, to gather all the Corn he can find in
the Country, for your Subsistence. His Majesty has sent you two thousand Horse,
and four thousand Foot. I can assure you, that I desire to be carried thither,
not only for the Benefit I may receive by such a Journey, but for the
Satisfaction of going to serve you my self in Person, since no Man honors you
more than he, who is, and ever will be,

My Lord, Your most Humble, etc. RICHELIEU.
Ruel, Oct. 3, 1635.
LETTER XXXV. To the same.
My Lord,
I Want Terms to express my Joy for your safe and happy Return: It would be
entire, were it not for a Loss I have lately sustained, which troubles me more
than I am able to tell you. If I could redeem those for whom I now complain, I
would readily do it, though at my own Expense. I will heartily pour out my
Prayers to God for them, and serve them in all their Affairs as far as I am
able. I desire you to take care that my Companies don't desert, particularly
that of Light Horse, which at present is without an Officer to command them:
Being resolved to do nothing without the King's Will and Approbation, I have
sent to him for fresh Instructions. In the mean time, I must tell you, that my
Opinion wholly agrees with yours. I am overjoyed to hear where you are, and
shall be more so, when I have an Opportunity to convince you by my Actions,
that I am,

SIR, Your most Humble etc. RICHELIEU.
Ruel, Oct. 5, 1635.
A MEMORIAL. To the same.
WHen you had a Commission to treat with the Duke of Weymar, as far as the Sum
of four Millions of Livres reached, the reason of it was, because we considered
the great danger you were in, if he had abandoned you, and because we would
omit nothing that seemed necessary for your Preservation.

We are very willing to maintain at a reasonable Expense, such Troops as the
Duke of Weymar is able to keep effectively on Foot; but we know well enough
that he cannot bring six thousand Horse, and twelve thousand Foot, into the
Field, as he promises. And if the King should employ so considerable a Sum of
Money to little purpose, (and this case seems to be of that Nature) he will not
be in a capacity to subsist the Body of French, without which the Duke of
Weymar can do nothing.

Send us advice therefore, what you judge will be convenient for us to give,
that we may follow your Instructions. Otherwise being not so well informed how
Matters stand, as you are, we shall act like Men in the Dark, and cannot
prevent our selves from being imposed upon.

Let your Answer, I beseech you, be quick and large, and well circumstanced, as
so important a Subject deserves.

Signed, The Cardinal de Richelieu.
Ruel, Oct. 5, 1635.
LETTER XXXVI. To the same.
My Lord,
I Sent you a long Letter since your arrival at Court, upon the Subject of the
Treaty we are going to conclude with Duke Bernard, to which I expect your
Answer, knowing that if my Letter does not find you with the King, yet Monsieur
de Chavigny will bring it to your Hands.

I cannot forbear to testify to you, once more my great Regret for the Death
of the Sieur de Mouy, poor Cahuzac, and Londigny: As soon as I heard of it, I
resolved to bestow my Company of Light Horse upon the Sieur de Biscaras. I am
mightily pleased that upon this Occasion my Opinion happens to jump with yours.
I have not as yet disposed of the Colors. As I cannot bethink my self of a fit
Person for that Post, such a one as I could desire; if you know one of
extraordinary bravery, let me beg of you to send me his Name, and I will think
farther of it. I must likewise desire you to send me word with all Secrecy, so
that no Body may know a Word of the Matter, whom of the Company you judge most
proper for me, with the good liking of the test, to make my Quartermaster. I
will enquire on my side, but dispose of nothing till I have received your
Answer. I give you a thousand Thanks for the News you sent me from Court.

The Bishop of Mande, whom I dispatched to Metz, to buy up all the Corn he
could find thereabouts, for the subsistence of your Army, will be here in a
short time, and acquit himself of this Charge, I am well assured, with great
Care and Diligence. Whatever Sums of Money he may want to pay for the
aforesaid Corn, shall be punctually remitted to him.

The hearty Zeal which you express for the King's Service, and the great
Judgment which God has given you, will so well direct you to choose what will
be most advantageous to us in the present Occasions, that I think it not
necessary to spend any more Words upon an Argument you are so well acquainted
with. However, if you please to inform me what Measures you design to take, I
will soon let you know my Sentiments of them.

Great Affairs are always attended with great Difficulties; but with God's
assistance, we'll keep up our Courage still. Every thing goes well in Italy and
the Valtoline. One lucky hit against Duke Charles, where we might have done
much greater Matters than we have, would have placed us above the feeble
Efforts of our Adversaries. I hope we shall manage Matters on that side with
more Success for the future, than hitherto we have found. I am satisfied that
for your Part, you will continue to act as you have begun, that is to say, as
well as it is possible for a Man to behave himself, or for us to wish.

Pray let me know after what manner you lived with the Cardinal of Savoy. There
were some at Rome that gave him the Title of Highness; and there were others
that denied it. He desired that my Brother would give him that Title, but
answer was made, that he would live with him as he had done for the time past,
and after your Example. For this reason I long to know after what manner you
treated him, and hope you will do me the Honor to satisfy me about it. I am
till Death,

My Lord, Your most Humble, etc. RICHELIEU.
Ruel, Oct. 12, 1635.
LETTER XXXVII. To the Cardinal de la Valette.
My Lord,
THE Sieur Ferrier is gone to wait upon you with a Month's Pay for the Cavalry
of your Army, besides that which you lately made. We do every thing in the
World here to support you, provided you could but make an Advantage of it, as
you desire, but the laziness and inconstancy of the French is such, that a Man
can promise no mighty Matters from them.

Monsieur de Bullion sends you thirty thousand Livres, that you may have a
particular Fund to serve you upon all Emergencies, and yet not be obliged to
give an Account how it is expended, to any one.

I thank you for the great care you have taken of my Companies. I have sent the
Sieur de Biscaras to them, who received two thousand Crowns of me; one half of
which is to be distributed among my Troop of Light Horse, and the other among
that of the Gendarms, by the Sieur de Locmaria. I have been this long while
enquiring for some experienced Officers to place at the Head of them, which has
given me some trouble; but I hope now to find such as will be proper for my
purpose, and then I will put all in good order without delay.

I have a Company here at hand, which the King gave me leave to raise by the
Sieur de Potiniere, whom I ordered about two Days ago, to march directly
toward your Quarters, that you might have no reason to complain of the
Diminution of my Companies. However, if you find them in such a Condition, that
part of them will serve you turn, your may dispose of them as you see
convenient.

The Sieur Ponica is arrived, but I have not seen him yet: We will treat with
him the most advantageously for our selves, that we can. It Is certain that some
German Horse will be necessary for us; but the difficulty will be where to get
them.

Monsieur Bouthilliers has sent me an account what Complaints you make of
Bellefonds: No doubt but the King will give you all the Satisfaction you can
expect in that Matter.

I am sorry to find by you, that the King's Companies are in such ill Order. At
the same time I am pleased that you are so well satisfied with the Regiment of
Guards, and with the News you sent me about the Sieur Savignac.

I am likewise well pleased to hear what Monsieur de Turenne has performed, in
relation to the Castles which he took by your Order. I don't question but he
will discover his great Merits upon all occasions.

Don't be afraid, I beg it of you, to be too severe, for it is almost impossible
for you to trespass in that kind. The King's Affairs are in so perplexed a
Condition, that it is a Chimoera to go to rectify them without Rigor. I desire
you to send me good verbal Processes against all those that have abandoned the
Army, that I may see them accordingly punished. If you condemn Vezilly, as you
send me word you will, I Will take care to have your Sentence put in execution.
The Sieur Ferrier will entertain you so particularly about all that has
happened here, that at present I need only subscribe my self,

Your most Humble, etc. RICHELIEU.
Chilly, Oct. 19, 1635.
LETTER XXXVIII. To the same.
My Lord,
YOU will find by the King's Dispatches, which the Sieur de la Cour-d'Argis
will show you, what his Majesty's Sentiments are upon the occasion of his
Journey. I have sent you a Memorial by him of my Thoughts at present, by which
you will perceive that the King does not positively order you to give Battle,
but in that matter he wholly leaves you to your own Liberty. It Is certain that
as one unfortunate Event would throw our Affairs into a great Disorder, so a
complete Victory would be of mighty advantage to us: And so much do I rely
upon your Courage, your Prudence, your Zeal for the Service of the King, and
your generous Ambition to answer the expectation of your Friends, that I
promise my self every thing from your Conduct. We have put up public
Supplications to God in all the Convents of Paris, to implore a Blessing upon
his Majesty's Arms. I give you a thousand thanks for the good advice you gave
me, which I received as a fresh Proof of your Affection to my Interests. I send
you no News by this Bearer, because he is urgent to depart, only I will tell
you, that the King arrived here yesterdy in good Health. His Majesty has sent
the Count de Gramail to the Bastile, because he was one of those who instead of
advancing his Affairs, was a means of keeping them back. There are abundance of
other ill-favored Particulars, that I cannot send you an account of now, but
we will discourse of them sometime or other at your leisure. In the mean time,
I beseech you to believe that no Man living esteems and loves you better than
my self, and that I am, and ever will be, with all sincerity,

My Lord, Your most Humble, etc. RICHELIEU.
Ruel, Oct. 23, 1653. The Superintendants have sent you by the Sieur Ferrier, a
Month's Pay for your Cavalry, and a particular Fund for your private Expenses.



LETTER XXXIX. To the Duke of Halwin.
SIR,
AFter having seen all your Dispatches, and the Advices you sent to me, I
cannot sufficiently commend you for the great Care you have taken to put all
the Diocesses in Languedoc in a condition to oppose the Enemy, in case they
have a design to attempt any thing on that side.

I am clearly of opinion, that you cannot make too much haste to summon the
Nobility of the Country, and the Companies of Gendarms belonging to you and
Monsieur d' Ambres, to appear. I likewise think 'twill be absolutely necessary
for you to put those two Regiments for which you received Commissions, on foot
with all the speed you can.

Monsieur de Bullion will send you what Money you have occasion for, to raise
the Levies. Monsieur de la Vriliere has engaged himself to procure you that
Order.

I shall shortly send the Sieur de Rentiere again to you, with my advice upon
all Matters you think fit to signify to him. In the mean time, I conjure you
to provide for all those places in your Province, upon which you believe the
Enemy may have any design; for in such cases a Man had infinitely better do too
much than too little, for fear of a Surprizal. In a Word, I persuade my self
that you will omit nothing that may be expected from your Diligence and Loyalty
to the King. This is the reason why I say no more to you upon this Chapter,
contenting my self to assure you that I am with all sincerity,

SIR, Your, etc. RICHELIEU.
Ruel, Nov. 9, 1635.
LETTER XL. To the same.
SIR,
I Have again dispatched the Sieur de Rentiere to you with all speed, to
acquaint you that we have seized a Letter from the King of Spain, directed to
the Cardinal Infant, wherein he tells him in express Terms, that were it not
for the War of Italy, he had before this made a Descent upon Languedoc, and
that he employs all his Efforts to carry on that Design. Besides these general
Terms, when he comes to Particulars, he plainly says that he is resolved to
surprise Mazeres.

To prevent this Design, you are ordered immediately upon the receipt of this,
to put the two Regiments on foot for which you have received Commissions, and
ready Money is sent to you to defray your Charges in raising them; and since
the Passes of Col Saint-Louis, and Col de Terneres are the only two places
through which they Enemy can come toward Mazeres and Saverdan, you must
dispatch some Forces with all expedition to seize and fortify them.

Now because it is impossible to keep Col de Terneres any other way but by
fortifying Forcereal in the Enemy's Country, and Col de las-Batailles in ours,
you must seize the abovementioned Col de las-Batailles, and fortify it; and
the King will empower you to surprise Forcereal, and fortify it, provided you
are able to keep it, as the Sieur de Rentiere proposes it feasible.

His Majesty likewise gives you power to possess your self of Aupoulx; which
place the aforesaid Sieur de Rentiere tells us, may be easily gained; and when
once in our Possession, so easy to be kept, that it is impossible for all the
Force of Spain to wrest it out of our Hands.

I am apt to believe that these two Designs cannot well miscarry, provided they
are put in execution with speed and secrecy. Besides the Sieur de Rentiere,
whom we have trusted with this Matter, no Man living has the least knowledge of
it; and in the Country it will be easy enough to keep it secret, by pretending
that all these Preparations you make are for the Defense and Preservation of
your Frontier, which the Enemy has publicly threatened to attack.

As for Mazeres, when you are upon the Spot, you will be able to judge whether it
will be more expedient to put that place in a posture of Defense against an
Army that can come none of the strongest out of Spain, or to raze it more than
it is at present.

My Opinion is, that it will be our best way to guard the Passes through which
the Enemy must march to visit us, and publicly to take notice that we are
informed of their Designs. Upon this, in all probability, they will not attempt
to put them in execution; or if they should, the Passes being sufficiently
guarded, and the Country in Arms, they must unavoidably fail in their
Undertaking.

However, if you should not think this sufficient, omit nothing that you
believe may be serviceable to your Affairs, and for that effect, visit all
places in Person. To execute what has been hinted to you above, you will have
four Regiments, two of which are on foot already, and the other two must be
raised with all imaginable diligence; besides your Company of Gendarms, that of
Light Horse of the Sieur de Merinville, that of the Gendarms of Monsieur
d'Ambres, which must speedily be equipped, and the two Companies of
Carabine-Cuirassiers, which you may likewise raise in a short time; and so soon
as you send us word that they are raised, care shall be taken to send you a
Fund to pay for the raising of them. As for Subsistence, you must find some way
or other to make them live upon the Frontier; which will be no difficult matter
to do when Forecereal is once in your Hands, since there are abundance of
fertile Valleys all about it.

It Is your business to take care to put into all your Garrisons, that you think
worth the keeping, Men of Resolution and Capacity to defend them, otherwise
you will have the Mortification to see your Endeavors blasted. Leave nothing
unattempted that will contribute to carry on this Design, that so the King may
receive that Satisfaction from it which he expects, and your self the Honor
which I desire you may find; as being with all sincerity,

SIR, Your, etc.

LETTER XLI. To the Duke of Hallwin.
SIR,
THE King sending into Languedoc the Baron de Mesle and d'Agencourt, to whose
Merit you are no Stranger; the first of whom is to assist and advise you in the
present Occasions, and to serve under you in the Quality of Marshall de Camp;
and the second, to view the Condition of the chief places in your Government,
and to confer with you about all such Matters as may be done for the Advantage
of his Majesty's Service, and to serve in quality of Sergeant de Bataille; I
thought my self obliged to send you advice of it by this Letter, that you might
know what care his Majesty takes of all Affairs in your Quarters. They have
both promised me to make all the haste they can, and as they have marked out
their Stages, I believe they will be with you in fifteen Days at most. I have
communicated to the abovementioned Sieur d'Argencourt, in whom I repose an
entire Confidence, the Design you saw in the Dispatch which I sent to you by
the Sieur de Rentiere, the Sum and Substance of which is, to seize with all
speed the Passes of Col de Saint-Louis, and Col de Terneres, which are the only
places through which the Spaniards can come to attempt any thing upon us on the
side of Mazeres, upon which they have a Design, as I have already informed you,
and to get Possession of Force real and Col de las-Batailles; which the
aforesaid Sieur de Rentiere proposes as very feasible. So soon as he is
arrived, you may examine every particular along with him, if you never gave
your self the trouble to do it before. As there is a vast difference between
attempting upon an Enemy in his own Country, and barely hindering him from
doing any thing in ours, by guarding the Passes through which they must march
to annoy us, it concerns your Prudence to consider well what you undertake, to
hazard nothing unadvisedly, and pursue no Designs but such as promise an
infallible Success, and which you are able to maintain. One of the principal
things, in my opinion, which you have to do, is to be provided with good Spies,
and to be faithfully informed from time to time, of the Countenance of your
Enemies, and the number of their Troops, because upon these you may form your
Resolutions, and advance or retard the execution of them as you shall see
convenient.

If you are informed that they are not in a condition to attack you, or that
they have other Designs, you may for some time defer the Execution of your
Enterprises, and in the mean time cause the two new Regiments, and the Horse,
for which you have already received Orders, to be raised, that you may make
your self more strong and considerable. But if you receive advice, that they
are both able and willing to dispute it with you, you must take care to be
beforehand with them, as well as your Forces will give you leave, without
staying till your new Levies are got ready. After all, they can never hinder
you from possessing your self of the Passes through which they must march with
their Equipage into Languedoc, nor from keeping them still in your Hands, since
you have the whole Country behind you open and free, which will furnish you
abundantly with all Provisions. This is what I had to offer to you in this
Letter, which I shall conclude, by assuring you of the Continuance of my
Affection, and that I am with all sincerity,

SIR, Your, etc. RICHELIEU.
Ruel, Dec. 6. 1635.
LETTER XLII. To the Cardinal de la Valette.
My Lord,
I Take Pen in Hand to acquaint you, that it is his Majesty's pleasure, that in
giving the seven Months Pay to the Troops of your Army, you should casheer the
Regiments of Quince, Chabrignac, Commarin, Chavignon, Baradat, Virville, and
Cose, telling those that have a mind to serve his Majesty, that he will take them
into his Service by June next. In the mean time, that you may not loose the Men
that remain in each of the Regiments you are to break, the King desires you to
reduce them into two or three Companies each, which you must afterward
incorporate with the Regiments of Nettancourt, Rebe, and others in your Army,
that are to be made up completely twenty, giving them the Names of Provinces.
There is another Expedient, which is to reduce the broken Regiments to two or
three Companies each, according as they have more or less Men in them, and to
keep them in independent Companies, to bestow them in the strong Places and
Castles of Lorrain, where any Garrisons are to be left, that the several
Regiments of which the Army is composed, may not be divided for the time to
come. The chief matter will be to find good Officers, that will preserve the
places where you post them, and not to fill them up with Fellows that have
neither Wit nor Courage, as it has been the way hitherto. I look upon this last
Expedient to be better than the first. I desire you to make an Experiment of it
speedily, before the return of this Bearer, whom we have on purpose dispatched
to you, and to send us word by him what you have done.

As for the Cavalry, it is his Majesty's Intention that the Troops of
Bouquinville, Sancourt, Choisy, and Bussy-de-Veyre, should continue broken,
except those that are desirous to mount again, and enter into Pay. You may
acquaint them with it, that if they keep to this Resolution, they may have time
enough to prepare themselves.

I have already conjured you to send me a Copy of the Judgments you have passed
against the Deserters of your Army; I beg the favor once more of you to do it,
since it is of the last importance to the King's Service, to make Examples of
such People. His Majesty has granted to the Officers of the Companies of
Light Horse, the Confiscation of those that have abandoned them without leave.
This will certainly oblige them to take more care for the future, to see them
punished, and cause those Sentences to be executed that are passed against them.

I don't find there is any great probability of keeping on foot under the Title
of a Regiment, that of Orelio, about which you writ to me, it being reduced to
an hundred, or sixscore Men at the most. All that can be done, in my Opinion,
is to reduce it to a free Independant-Company, where all the Soldiers that are
left, may be conveniently disposed of.

Nor is there any more likelihood that the Troops of Saint-Remy will be kept
up, under the Name of a Regiment, since I cannot see how it is possible for them
to get again into Liege. The best thing that can be done for them, will be to
reduce them to a Company of Light Horse, under the same Pay with the rest of
the Army.

I conjure you to dispatch without delay, the Officers that are named by each
Body of your Army, to gather Recruits, to come and receive their Money at
Paris, and that afterward they go about that Affair with all possible
Expedition, because they have no time now to lose. In the mean while be
assured, that I am, and will be for ever,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Ruel, Jan. 1, 1636.
LETTER XLII. To the same.
My Lord,
I Writ to you some seven or eight Days ago, to acquaint you how mightily the
King was pleased at the Offer you made his Majeffy, to attempt by your self the
Relief of some places in Alsatia; but now I take Pen in Hand, to express my
satisfaction to you, that you are like to meet with fewer Difficulties there,
than I durst have hoped for, as you will be more particularly informed by the
Dispatch that Monsieur Servien has sent to you upon this Subject. I shall not
trouble my self to give you an account of the late Advantage which Monsieur de
Manicamp has had over the Enemy's Troops that were posted about Colmar, not
doubting but that you heard of it before we did here. I will only tell you that
he writ to the King, to acquaint him that we may without running the least
hazard, relieve Colmar, and the other Garrisons in those Parts, with a much
lesser number of Forces, than you make account to take along with you. I rely
so much upon your Prudence and good Conduct, that I don't question in the least
but that you will happily accomplish this Design, which is of so much importance
to his Majesty's Affairs, and will give that Reputation and Honor to your
self, as the most zealous of your Friends can wish for you, and particularly,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Ruel, Jan. 1, 1636.
LETTER XLIII. To the same.
My Lord,
I Here send you the Letter which the Marshall de la Force received from
Monsieur de Manicamp, wherein you will see how easy a Matter he represents it,
to effect the Relief of Colmar. As this will give you greater Encouragement to
undertake it, so it will hinder me from saying any more to you upon this
Subject, but not from assuring you of the continuance of my Service and
Affection to you, being with all sincerity,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Reul, Jan. 9, 1663.
LETTER XLIV. To the Cardinal de la Valette.
My Lord,
I Have not till now delayed the doing of what I judged necessary to be done
for the King's Service, and your own Satisfaction, in relation to the Brief
which the Pope has written to you. We have made great Complaints of it to the
Nuncio's; the Cardinal of Lions, and the Ambassadors, have spoke of it with
great Resentments to the Pope and his Nephews, not omitting any of those
Reasons and Examples that use to be cited on such Occasions. Just now I come
from talking about it with Monsieur Mazarini, who tells me, that the Answer
they received from Rome, to the Letter they sent thither from the part of the
King, was, that the Pope could do no less. But however, that the Business
should go no farther. Whatever touches you will affect me more sensibly than
even your self. This I beseech you to believe, and that I am in all reality,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Paris, Jan. 10, 1636.
LETTER XLV. To the Duke of Hallwin.
SIR,
I Have read over the Letters and Memoirs which you sent me from time to time:
In answer to which, I will tell you, that you have not sent me word what it is
you principally desire to do. For which reason I beg of you to undertake
nothing till you have first of all conferred with the Sieur d' Argencourt about
it, so that he may judge in his turn, whether what you propose be practicable
or no. But above all, take special care that as you have possessed and
fortified the principal Passes, by which the Enemy can march to you, you don't
let them come and attack you in others which you have not provided for; by
which means they may force you to act on the defensive. As I promise my self no
less from your Prudence than from your Courage, I am confident you will hazard
nothing but where you have a very fair prospect of succeeding. For as in this
case, a Diversion would be very useful to us, if the Enemy attacked us
powerfully in Languedoc, so otherwise it would exceedingly prejudice his
Majesty's Affairs. I will expect some News from you on this Head with great
Impatience. In the Interim possess your self with an Assurance that I am, and
always will be,

Sir, Your, etc.
Ruel, Jan. 22, 1636.
LETTER XLVI. To the Cardinal de la Valette.
My Lord,
J Need not tell how extremely satisfied the King was at your putting
Provisions into the Towns of Alsatia, and what happened thereupon; nor how
agreeable the News was to my self in particular, because you may easily imagine
both one and the other, as well by the Advantage his Majesty's Affairs have
received by it, as by the Affection I bear you, and the Part which I always
take in whatever concerns you. I will only tell you, that this good Success did
not deceive my Expectation, and that I always promised my self as much from
your Zeal to the King, and from your Prudence and good Conduct. I say nothing
to you concerning the Relief of Haguenau, because I am satisfied that if the
thing is practicable, you will lose no Time nor Opportunity to effect it, and
that you will undertake nothing but upon very good Grounds. I am sorry to find
in your Letter that you are in such want of Money. I will employ all my
Interest with the Superintendants to furnish you as soon as possible. In the
mean time, don't be afraid to draw Bills of Exchange upon them, as often as you
have occasion, to subsist your Troops, and to buy Corn, and other Provisions,
which you may throw into Haguenau, and other places, upon the assurance I give
you, that they shall pay your Bills without the least difficulty.

I am of opinion, it will be convenient not only to put the Governor of
Benfield in hopes of receiving a Pension from the King, but likewise positively
to assure him of it. You may rely upon me that it shall be paid him without
Contradiction. I will not prescribe the particular Sum, but leave that wholly
to your Discretion. Monsieur de Chavigny has sent you so large an Account of
all that has happened in these parts, that nothing remains for me, but to
conjure you to rest assured, that no Man loves you better than my self, as you
will be satisfied the more occasions you give me, to convince you by the
Effects, that I am with all sincerity,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Paris, Feb. 12, 1636. P. S. The hopes I have of seeing you at your return from
Alsatia, hinders me from sending you a longer Letter.



LETTER XLVII. To the Duke of Hallwin.
SIR,
I Send you this Letter to acquaint you, that we have received Advice, that the
Naval Preparations which the Enemy is making at Barcelona, consisting of four
flatbottom'd Vessels, able to carry each of them twenty Pieces of Cannon, and
two hundred Men, and some other small Vessels, are designed to attack Brescon,
which they pretend to batter near at hand, for which purpose their Vessels are
flat-bottom'd, as I told you above. I will not pretend to instruct how to obviate
this Storm, since having Monsieur d' Argencourt with you upon the Spot, you sit
at the Fountainhead of Expedients, by which you may protect your selves from
the Insults of the Enemy. I that am at a great Distance from the Place, imagine
the best way will be to make good Parapets of Earth, that are Cannon-proof,
upon the Rock; but this perhaps will prove somewhat difficult. However, you may
be able with the help of a few Barks, to carry Earth enough thither. You may
follow this Advice, if you think it convenient, but be assured that with the
first fair Weather, the Enemy will make some Attempt upon Brescon, or some
other place like it. A Man informed is worth two that are not. I am persuaded
you will keep your selves from being surpised. Thus I remain,

Your, etc.
Ruel, Feb. 26, 1636.
LETTER XLIX. To the same.
SIR,
SInce I writ you a Letter this Morning, upon the Subject of Brescon, I
received another from the Sieur d'Argencourt, wherein he sends me word that the
Fortification that has been made about the Rock, being too low to put the place
into a posture of Security, since it is but about nine Foot high, and six Foot
thick, and that it will be necessary to raise the aforesaid Fortification or
Compass of it, some nine Foot higher than it is, making in all three Pole in
height, with a Parapet of six Poot above; I thought fit, therefore, to add
these few Lines to my Letter, to desire you to carry on these Works with all
imaginable Diligence, that before the Enemy is in a Condition to put his Design
upon this place in execution, it may be so well provided, that you need not
apprehend any great Trouble from that Quarter. Let me request you to conferr
about all these Matters with the Sieur d' Argencourt, follow carefully the
Designs he gives you, and do nothing without his Advice. In the mean time rest
assured that I am with all sincerity,

Sir, Your, etc.
Ruel, Feb. 27, 1636.
LETTER L. To the Cardinal de la Vallette.
My Lord,
I Received your Dispatch on the second of this Month, and read over the
Accounts you sent me of the Affairs of Alsatia. I hope that your Arrival there
will prevent all the Inconveniences that may happen on that side, and that
you will arrive soon enough at Haguenau, to preserve that place, and confirm the
rest in the Affection they have hitherto testified for the King's Service. The
Resolution which the Duke of Weymar has taken up to follow you near at hand,
will, in my opinion, not a little facilitate the execution of your Design,
especially if he posts himself in a place from whence he may readily join his
Troops with yours, according to his Promise, whenever you have any occasion for
them. For my part, I don't question but that he will do all that lies in his
power, to put himself in a condition to do us good Service.

The King is very well pleased with the Order you have given to Monsieur de
Mande, to furnish his Troops with Corn, judging well that without this
Provision, it would be impossible for them to subsist, since the Country is
entirely laid waste. His Majesty referrs himself wholly to you, to distribute
Bread to those of his Army, as you shall find they have occasion for it, as you
will see more particularly by the Letter of Monsieur de Noyers.

As for what relates to the Money which the Officers demand, so soon as the
Month's Pay is adjusted, and paid off, as well to the old Troops, as to the
Recruits, if there is any Overplus remaining, I am of opinion that you cannot
employ it to better purpose than to pay off the aforesaid Officers two or three
Months at least, whether it is their due or no. This is all I have to say to
you in this Letter, which I shall conclude, by assuring you that I am, and
shall be during my Life,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Conflans, June 9, 1636.
LETTER LI. To the same.
My Lord,
IT IS impossible for me to express to you the Joy we have had here, for the
happy success of your Expedition, and the Glory you have acquired to your self
by it. I am persuaded you will augment it, whenever you find occasions to give
you leave, till at last it arrives to such a Pitch as you and I desire.

I did not wait for the arrival of your Letters, to make a Provision for your
Necessities, having borrowed beforehand, upon the little Credit I have in the
World, forty thousand Crowns for you to buy Corn to lay up at Haguenau, Colmar,
and Schelstat, that those places being well provided, as it is requisite, they
may be secured from all Inconveniences. I don't doubt but you will husband the
Money as well as you can, and wait the Harvest which is now near at hand, when
you may buy it at a cheap rate, especially if the Soldiers will be got to work,
when they have no Enemies to disturb them.

You will not take it ill, I am confident, that I have sent back my Company to
you, which has already behaved themselves very well under your Command,
together with ten out of my Regiment, and others. I thought fit to reinforce
you with these Men, that you may employ them upon all occurrences, where you
have occasion for them.

Having received advice that the Poles and Croats had crossed over to
Thionville, to join Galasse, Orders were immediately dispatched to Monsieur the
Prince, to send fifteen hundred Horse to Enchissen, to join you, that you might
be in a condition to do something considerable.

The King has granted to Colonel Hebron the ransom of Meternick, and precedence
to his Regiment before all the new ones of twenty Companies, that have been
created since him.

I desire you to manage with good husbandry the forty thousand Crowns I have
sent you to lay out in buying of Corn; so that with the Harvest, you may
expect, without any other Cost but that of cutting it, the Garrisons may be
provided for two or three Years beforehand; and if it is practicable, make the
Governors give you a Certificate of the Corn which they have in their Towns.

Monsieur de Noyers will solicit for a Month's Pay, which you writ to me
about, that it may be sent to you in time.

I am concerned that the fifteen hundred Horse which we sent to you for the
Franche-Comte, are not yet arrived; for I am of opinion, that you will have an
opportunity to do something worthy of your self this Summer.

You may be confident I will do you all the good Services I can, who am,

My Lord, Your, etc,
Conflans, June 23, 1636.
LETTER LII. To the Cardinal de la Valette.
My Lord,
THis Courrier going to wait upon you about a certain Occasion which you will
find by the Dispatch of Mousieur de Noyers, that he will deliver to you, I
could not let him depart till I had given him this Letter, to assure you of the
continuance of my Affection and Service, upon which you may certainly depend
upon all Occasions. It is so long ago since I received any News from you, that
I protest to you, I have been in a great deal of Pain about it. You would in a
most particular manner oblige me to let me hear from you as your Occasions will
permit, and to inform me of all the material Occurrences that happen in your
Parts. In the mean time rest assured that no Man living more esteems you, or is
with more sincerity than I am,

My Lord, Your most Humble, etc.
Charonne, July 7, 1636.
LETTER LIII. To the same
My Lord,
I Cannot express to you my great concern for the Death of poor Colonel Hebron,
not only for the esteem I had of his Person, but for the Affection and Zeal he
always testified for his Majesty's Service. His Loss has touched me in so
lively and sensible a manner, that it is impossble for me to receive any
Comfort. I don't question what you tell me in your Letter, that it has
afflicted your self in particular; for to say the Truth, he was a Gentleman
that was very necessary to us at this Juncture. I have paid to his Memory all
that lay in my power, to express my great value for him, ordering Prayers to be
made to God for him, and assisting his Ne^hew with what he has occasion for, as
if he were my own Relation. The Ransom of Maternic is secured for him, and
whatever is due to his Uncle, shall most punctually be paid to him. Saverne
costs us exceeding dear, but we must patiently bear what pleases God.

We find it a matter of great perplexity upon whom to bestow the aforesaid
Colonel's Regiment, because his eldest Captain, who is related to him, is a
Hugonot, and the Catholics earnestly petition to have it conferred upon one of
their Party; among whom we find the Sieur Douglass, who is descended from one
of the best Families in Scotland. In the mean time, nothing shall be resolved
upon here, relating to this occasion, till we have received Advice from you,
which we desire you to send by the first opportunity.

We have another Difficulty too upon our Hands, that gives us no less trouble,
and that is, to find out for you a proper Mareschall de Camp, such a one as you
want. The King willingly consents that you have Monsieur de Bussy; but him you
cannot have soon enough. As for Monsieur de Rambure, he is sufficiently taken
up with the business of his Place. So we have sent to you the Grand Provost in
in this Quality, who is a Gentleman of very good Sense, great Courage, and
sweetness of Temper. He will get together the Recruits of Foot and Horse that
are in Lorrain, to aid you to make some opposition to Offlans, who lies
quartered on that side, with about some twelve hundred sorry Horse.

The King gives his consent that Saverne be put into the hands of the Duke of
Weymar, provided he gives his promise in Writing, to leave the Exercise of the
Catholic Religion in that place, such as he finds it, without the least
alteration. Although you are delivered from the fears of that Siege, it will
concern you and the Duke to follow the most advantageous measures you can for
the King's Service. If Galasse should post himself any where, where you might
have some notable Advantage over him, it would be a great Blow; but I can
scarce bring my self to believe any such thing can be done, till Dole is taken,
which will happen, with God's assistance, according to your advices, by the end
of this Month. You must take care that nothing incommode you in the
Franche-Comte, but especially favor the Harvest in Alsatia. For the rest, his
Majesty leaves you at full liberty, to take such Methods as you shall judge to
be most expedient. If you please to acquaint us with them, we shall send you
our Thoughts, without obliging you to follow them, or hindering you to execute
what you shall think proper, till you have received our Answer.

After the Siege of Dole is over, and the King Master of the place, we will see
what a Re-inforcement we can then send you; the present Posture of Affairs in
these Parts not permitting us as yet to part with any of our Troops. We are
providing to send you the second Months Pay, which you solicit for, and that
you may suffer no Disappointments of that nature, it shall be sent away toward
the third or fourth of the next Month.

The Enemy have taken Capelle on the Coast of Picardy, because the Place made
no manner of defense. We know the reasons that the Governor will allege in
his own Justification; but he has utterly forfeited the Expectation which the
World had conceived of him. As this is but a very small place, and of little
importance, the loss of it is not considerable. Therefore let not this Matter
give you any Pain at all, for I can assure you, that the Forces we have in
these parts, are more than sufficient, not only to hinder our Enemies from
doing us any mischief, but likewise to take our Revenge upon them, if a fit
Opportunity presents it self. The King will not change his Designs of making
the Army of the Franche-Comte act in these Quarters, but not yours, or that of
the Duke of Weymar, pursuant to the first Resolutions that were taken in these
Matters. Only perhaps a thousand Horse may be ordered to come from the Army in
Burgundy into Picardy, as soon as Dole is taken, that we may be in a better
condition to oppose the Enemy, whose greatest Efforts seems to be upon the
Frontiers of Picardy.

I cannot conclude this Letter, without testifying to you once more my great
regret for Monsieur Hebron. I am likewise sorry to hear that Monsieur de
Turenne is wounded. Pray assure him of the continuance of my Affection; and as
for your own particular, rest satisfied that no Man esteems you more, or is
more really than my self,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Charonne, July 20, 1636.
LETTER LIVE. To the Cardinal de la Valette.
My Lord,
I Have received your Letter which you were pleased to write to me upon the
occasion of the taking of Saverne, and have considered the Contents of it. We
should be willing to put that place into the Hands of the Duke of Weymar, to
testify the great Confidence we repose in him, But certain it is, that the
Catholics would lay hold of such an Opportunity, to raise great Clamours
against us, this place being the Seat of the Bishop of Strasburg, whither the
Catholics have retired. The Nuncio has already inquired very particularly how
we design to dispose of it; and his Holiness, whom the Spaniards perpetually
instigate against France, as you know well enough, would carry himself wholly
against us upon this occasion. Pray give the Duke of Weymar to understand so
much; and to convince him how much we rely upon his Integrity, and that no
other reason in the World should hinder the King from delivering the place up
to him, his Majesty is content, if he desires it, that you should restore the
Castle of Aubar to him; and if he takes any other place in Alsatia, or upon the
Sarre, which he thinks worthy of Consideration, the King is well satisfied that
it should be consigned over to him. This, My Lord, is all that we have to say
upon this Subject, his Majesty referring the rest to your Prudence.

As for the rest, when ever the Duke of Weymar thinks fit to make any stay in
Alsatia, the King is well enough content it should be at Saverne, provided he
likes the place, and will give Orders to those that he puts into the place, to
receive him with as much Honor and Deference, as if the aforesaid place were
absolutely in his Hands.

You must remember to choose a Governor for it, of a different Temper from the
Wretch that had it last, that if it happens to be attacked, he may follow the
Example of those that defended and acquired it with so great Trouble and
Expense, since poor Colonel Hebron died there.

It belongs to your Discretion to consider whether you cannot reinforce the
Grand Provost with some Troops in Lorrain, to make opposition against the Enemy
that is there, which is conformable to a Design I have seen in a Letter of the
Duke of Weymar, by approaching near the Sarre.

To conclude; the King gives you full power to attempt whatever you shall judge
worth the while. As it is of the last importance that Saverne be fortified
strongly, I am persuaded you will take particular care about it.

When you were here, I often heard you discoursing, of how great Consequence it
would be, if you could get good advanced Quarters this next Winter,
inconvenient to the Enemy, and advantageous for your selves. It will concern
you in point of Prudence, to consider of this in good time.

As far as we are able to judge of the Designs of Spain, particularly by a
Dispatch of a fresh Date, that was surprised by Monsieur de Grammont, their
intention is to induce Galasse, and the King of Hungary, to make an Effort to
enter France in August. It concerns you and the Duke of Weymar to oppose this
Attempt, and frustrate the Execution of it.

If you could possibly disengage your self from putting the Castle of Aubar
into the hands of the Hugonots, it would be much better for us. Besides, I
don't look upon it to be in the least necessary to the Duke of Weymar, since
Saverne is already comprehended in Alsatia, which the King has quitted to him,
pursuant to the Articles of the Treaty between them; and that in consideration
of this, his Majesty will command the Person whom you shall establish in it, to
acknowledge him as much as he can desire. You are Master of so much Address,
that I am confident you can bring over the Duke to any Terms that you judge
most advantageous for the King's Service, for which reason I shall speak to you
no more upon this Head, assuring you that I am, and always will be,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Chaliot, July 23, 1636.
LETTER LV. To the Pope.
Out of Monsieur du Puy's Cabinet, MS. 363.
Most Holy Father,
I Don't address these Lines to you, as being Privy-Counseller to the greatest
of all those Princes that have the happiness to be under the Conduct of your
Holiness, but as a Cardinal of the Holy See, zealous for the Interests of the
Church, and for every thing that concerns the Person and House of Beatitude.
Now what happened lately in relation to the Marshall d'Estrees, being of such
a nature that it may draw very ill Consequences along with it, I should plainly
be wanting to my Duty, if I did not make my humble Supplications to you, to
employ your Prudence upon this Occasion. As the Marshall has done nothing but
what the King commanded him to do, if any of his Actions have been disagreeable
to your Holiness, you ought to complain of his Majesty, and not of him.
However, I persuade my self that your Goodness and Justice will induce you to
acknowledge, that it never was the intention of that great Prince to displease
you in whatever has happened, but rather to serve you, and hinder those who
formerly have executed their Designs against the Holy See from putting
themselves in such a condition, during his Reign, as to give the World any just
Apprehensions of their playing the same Game over again. Your Holiness about
two Years ago, sent a Nuncio Extraordinary to France, upon an occasion as
contrary to the Interests of his Majesty, as it was favorable to the
Spaniards, and recalled him when that Court gave public Signs that his Person
was disagreeable to them, and apprehended that he dealt for a Peace, against
their Intention. Now if it should so fall out that your Holiness should persist
to oppose the Employ of the Marshall d'Estrees, in whose Person are to be
found abundance of Qualities contrary to what the Enemies of this Crown may
desire, there is no Person but would believe, although erroneously, that Spain,
by her Artifices, had insensibly carried your Holiness to what she most of all
desired. As for my self, this Thought never found any room in my Breast, but it
concerns your Holiness in the highest degree, to prevent it from taking any
footing in the Minds of other People, who perhaps will conclude there is
something in it, if you should continue to treat the King upon this occasion,
otherwise than you do other Princes that have Ambassadors at your Court. I hope
your Holiness will be pleased to make a difference between those that honor
you with a cordial and everlasting Reverence, and those that only give you a
few exterior Marks of it, when their Affairs require such a Conduct. The known
Piety of the King naturally leads your Holiness to this Procedure, his Person
demands it of you, the present Juncture seems to oblige your Beatitude to it,
since nothing can prove so directly contrary to a Peace, as to show a
disrespect to him, who of all other Kings, most earnestly desires a strict
Union with you. As it is an easy matter, so it will likewise be a glorious one
to your Holiness, to preserve that absolute Power which you have in the
Affection of this great Prince; and I dare engage to you, that the Marshall
d'Estrees, for his part, will endeavor nothing more zealously than to serve
you, and advance the Interests of your whole Family, that by doing so, he may
render himself serviceable to his Master. If it happens otherwise, I freely
consent that your Holiness should lay all the blame upon my self, who should
take it for a new Obligation, if you would condescend to think upon this most
humble Supplication of mine, and not barely consider it as such, but as it
concurs with his Majesty's Prayers, which have no other End but what may be of
most advantage to your Holiness, and all your Family. This I most humbly
conjure your Holiness to believe, as likewise that I shall always be,

Your Holiness's most, etc.
July 25, 1636.
LETTER LVI. To the Cardinal de la Valette.
My Lord,
YOU will particularly know by the Dispatch of Monsieur de Noyers, what
condition we are in at present, and what the Enemy has been doing ever since
they have approached toward the Frontier of Picardy. The King daily
strengthens himself with new Forces, as much as he can, that he may be in a
capacity to beat them back into their own Territory. His Majesty makes account,
so soon as Dole is taken, which News we expect every hour with the greatest
impatience, to order two thousand Horse of Monsieur the Prince's Army, to march
and join that of Picardy, where there are not above five thousand; leaving the
rest of the abovementioned Army, either to tarry still in the Franche-Comte,
and make Head against the Enemy, if they offer to come there, or else to march
into Lorrain, according as he shall find it most expedient for his Affairs. As
for what relates to your self, My Lord, the King leaves you wholly at your own
liberty to act as you shall judge most advantageous to his Designs, and does
not prescribe you any Method to follow, but trusts entirely to your Prudence
and your Conduct, to manage your self, as the Motion of the Enemy, and any
emergent Occasions make it proper for you. In the mean time, I beseech you to
believe that I can have no opportunity of serving you, presented to me, which I
shall not embrace with the greatest eagerness, that I may convince you every
day more and more, of the esteem I have for your Person, and of the Affection
wherewith I am, and ever shall be,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Challiot, Aug. 4, 1636.
LETTER LVII. To the same.
My Lord,
YOU will soon imagine that the War goes but ill on our side in these parts,
since I have resolved at at last to go thither in Person, with all the Pains
and Illnesses to which you know me so subject. The Cowardice of three Raskals,
that made no defense for the Garrisons they were entrusted with, has so
perplexed our Affairs for the present, that I am necessitated to make this
Journey. You never heard of such perfidious Villains; soon after, away they
sled, like Traitors as they were: We have drawn them asunder between four
Horses, in Effigy, with all the reproachful Marks of Ignominy that con'd
possibly be thought of, and their Persons will be treated after the same
manner, wherever we happen to find them.

We shall have by the Sixth of the next Month, above ten thousand Horse, and
twenty five thousand Foot: With these Forces we shall march straight toward
the Enemy. On one side we have Monsieur of Lorrain to sear, who designs to make
a Descent upon us by the way of Burgundy, with his own Troops, and those that
were quartered in the Franche-Comte; and, as I imagine, Galasse, who might very
well have passed the Rhine, to re-pass it at Brisac, and so marched to join him.

This, My Lord, is the Province which we leave to be managed by your self, and
the Duke of Weymar in conjunction.

We have left a thousand Horse, and three thousand Foot with Monsieur the
Prince. Besides these, he may still raise three thousand Men, and five hundred
Horse, with which he will be able to oppose the Enemy on one side, while you
will powerfully make Head against him on the other.

For this effect, it will be wholly necessary for you to direct your Course
toward Espagnol or Mircourt, that you may afterward take such a way as the
marching of the Enemy will oblige you to observe. As soon as you draw near to
the Prince's Army, care shall be taken to prevent all manner of Competition, by
sending down an Order to him to go to some other place, and to leave his Troops
with you. I know very well that it is impossible to propose a more mortifying
Condition to you, than to send you to the place where the obove-mention'd
Person has any power: But it cannot be avoided, the necessity of our Affairs
obliging us to follow this Conduct. You are the only Man, that, together with
the Duke of Weymar, are able to regulate Matters in those Parts.

Although our Affairs on this side are in a very scurvy condition, yet I hope
we shall be able to retrieve them, so soon as our Troops are got together.
Although the Spaniards quitted all other Designs, to make their utmost Efforts
in Picardy, yet if they had not met with such treacherous Villains, I believe
they would have had no mighty Matters to boast of.

It Is my Request to you, to march toward Burgundy with all the speed you can,
that this Consternation may produce no ill Effects on that side, which will not
happen when they see you have Forces there able to oppose the Designs of the
Enemy.

The Prince has already had the Orders sent to him, which his Majesty would
have observed among the different Armies, when they join, which is, that every
General shall command his own Troops. I am apt to think that the sooner you can
advance on this side, it will be so much the better; for I make no question but
Galasse will endeavor to pass the River at Brisac, to join the Duke of
Lorrain. and it is of great importance that you should arrive there before him.

The Enemies have possessed themselves of the Village of Verdun upon the Doux,
which is not fortified, but it is a Pass of some consequence. Assure your self,
My Lord, that I am, and will be, so long as I live, without the least
alteration,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Paris, Aug. 23, 1636.
LETTER LVIII. To the same.
My Lord,
I Want Words to express my Dissatisfaction at the ill Conduct of the Marquess
de Sourdis. He cannot excuse himself upon the want of Directions; for he has
been written to often enough. If we knew any Man at present fit to be put into
his place, we should take care to have him sent for home immediately.

As for the Gentlemen of the Parliament of Metz, you will assuredly receive all
the Satisfaction you can desire: But I desire you to have a little patience,
till the present Tempest be over. After the rate things go now, one would
imagine that a Blessing attended those that railed at the Government. I hope
that within two Months it will not be so; and then the Parliament of Metz shall
be changed, as you desire it.

We do all that we can to reinforce you with some Foot. This very Day we
ordered the Regiment of Ronciere to march, which, in my opinion, will make a
very fine one. Verderonne is by this time got pretty forward, and so is
Decauts. The Regiment that Monsieur Vignier is a raising, will be complete in
seven or eight Days. Vaubecourt has sent us word that he will furnish us with
four thousand Men; but knowing the Man as you and I do, I should be very glad
if he brought us but one half of them. Let the worst come, I take it for
granted that he and Monsieur Vignier will bring three thousand effective Men,
and Verderonne, Ronciere, and Decauts; two thousand five hundred, besides the
Forces that the Baron de Chapelaine, and one Anfonville, intend to raise, to
put into Chaumont.

As for the Horse, we expect them from those places where the Count de Guiche
told you.

It Is with a great deal of reason you say that we want a German in the place of
the late Monsieur Hebron. If you could so contrive matters, as to manage any
one of those whom you proposed, you would very much oblige us. In the mean time
we will write about it.

Since I writ this, it came into my Head, that the Great Provost will be a very
proper Man at Nancy. Send me word what you think of it, and whether you approve
of him. If it is so, after I have received your Letter, I will act accordingly,
and let you see upon all occasions that whatever concerns you, touches me more
sensibly than even my own proper Interests. Let me conjure you to believe that
I am most sincerely,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Abbey de la Victoire, Sept. 13, 1636.
LETTER LIX. To the same.
My Lord,
THE Sieur Talon, your Secretary, has received Satisfaction, as he will inform
you himself, as to the business of the Fund for Corn. In every thing else that
lies in my power, you shall find the like care taken, to give you all
imaginable content.

The King has given the Scotch Regiment to the Baron Hebron, which your Letter
did not a little promote.

The Prince has sent us some Letters, which were written very much in your
favor. I suppose that by this time his Troops, and those of Vaubecourt have
joined you, and that by this means you will be in a condition to oppose the
designs of Galasse. Upon my word, I depend more upon your, and the Duke of
Weymar's Conduct, although you have but indifferent Forces, than upon all the
great Armies which we have on this side, which in truth, exceed thirty five
thousand Foot, and twelve thousand Horse in number.

The Enemy retires too fast for us. We could wish they would be so civil as to
stay till we could come up to them. Their Army does not in reality consist of
above eighteen thousand, as well Foot as Horse.

Monsieur has passed the River at Peronne, with twenty five thousand Men, and
ten thousand Horse. The King marches this way toward Corbie, with ten thousand
Men, and two thousand Horse.

Corbie at this very Moment is reduced to great necessity. Those that are in
the place are forced to eat boiled Corn, as they did at the Siege of Paris.
They have Corn in abundance; but their Mills that were lately burnt by the
Sieur de Beau-fort, failing them, they give seven Bushels of Corn for a Bushel
and a half of Meal. They have in a manner no Wine among them; and to complete
their Misery, the Plague and Bloody Flux rage violently in the place.

I am very glad that you have taken Chevillon: You did very well in giving him
leave to write. You must look after him carefully, and treat him gently, in
order to make good use of him in time and place, as occasion shall require.
There is no good to be hoped from the Master of the aforesaid Chevillon, unless
mere Necessity constrains him to it, and it pleases God to give us some
Advantage over our Enemies.

If the People of the Franche-Comte would come again into the Neutrality, the
King would do the same very willingly. You and the Prince may negotiate this
Affair, according as you find it convenient, if you see any tendency toward it.

We can return no answer to Monsieur de Frangipane, because we cannot listen to
any Treaty of a Peace, but in conjunction with the rest of our Allies at Colen,
which is the place appointed for all.

We have paid two hundred thousand Crowns to the Duke of Weymar. They send me
word that within three Days there will be nothing due to him.

You remember what I writ to you concerning the Marquis de Sourdis, and the
Affair of the Parliament of Metz. Both one and the other shall most assuredly be
done. Send me word with all expedition whether you judge the Great Provost to
be a proper Man for. Nancy. In case you do, his Commission shall be speedily
dispatched to him: But you must be sure to keep the Affair secret, that he may
be actually in the place before they mistrust any thing of the matter. Assure
your self, My Lord, that whatever concerns you, shall likewise affect me to the
highest degree, who am,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Abbey de la Victoire, Sept, 22, 1636.
LETTER LX. To the same.
My Lord,
THE Sieur de Suz will deliver the King's pleasure to you so fully and clearly,
that I have no occasion to say more to that point. I am confident you know how
to make the best use of it, and manage all Advantages with care. You shall not
want Money to pay for whatever Corn is necessary for the Subsistence of your
Army. Due care shall be taken here, to supply you with it from time to time,
according as you send us word, that you stand in need of it.

I have written to the Duke of Weymar, a Letter in the most obliging Terms I
could think of. I likewise writ to Monsieur de Ranzau. The Sieur de Suz, and
his Gentleman, bring him two thousand Crowns for his Pension: We shall most
certainly take care of him.

We hasten, as much as possible, Monsieur de Longueville, to go and join you.
He sent me word two Days ago that he was marched out of Gisors.

I say nothing to you of our Affairs on this side. You Will hear the News soon
enough from other Hands. The Enemy retired with too much haste out of Picardy;
and those that were employed to pursue them, followed them too slowly. A
Multitude of Commanders does never do any good.

Corbie is blocked up: The Works advance very well; the Spaniards, it is true,
bear Hardships very well, but it is certain that the necessities of the place
are very pressing. Among the rest, they have no Wine, very little Beer, and but
one Hand-Mill, which cannot supply one half of the Garrison.

The Sieur de Suz brings the Great Provost his Commission to go to Nancy; pray
send him thither with all Secrecy and speed, for the Affair requires it.

In whatsoever Place or Condition I am, you shall always find me what you know
me to be, that is to say,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Amiens, Oct. 10, 1636. Pray tell the Count de Grancay, that the King takes it
very kindly from him, that he helped you to subsist your Army. As for my own
particular, I am highly obliged to him for it, and will take all occasions to
possess the King with a good opinion of his Services.


Addition.
Yesterday in the Evening I received your Letter, dated Oct. 3. I shall only
add to those Lines I writ to you yesterday, that I am sending a Courrier in all
haste, to Monsieur de Longueville, to join you with all expedition.

Monsieur de Ranzau has not only received his Warrant for a Pension of two
thousand Crowns, but has had it actually paid to him; which Sum I made a shift
to make up, not thinking it fit to wait the leisure of the Treasury.

It is impossible at present to get Aiguebonne out of the place where he is.
Fontenay is busied here. We could not think of a fitter Man to send to Nancy,
than the Great Provost,

Pray write to all the places in Alsatia, to furnish themselves with as much
Corn as they can. I will effectively provide that Money shall be sent to them.

We have writ to Monsieur de Villarceaux, to lay up part of the Corn with all
speed at Saverne. The Great Provost being at Nancy, may make him do it himself.
If Monsieur de Ranzau can raise the Croats, we shall be well pleased with the
News. I will write to Charnace, to bring over Herrenrestre, about whom you writ
to me, to the King's Service.

Amiens, Oct. 11, 1636.


LETTER LXI. To the same.
My Lord,
WHen the Sieur de Suz parted from hence, in order to go and wait upon you, I
assured him we would think to put him in some Place, without explaining my self
any farther to him. Since that time I have so great a Value for him,
particularly upon the Testimonials you have given me, of his Affection and
Courage, that I proposed him to the King to be Governor of Moyenvic,
concluding that you would be infinitely better pleased to have this Place,
which depends upon your Government, and is at the Gates of Metz, filled with a
Person whom you love, and can answer for, than one you don't know, as you do
the Sieur de Suz. His Majesty granted him the Government very willingly. If you
think him not proper for the place, pray stop the Commission, and send it back
again to me: But if you judge him capable of such a Post, see it delivered to
him, and send him to Mayenvec aforesaid. In this and every thing else, where
there is the least prospect of serving you, you will find by the effect that I am
with all sincerity,

My Lord, Your. etc.
Amiens, Oct. 16, 1636.
LETTER LXII. To the same.
My Lord,
THE reason of my setting Pen to Paper now, is not to answer your Dispatch
which you sent me by the Sieur Arodot, but to assure you of the continuance of
my Affection and Service, and to tell you, that the Marquess of Coblens has had
the honor to kiss the King's Hand, who received him very favorably. His
Majesty has granted him a Pension of two thousand Crowns, and given him a
Warrant for it, till such time as he has an opportunity to reward his Services
some other way. For my own particular, I will assist him as far as lies in my
power, as well in consideration of his Merit, as for the recommendation you
give me of his Person. I beseech you to believe that I am, and will be so, as
long as I live,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Amiens, Oct. 29, 1636.
A MEMORIAL. To the same.
IN the time of Monsieur de Montmorency, Monsieur le Premier behaved himself
extremely ill, because the other had such an Ascendant over him, that he made
him do what he pleased.

After this, the aforesaid Sieur le Premier managed himself with a Conduct not
to be mis-liked, till now of late, being possessed by some obscure Persons,
that are unknown, he returned to his former wicked Courses; which particularly
appeared after the infamous Cowardice of his Uncle, who was Governor of
Catelet. At the beginning of the Siege, he said in public Company, That he was
assured that his Uncle would not agree to any Capitulation; and if he did, that
he would be the first to condemn him.

As soon as this Place was basely and ignominiously surrendered, he altered his
Tone, and had the boldness to say, That his Uncle had discharged the part of an
honest Man: This angered the King. Afterward his Majesty having held a Council
at Chaliot, where it was resolved to apprehend the Sieur de St. Ledger, Monsieur
le Premier, who was then at Chaliot, having discovered it, dispatched a
Courrier immediately to his Brother, to inform his Uncle of the Proceedings,
and advise him to make his Escape. Which fell out so well for him, that he
received notice of it two Hours before the Messenger that was gone to arrest
him, arrived at Ham.

This Article being confirmed by the information of the Post-Masters and
Postilions, that directed the aforesaid Courrier of Monsieur de Saint-Simon,
and of the Innkeepers where he lodged, his Majesty resolved to judge this
Matter at the Trial of the Sieur de Saint-Leger, who was condemned to be drawn
in Pieces by four Horses; the Cardinal de Richelieu represented to his Majesty,
that it would be much better to let it alone, because it would be too great an
Affliction to Monsieur le Premier.

After which, the aforesaid Sieur le Premier testifying a great Sorrow and
Repentance for this Action, the King, out of his own Goodness, advised him to
go into the Army. After he had been there fifteen Days, he waited on his
Majesty at Roye, and upon some Reports running abroad, that the Spaniards
designed to make a Descent upon Guienne, begged leave of him to go to Blaye.
When he was gone thither, his Majesty considering his disaffection to his
Affairs, to which he had preferred the Interest of a Man who had committed an
inexcusable Action, sent him Word to continue there, and gave his Relations to
understand, that it was his pleasure they should tarry at their respective
Houses, and not come to Court.

LETTER LXIII. To the Cardinal de la Valette.
My Lord,
IF the News you sent me of the Retreat of Galasse, and the Victory which the
King's Arms have obtained over him, gave me so great a Satisfaction, I am apt
to flatter my self that the surrendry of Corbie, which this Gentleman brings
with him, will prove no less agreeable to you, since I know how overjoyed you
are at every advantage, which God is pleased to bestow upon his Majesty's
Affairs. The Enemy is to march out of the Place to Morrow, according to the
Capitulation agreed upon; for the performance of which, they have given us by
way of Hostages, three of the principal Officers of the Garrison, without
demanding any from us. The extraordinary incommodities they suffered by the
Plague, and other Distempers, and by the want of all sorts of Victuals, besides
Corn, joined to the great Fatigues they were constrained to undergo, to resist
four vigorous Attacks, obliged them to surrender, before they were brought to
the last Extremities. This happy Action, and the retreat of Galasse, will, I
suppose, hinder the Enemies of France from boasting they have done us any great
Mischief, since they have suffered twice as much themselves, their Country
being without comparison more ruined than ours, along of the Germans who
committed all imaginable Cruelties there. I cannot sufficiently wonder what
makes Monsieur de Longueville him, behind still, several Courriers have been
dispatched to keep to press him to join you; nay, I sent one of my own
Gentlemen, to represent to him, how necessary it was to do it for the welfare
of his Majesty's Affairs, who is not yet returned. If Galasse in his Retreat
should receive an Overthrow from us, we might say truly enough, that his
Majesty's Affairs were never better than they would then be. And I hope it will
so fall out.

I cannot express to you how well pleased the King is with your Conduct and
Services, nor how joyful I am in my own particular, that his Majesty sets so
great an esteem upon your Person. Monsieur de Rantzau cannot be sufficiently
commended: The Action at Saint-Jean de Laune was so gallant, that he deserves
to have a particular Notice taken of him, to which I shall willingly contribute
all that lies in my own Power; and pray let me desire you to signify as much
to him. If you are so happy as to beat Galasse back into Germany, with some
remarkable Advantage, besides what you have already obtained over him, it would
be highly necessary for you, if it is practicable, to take your Winter Quarters
in the Franche-Comte, and at Miremont, Espinol, Rambervilliers, and Mirecourt.
At least it is absolutely necessary to leave them to the Duke of Weymar, in case
you cannot enjoy them both together, for it will be an Advantage to him; and,
to say the truth, our Frontier would soon be ruined by the extraordinary
Disorders that Strangers use to commit. Rest assured that as long as I live, I
shall be,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Amiens, Nov. 13, 1636.
LETTER LXIV. To the same.
My Lord,
THE reason of my writing to you now, is not to tell you how overjoyed I am at
the late Victory which your Army has got over that of Galasse in the
Franche-Comte; for you may easily imagine how great my Satisfaction is, as well
for the Advantage the King's Affairs receive by it, as for the Honor you have
acquired upon this occasion, the increase whereof I no less passionately
desire, than your self can do, there being no Man living that honors and loves
you better than my self. I shall content my self with telling you, that this
happy Event, joined with the good Success that has happened on this side, a
full account of which I have sent you by a Gentleman belonging to the Prince,
has reestablish'd his Majesty's Affairs in so great Reputation, that our very
Enemies are forced to own, that they were never in a better Condition than they
are at present.

By the Dispatch that the Prince's Gentleman brings you, I have sent you my
Opinion about the Winter Quarters for the Duke of Weymar's Troops, and your
own: I long to hear what your Sentiments are upon that Subject.

I will speak to the King about the two Commissions of Aid de Camp, that you
writ to me about, as soon as I see his Majesty. In the mean time you may look
upon it as actually done, for I don't expect to meet the least difficulty in it.

Monsieur de Noyers is the Man that returns a particular Answer to all your
Dispatches; which is the reason why I forbear to add any thing concerning them
here.

I writ to the Count de Guiche to come to me here, in order to send him
afterward to Bayonne, to meet his Father; and in truth it is absolutely
necessary that he should undertake this Journey. Pray make no difficulty to let
him go.

I am upon the Road now, going toward his Majesty, and have given Orders about
every thing that I judged useful or necessary for the security of Picardy,
where we have made some change in the Governor, which I believe you will approve
of. Wherever I am, you may assure your self that I shall always be, and that
with the utmost sincerity,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Bouillan-Court, Nov. 20, 1636.
LETTER LXV. To the same.
My Lord,
You Will be astonished, I know, when you hear that so soon as Corbie was
surrendered, the Count carried Monsieur along with him from Court; and you will
be more astonished when you are told, that according to the common Report, they
have taken their Course directly toward Guienne. I don't question but that
Monsieur d' Espernon, and Monsieur de la Valette, will discharge their Duty;
but I desire you to dispatch a Person, in whom you may rely, thither, to
fortify them in their good Intentions. The Malice of the Count, and the
Easiness of Monsieur, are really things that surpass expressing. I conjure you
to do on your side, all that you shall judge necessary upon this occasion.
Monsieur de Noyers has writ to you about Winter Quarters for the Duke of
Weymar. It Is of great importance, in my Opinion, that he should have them in
Lorrain, on the side of Remiremont, Espinal, Rambervilliers, Mirecourt; that we
may save France as much as we can, or rather to give him some Contributions to
be raised upon Bassigny, that shall be brought to him by certain Commissioners
erected on purpose to receive them. I beseech you to believe that I am, and
always will be,

My Lord, Your, etc.
De Plessis Saint Just, Nov. 21, 1636.
LETTER LXVI. To the same.
My Lord,
MOnsieur de Noyers dispatching this Courrier to you, to give you Advice of the
Alteration that has happened in the Affair of Monsieur and the Count, I writ
these few Lines, to signify to you how overjoyed I am at the News, and to
acquaint you by the same Bearer, that I hope every thing will be accommodated
to the Satisfaction of the King and his Servants, and yet that this shall not
occasion the least change in his Majesty's Affairs. I wish with all my Heart it
may go off so. But let whatever will happen, I shall always be to the utmost of
my power,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Presle, Nov. 24, 1636. I know well enough that the Equipping of the Count will
cause some Difficulties; but for all that, I don't believe it will have any
influence in changing the Series of Affairs, or the repose of the State.



LETTER LXVII. To the same.
My Lord,
MOnsieur de Noyers has writ so fully to you, that the reason of my putting Pen
to Paper now, was not to add any thing to his Dispatch, but only to tell you
the King is of opinion, that it is absolutely necessary for for his Service,
that you should not leave your Post to come to wait upon him, till such time as
you have decided what is contained in the Memorial, which the aforesaid Sieur
de Noyers sends you from the part of his Majesty. You Will pass a better Judgment
upon it when you see it, than it is possible for me to represent to you in this
Letter. I will not tell you how joyful I shall be to see you, reserving that
till such an opportunity presents it self. In the mean time, I conjure you to
believe, that there is no Man living upon whose Affection and Service you may
more entirely depend, than mine, who am, and ever will be,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Ruel, Nov. 29, 1636.
LETTER LXVIII. To the same.
My Lord,
THE Prince of Orange having sent me several Letters and Memoirs, where he
takes notice of several Defects at Thionville, observed by one la Mothe, a
Captain in that Garrison, who was taken Prisoner by the Troops belonging to the
States, and carried to Ma^stricht, I judged it convenient that you should go
and view the place, that if there is any prospect of getting it, you might not
lose the opportunity, while you are in those parts: For which reason I have
sent the Dispatch to you, just as I received it, leaving it to your Prudence to
make those Considerarations upon it, which you think will be most advantageous
for the King's Service. This being the business of this Letter, I shall only
add, that I am, and always will be,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Ruel, Dec. 14, 1636.
LETTER LXIX. To the same.
My Lord,
YOU will herewith receive the Commission sent down to the Duke of Candalle, to
command the King's Army in your absence, and under you. I have nothing more to
add, but that so soon as you have put the Army into their Winter Quarters, the
King will be very glad to see you; and my self in particular, whose greatest
Ambition it is to convince you that I am,

My Lord, Your etc.
Ruel, Dec. 15, 1636.
LETTER LXX. To Monsieur, the King's Brother.
My Lord,
HIS Majesty's Goodness, in relation to your self, is so fully known to me,
that I dare engage my Life and Honor for the performance of what he is pleased
to promise you in the Letter which will be put into your Hands by Monsieur de
Chavigny. Your Highness shall find upon this occasion, and any other that may
happen hereafter, that I am with Zeal and Sincerity,

My Lord, Your, etc.

LETTER LXXI. To Monsieur, the Count.
SIR,
THE Assurances which Monsieur de Brion, aad the good Father Hilarion, have
given me of your Affection, have made me write these few Lines to you, to thank
you for it, and to signify to you how overjoyed I am that you have taken the
true Course to re-establish your self in his Majesty's Favor, and given an
opportunity to those that honor you, as I do in particular, to do you what
Service they can. Which I shall most readily do, whenever an occasion presents
it self, as being,

Sir, Your, etc.
Ruel, March 27, 1636.
LETTER LXXII. To the Duke of Halwin.
SIR,
I Was extremely pleased to find by the Letter you writ to me on the 14th. of
this Month, that you had sent a Re-inforcement to the Islands, by way of
advance. His Majesty judges it expedient that you should visit them, as you
desire, and discourse the Commissioners of the Navy, to know what store of
Victuals and Ammunitions Languedoc is able to furnish for their Subsistence, as
you will more particularly find by the Letter which the King has written to you
upon this Subject. I do here positively assure you, that if you pass your Word,
as you tell me you are ready to do it, to the Merchants who are willing to
advance these Provisions, that they shall certainly be paid, such order shall
be taken to establish a Fund here for that purpose, that you need not be in any
trouble about that matter. In the mean time, rest assured of the continuance of
my Affection to you, and believe that no opportunity shall present it self to
give you any Proofs of it, which I shall not most eagerly embrace, who am,

Sir, Your, etc.
Charonne, April 2, 1636. Besides, that it is his Majesty's desire that you
would visit all Provence about the occasion mentioned in my Letter, I conjure
you in my own particular, to do all that lies in your power, relating to that
Affair; assuring you that you cannot do any thing that will be more agreeable
to his Majesty, and grateful to my self.



LETTER LXXIII. To the Cardinal de la Valette.
My Lord,
I Dispatched this Gentleman on purpose to you, as well to bring me an account
of your Health, as how Affairs go in your part of the World. I don't doubt but
you will take all imaginable care to put your self in a condition to enter the
Enemy's Country speedily, because the surest way to give them an effectual
Blow, will be to surprise them, and not give them time to put themselves into a
posture to oppose you. The Sieur de Aigueberre is come back, and returned. The
Prince of Orange persists in his first Resolutions, to make one of the three
Attacks you know of, provided that we begin first. The aforesaid Sieur d'
Aigueberre has been with him, to assure him that by the fourth of this Month,
you will be in the Enemy's Country. I hope you will do it with good success,
which I the rather believe, because I am no Stranger to your good Fortune and
Industry. Let me conjure you, therefore, My Lord, to make all the haste you
can, that the Prince of Orange may have no excuse for staying behind. I know
well enough that a Day or two, whether more or less, will break no squares
between you; so the intention of this Letter is not to make you take the Field
in a hurry, but only to remind you to lose no time.

Monsieur de la Meilleraye goes next Wednesday to review the Troops he is to
command, and will so post himself as to be able to assist you upon any
occasion. I passionately wish that you may perform some glorious Exploit, not
only for the Advantage of the King's Service, but also for your own particular
Satisfaction, which I desire as much as your self; being with all sincerity.

My Lord, Your, etc.
Ruel, June 1, 1637.
LETTER LXXIV. To the same.
My Lord,
I Am extremely concerned that you did not find every thing in readiness, as
you might well expect; but it is the nature of great Affairs to carry many
Difficulties with them; and it often happens that the Sun shines brighter after
the Storm is over.

I suppose that by this time the Horses you wanted to draw the Cannon, are
arrived safe, and that Cry has given orders for subsisting your four hundred
Horses that are to carry your Victuals; Monsieur de Bullion having made
Provision for them above ten Days ago.

As for the other two hundred Horses, that you want, to make them up in all a
hundred and fifty, the Sieur de Septoutre, who was employed to raise them, has
given the Sieur Gargan a List of the several places where they are kept; for
it is ten Days ago since he signified as much in a Letter to Monsieur de Noyers,
who has sent you an account of that whole matter.

Vercourt parted from hence on Saturday, to wait upon you; but I suppose he
will first call upon Monsieur de Rambure, at Guise.

Monsieur de la Bar went yesterday to meet you, and carries with him Money to
pay off the Artillery. We are assured here, that his absence will do no hurt,
because the Officers that are upon the Spot, have orders to act in his absence,
as far as he himself could do, if he was there.

The Boats went from Paris about five Days ago. I am sorry you had them not all
at once, that you might have begun with the better show. But you may want
several things that are absolutely necessary to you, which the Enemy however
cannot hinder from coming up to you, your Designs not carrying you to leave any
place that belongs to them, behind you.

If your Infantry is not so good as you could desire, we design you from this
very Moment, two Regiments, of twenty Companies each, to recruit you by the
beginning of July, and two more by the first of August.

To convince you that I will omit nothing that lies within the Sphere of my
poor capacity, to second the good Designs which you have formed for his
Majesty's Service, I have sent you by one of Monsieur de Noyers's Gentlemen,
ten thousand Crowns, that in case any thing be wanting to the Horses that carry
your Provisions, or, in short, any other unforeseen Accident should happen, you
may be able to remedy it immediately, and not see your Designs miscarry for
want of Money.

The Sieur d' Estrade has communicated to us your two different Projects. Your
first is, to take Auchy in twenty four Hours, which may easily be done, and to
invest Hesdin at the same time, in order to besiege it afterward. The second
is, to take Chasteau Cambresis, which may be done in three or four Days time;
and so soon as you have taken that place, to invest Landrecy, in order to
besiege it afterward.

As for the first, you must let it alone, because of our Engagement with the
Prince of Orange. Aigueberre is come back, who went on purpose to assure him,
that we would attack the Enemy on this side, without naming the place. So you
must consider with all speed, what is to be done with the second Design, or any
other that you shall judge more advantageous. But as for Hesdin, you must not
think of it at present, for the Reasons mentioned above.

There will be no occasion to send for the Count de Guiche hither, because that
would make People suspect that we were irresolv'd ^n our Designs; and this
Answer gives you light enough to see what measures you must take. Le Rosle is
gone from hence, with the Sieur d' Estrade, to serve this Campaign. Rest
assured that I am, and always will be,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Ruel, June 3, 1637.
LETTER LXXV. To the same.
My Lord,
THat which afflicts Monsieur de Bullion, rejoices me; that is to say, the
Supplies of Money which you demand for the Month's Pay of your Troops. It Is
true, the Advice I lately received, that you had not above ten thousand Men,
does sensibly grieve me; but since the Funds that were erected to discharge the
aforesaid Month's Pay, for fifteen thousand Foot, and seven thousand Horse,
does not suffice, we shall have more Men by a great deal than we expected.

Monsieur de la Meilleraye has faithfully promised me, that you shall want no
Military Provisions, that he spoke to you about: I am going this very Moment to
give Orders concerning them. At this present Hour, besides the Ammunitions
which you have in your Equipage, there are thirty thousand Pound weight of
Powder in St. Quintin, which you may send for whenever you please, because it
is designed for your Army.

I am sorry for the discovery of the King's Musqueteer; but in matters of War,
a Man had much better depend upon mere Force, than upon Enterprises, the
Success whereof is uncertain. I hope that by carrying on your Affairs with your
usual Vigor, all things will succeed well enough. This I desire from the
bottom of my Heart, as also that you will believe me to be,

My Lord, Your, etc,
Chilly, June 9, 1637.
LETTER LXXVI. To the same
My Lord,
I Have left it to Monsieur de Noyers to return a particular Answer to the
Dispatch which you sent to me by Monsieur d' Estrade, and to let you know how
well pleased I am at the account he gave me of the good condition of your
Troops. I am no less satisfied to find that the Enterprise you are now upon,
promises so fairly; and indeed, it is impossible to manage any thing with more
Prudence and Judgment, than you have shown upon that occasion.

I don't question but that in a short time you will be Master of
Chasteau-Cambresis, and hope that after that Landrechy will make no long
opposition, though the Town is strongly fortified, and well provided; so great an
opinion have I of the good Success of his Majesty's Arms, and of your
Diligence. Nothing shall be wanting here, that may in the least contribute to
make you Master of that place.

I have already sent you word, that besides the fourscore thousand weight of
Powder which you have with you, there are thirty thousand weight more at St.
Quintin, which you may send for when you see fit: As also four thousand
Cannon-Ball, and two thousand for Culverins, that are at Guise. And now I can
assure you, that Monsieur de la Meilleraye has given Orders to send you all
sorts of Ammunition, on which we work here without intermission. He has
likewise sent you 300 Artillery Horses extraordinary, to carry the Powder, and
other Stores that are at Chaulny and Compeigne, according to your request, to
Guise; and to hasten the aforesaid Carriages and Wagons, we send thither a
Relation of Monsieur de Noyers, and a Gentleman, that lives with me, who I am
sure will not lose one Moment. Thus, my Lord, I hope that you will be well
supplied with Ammunition, and that in a short time we shall have a good
Magazine at Guise.

We have likewise dispatched Courriers to the Regiments of Belnave, Xaintonge,
and Perigord, that are quartered not far from this place, to advance, in order
to send them to you, to reinforce your Army.

We have no News in these parts. The King, God be thanked, is in good health.
As for my self, I am troubled with my old Distemper, which however does not
hinder me from testifying to you upon all occasions, that I am with all
sincerity,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Ruel, June 23, 1637.
LETTER LXXVII. To the Cardinal de la Valette.
My Lord,
SInce the Dispatch I sent to you by Monsieur de Pulluau, the Sieur Renard
arrived here, upon which I could not forbear to congratulate with you for the
continual progress of his Majesty's Arms under your conduct, not at all
doubting but that they will prosper more and more in your Hands, to the great
satisfaction of the King, and your own Honor in particular. As you have
already found by good Experience, that nothing is wanting to you, which is in
the power of the Court, so I am persuaded that on your part, you will do all you
can to make your self Master speedily of the Town you have besieged, not
questioning but that you have taken sufficient care to prevent any relief from
coming to the place.

I can assure you, that you will either find the Enemy in a weak condition, or
that they will leave you to meet the Prince of Orange, who at this very Moment I
am writing to you, is in the Field. He parted from the Hague on the Seventeenth
of this Month, for that intent; and I flatter my self that he will perform some
remarkable Action; for in all probability he has such a Design in his Head, and
knows well enough that the Enemy is not over powerful.

I so passionately desire that the Army may be victorious under your command,
that if I thought there were the least necessity for it, I would offer my self
to serve you even in the quality of a Commissary of the Provisions. I am, and
always will be,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Ruel, June. 26, 1637.
LETTER LXXVIII. To the Cardinal de la Valette.
My Lord,
THE desire I have to omit nothing that may enable you to perform some notable
and successful Action, has made me resolve, since the departure of Monsieur de
Palluau, to dispatch an Express to Monsieur de la Meilleraye, to tell him, that
instead of carrying on the Design upon which we put him, he must march strait
away for St. Quintin, with fifteen hundred Horse, and four thousand Foot, to
join you if you have occasion for him. Upon due consideration, I find that we
may reap so many Advantages by taking Landrechy, that nothing in the World
should be neglected that can in the least contribute to so good a Design. If I
could do more toward the effecting of it, I would do it very freely, both as
it respects the King's Service, and your Glory. You may rest assured of this,
as also that I am with all sincerity,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Ruel, June 27, 1637.
LETTER LXXIX. To the Duke of Halwin.
SIR,
I Have dispatched this Courrier on purpose to you, to inform you with all
speed, that besides the Attack which the King of Spain makes on the Coasts of
Bayonne, he prepares another for Languedoc, which he designs to make on the
Fifteenth of July. To facilitate this Enterprise, he has summoned all the Power
of Spain, and seized on all the Coach-Horses in Madrid, to mount the Cavalry.
You may easily believe that I am well satisfied how difficult it is for Spain
to make two powerful Attacks at the same time; but however, it is very certain
that this is their Design, and that the Enemy pretend to make a Descent upon
Languedoc both by Sea and by Land. Being no longer employed in the Islands,
their Naval Forces may help to execute this Attempt.

Now to prevent this Storm, I desire you to advance to Narbonne with all
Expedition; take the Sieur d' Argencourt along with you, to see what is
necessary to be done there, and accordingly put every thing in order without
delay. Post the Regiment of Languedoc in some neighboring place, to help you
in case of need. Order all the Commons of the Province to be ready, as likewise
the Gentlemen and Nobility, and lay up all the Corn you can get in the Country,
at Narbonne. We have already written to Monsieur de Vitry, to send you his
Regiment; and to the Messieurs d' Harcourt, and Bourdeaux, to get the Naval
Forces ready to come to your assistance. I make no doubt, but that by the help
of God, and your diligence, the Enemy will be as warmly received in Languedoc
as they were in the Islands.

I beg of you not to neglect this Advice; and though you see but little
appearance of their coming to visit you, yet take it for a certain Truth. I
writ to Monsieur de Narbonne, to acquaint him that this is no Chimerical News;
as likewise to desire him to second your good Intentions upon this occasion.
Monsieur de Barraut has received Orders some time ago, to raise the Militia,
which is now in a State of readiness to defend the Country of Foix. Monsieur de
la Vrillerie has sent him word to march with them to your assistance in case of
necessity, and has sent you his Majesty's Dispatch to that purpose; as also
another to Monsieur de ^ry, to send you his Regiment. You may command both of
them to join you whenever you judge it expedient. In the mean time, be assured
of the continuance of my Affection, and that I am, and ever will be,

Sir, Your, etc.
Ruel, June 28, 1637.
LETTER LXXX. To the Cardinal de la Valette.
My Lord,
J Was extremely pleased to learn by the Sieur Arnauld the good condition of
your Army, and the forwardness of the Siege you are now engaged in, where I
hope, as heartily as your self can do, that you will find a speedy and fortunate
Success.

You have been already informed, that Orders were sent to Monsieur de la
Meilleraye to post himself near you, and join you with his Troops, if you
should have any occasion for them; having sent you this advice by the same
Courrier that brought him the King's Dispatch upon this Subject.

The taking of Guard by the Count, about which you writ to me, fell out very
luckily. As soon as ever we knew of it here, a Warrant was immediately
dispatched to Monsieur de Belle-Jambe, who is at St. Quintin, to examine him,
and afterward to do with him as he saw convenient. If you have not as yet sent
the abovementioned Guard to St. Quintin aforesaid; pray take care to get him
conducted thither in safety, it being of great importance to make an Example of
him.

The Advantage which the Sieur Gassion has obtained over the Enemy, has without
doubt put them in some Consternation, I am exceeding glad that he has begun so
fortunately, and doubt not but he will continue to do the same upon all
occasions that shall present themselves to the Advantage of the King's Service,
being so well acquainted as I am, with his Courage, Fidelity, and Affection. Be
assured that I shall always be,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Ruel, toward Evening, July 1. I have hitherto delayed to dispatch this
Courrier again to you, because we have no News here to send you; and I had kept
him here still, but that I was afraid you would be in some pain about us.
Monsiuer de Noyers has sent you an account of all that has happened in this
part of the World, to which I have nothing to add, but to conjure you, my Lord,
to take particular care of your Person; for I desire your preservation as
heartily as I do my own.

I am overjoyed to learn by Monsieur Arnauld, the state of your
Circumvallation. I earnestly request you to make the Trenches of your Attacks
so good, that Soldiers and Gentlemen of Quality may be preserved safe in them;
because your Military Men are such Enemies to all Sieges, that if they see they
cannot be tolerably secured, they grow sick of them immediately: But when they
once see that due care is taken of them, I hope they will relish the Employment
so well, that after Landrechy is reduced, we may pretend to go upon some
greater Exploit. In God's Name, have a care of your Person, and do not expose
your self to no purpose.

Those that come from your Army, give me such good assurances of the great
Care, and Diligence, and Affection, which the Sieur N. has expressed for his
Majesty's Service there, that I find my self obliged to tell you, that if it is
really so, and you have not any reason to question his Fidelity, I am of
opinion that he ought not to be removed till such time as we have farther Light
into the matter, notwithstanding what I writ to you in my former Letter.
However, I leave all to your discretion.



LETTER LXXXI. To the same.
My Lord,
Although I have already returned an Answer to the Letter you sent me by Monsieur
Arnauld, yet I cannot let him depart toward you, without giving him this, the
chief business of which is, to assure you always of my Affection and Service,
and that I will lose no opportunity to give you all the convictions of it I can.

Just now I have received a Letter from the Messenger whom I sent to Compeigne
and Chauny, to see the Ammunition which is in both those places carried to
Guise, wherein he sends me word, that within three Days, there will be at the
place abovementioned, above an hundred thousand weight of Powder and Bullets,
and Match and Lead in proportion.

Thus, my Lord, I hope you will want nothing to carry on your Siege, or any other
Enterprise you shall take in hand afterward. I am,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Ruel, July 3, 1637. We have just now received News from Germany, which is to
this effect, That Picolomini has been these six Days at Worms; that he stays
there for the Supplies which Galasse is to send him; with which he is
afterward to reinforce the Cardinal Infant. You have heard to be sure of the
Defeat of part of Duke Charles's Troops, by the Duke of Weymar.



LETTER LXXXII. To the same.
My Lord,
Monsieur de Coueslin being desirous to see the Siege of Landrechy, I would not
suffer him to depart before I had given you by him fresh assurances of my
Affection toward you, which is as great as you can desire. He will acquaint
you with all the News of the Court, as also how impatient we are to know from
you all remarkable Passages that happen in your Quarters. Leaving him to
discourse this matter with you more at large, I conclude this Letter with
assuring you that I am,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Ruel, July 9, 1637.
LETTER LXXXIII. To the same.
My Lord,
THE King is so impatient to hear how the Siege of Landrechy goes forward, and
how Affairs stand in your part of the World, that finding Monsieur de Pulluau
is not come back, as I expected, I resolved to send the Sieur Saladin
immediately to you, to know how the Siege is advanced, and what the Enemy is
doing, that I might give his Majesty an account of all. I repose so great a
confidence in the success of his Arms, in your Prudence, and in your Care, that
I doubt not in a short time, to receive that satisfaction which I proposed to
my self at first from your Enterprise. For my own particular, I desire it so
much the more, because besides the Reputation which this Action will give the
King's Affairs, you will acquire no little Glory by it; toward which I shall
freely contribute all that lies in my power, as being with all sincerity,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Ruel, July 9. 1637.
LETTER LXXXIV. To the Cardinal de la Vallette.
My Lord,
NOT being able to stay till your Courrier had refreshed himself, I send you
now another with thirty thousand Franks, that you might not want Money so much
as in your Imagination. Besides this, you may take up thirty thousand Livres,
that are in the hands of the Sieur Cohon, to whom Monsieur de Noyers ordered
the Messenger that brings you the thirty thousand Livres to deliver them; and
it is left wholly to you to lay out this Money as you shall see occasion.

Every one here knows well enough what a Train of Difficulties attend a Siege,
and therefore don't desire that you should hasten your Attacks more than you
can do it in Prudence. I can assure you that this is not only his Majesty's
Opinion, but likewise of all those that have the honor to be near his Person.

Monsieur de la Meilleraye is marched to join you, according to the Orders he
has received from hence, occasioned by what you writ to us some time ago, viz.
that you wanted to be reinforced with some Troops. He is ready to act as you
shall order him; the only reason why we sent him, being to execute your
commands, either on the Siege, or any where else, where you think fit to employ
him.

Since you are of opinion, that you still want Horses to fetch in your
Provisions, we are going to raise two hundred more, in order to relieve yours
when they begin to be harrassed. As for the Artillery, Monsieur de la
Meilleraye may join yours, with that which was designed for him, in case you
have occasion for it; and thus I hope you will be supplied with every thing
necessary to carry on your Design.

Bergerac told me as from you, that you have received advice, that the Enemy
are taking abundance of Cannon out of Sedan, to be employed against us. We
cannot imagine what should be the meaning of it, because they do nothing at
Sedan, as we are informed by the Marshall de Chatillon, who acquaints us with
what passes there.

I beg of you, that as you continue your Attacks, which you send me word were
begun last Night, you would not forget to finish your Lines of Circumvallation;
and rest assured that nothing that lies in our power, shall be omitted which
may facilitate the reduction of the place.

Knowing that the Enemy may be in a condition to make some Effort by the end of
this Month, the King whom I shall accompany, makes account to be at Soissons
about that time, to strengthen either by his Presence, or by the addition of
his own Troops, your Army, which perhaps may want such a Re-inforcement. Be
assured that in whatsoever place it is my destiny to be, I am, and ever shall be,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Challiot, July 19, 1637.
LETTER LXXXV. To the Cardinal de la Vallette.
My Lord,
THOUGH I have nothing at present to write to you, yet I could not let the Sieur
de Bergerac go, without giving him this Letter, to assure you of the
continuance of my Affection and Service, on which you may certainly depend upon
all occasions.

We begin to have News of Picolomini, that he has not above eight or nine
thousand Men in all with him, half Horse, and half Foot. Monsieur de Chatillon
has got his Forces together, and has a sufficient power with him to despise all
the Efforts that the Enemy can make on that side. The King will be infallibly
at Soissons or ^on by the end of this Month.

The Sieur de Saintou has taken care to send away all those things that
Monsieur de la Meilleraye said he had a necessary occasion for. We will not
fail to supply you with every thing that may be expected from us. Rest
satisfied of this, and that I am,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Challiot, July 15, 1637.
LETTER LXXXVI. To the same.
My Lord,
I Am overjoyed to find by you that the Siege of Landrechy is so fairly
advanced. We are in hopes to hear every Day better News than other; for places
that are reduced to such a Condition as yours is, make no long opposition, when
they once begin to decline.

I have spoken to the King about what you were pleased to write to me, that it
was high time to find out a Governor for the Town. His Majesty was of opinion,
that the two fittest Men in your Army, were Nettancourt, and Vaubecourt; but
the latter he thinks the properer of the two, in regard of Nettancourt's
Religion, which would extremely prejudice the reputation of his Majesty, and
check the progress we may expect to make in Flanders. So you must put the
aforesaid Sieur de Vaubecourt with his Regiment, and such other Troops as you
shall judge convenient, into the place, as well to guard as to fortify it.

We continue to make a considerable Progress in Burgundy, as well on the part
of Monsieur de Longueville, as of the Duke of Weymar, and the Count de Gransay.

Landrechy will balance the loss of Hermestein; and after this we will push our
fortune farther in Flanders.

The King will set forward by the end of this Month, as I have already sent you
word, for Laon. I am persuaded that two or three Days before our departure, we
shall hear the agreeable News that you have plucked down the Stag that you have
been chasing. I am, and always shall be,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Challiot, July 21, 1637. The Hollanders embarked some fifteen Days ago at
Ramekins, but the Wind was so contrary, that we don't know which way they are
gone. However, we are certain that they will do us some notable Service.



LETTER LXXXVII. To the same.
My Lord,
YOU will receive two of my Letters in one Day. The latter comes to inform you
that the Hollanders having been in great Pain at some Reports that have been
scattered abroad, that your Army consists of no more than eight or nine
thousand Men; I beseech you, that for the future you will not suffer the
Commissaries that make the Reviews, to order their Accounts, so as has been
practiced of late. They cannot be too exact to set down no more Men than they
find in the Army; but then it is reasonable they should put those in the Number,
that are reckoned in Pay. Now in their present Supputations, they never reckon
the Captain, the Lieutenant, the Ensign, the two Sergeants, the Drummer, the
Haut-boy, and the Quartermaster; nor what is more, the three Men that are
allowed to the three great Officers, for want of which they are forced to take
other Soldiers, when their Baggage marches. Thus not reckoning in every Company
the eleven Men that are effectually there, it comes to pass, that in a Regiment
consisting of twenty Companies, we lose two hundred and twenty Men. By this
means the Enemy having always Spies in our Army, and knowing that People are
seldom guilty of making their numbers less than they are, imagine that we are
fewer than in reality we are; which may occasion a world of inconveniences.

The Sieur Usquerque, who is Secretary to the States, has been again with us,
to be informed of the Truth of your Army, which is represented so small on this
side, that it looks as if these Gentlemen would use this as an Excuse for not
doing the great Service we expected from them. It Is to little purpose for us to
tell them how things really are; for People are apter to believe the flying
Reports of an Army than our Assurances; which is an unspeakable damage to us.

We have dispatched two Courriers to the States, to satisfy them that his
Majesty's Forces at Landrechy, make up in all eighteen thousand Foot, and eight
thousand Horse. And I believe we don't over-reckon our selves, since we paid
for almost thirteen thousand Foot, and seven thousand Horse, when you had no
more than the Forces that you carried with you at first; and Monsieur de la
Meilleraye afterward joined you, as I compute, with five thousand Men, and
fifteen hundred Horse.

We have sent to Monsieur de Chastillon to remedy the same ill way of
reckoning, which might happen in his Army, if we did not take care to prevent
it, that by this means we may hinder all manner of Spies from representing us
to be weaker than we are; which is one of those things that did us the most
mischief last Year, and served to make our Enemies pass for much stronger than
they really were, to their great advantage.

At last the Count has made his Peace with the King; but he is to reside at
Sedan for some Years. He signed the Oath of Fidelity at the same time that
Picolomini had sent Orders to him, and after the Queen Mother had signed a
Treaty at Brussels with the Cardinal Infant, to engage him beforehand. Bautru
parts to morrow, with the King's Almoner, to receive his Oath upon the Holy
Evangelists. This is all I can tell you about this Affair, which I hope will
have a happy Conclusion. In the mean time, I conjure you to believe that I am,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Challiot, July 22, 1637.
LETTER LXXXVIII. To the Cardinal de la Valette.
My Lord,
IT IS impossible for me to represent to you his Majesty's Joy for the taking of
Landrechy, which is so great, that it can receive no addition. As for my self,
besides the Joy I receive for the prosperity of France, I have a particular one
for the Glory you have acquired by this great Action. No Man could have carried
on the Siege of that place with more Prudence than you have done. I am ravished
that you have escaped wounding all this while, fince I am informed by all those
Gentlemen that are come from thence, that as you very worthily discharged your
Employment, so you did amiss in one point, which obliges you to take as great
care of your Person, as I find you neglected it. I conjure you to change this
way of procedure for the future; as also to remember, that if the King should
lose a Person of your consequence, all the Advantages we might otherwise obtain
over the Enemy, would be inconsiderable, and your Friends incapable of
receiving Consolation.

Monsieur Arnauld has acquainted us with what you think your self able to do at
present, which really, in my opinion, is the best Design that can be taken in
hand. By this means you will not ruin your Army, you will secure your
Winter Quarters; and the Hollanders, who continually ask us to enter into the
Heart of the Country, will be satisfied, if you can but be able to fortify the
Post there, which is proposed to you. His Majesty gives you full power to act
as you shall see convenient; and thinks fit, as you will find by the Dispatch
of Monsieur de Noyers, that you pursue those Designs which were communicated to
us by the abovementioned Sieur Arnauld. I hope you will prove as successful in
them, as you were in the beginning of this Campaign. The Troops of Picolomini
are not as yet come up; and the Prince of Orange, who has waited twenty days at
Ramekins for fair Weather, has been constrained by the badness of the Season,
to disembark his Army, and go upon another Design: He resolved last Thursday,
as Saladin, whom I sent away to Monsieur de Charnace, brings me word, upon the
Siege of Breda.

We have sent Vercourt back again to you, who talks nothing but Miracles of his
Design. If the place is such as he represents it, capable of being fortified,
and supported by other Posts which you may take upon the Sambre, it will be
very advantageous for us, and serve to incommode the Enemy. I return you no
Answer to the Compliments you were pleased to send me about Monsieur de la
Meilleraye, whom I esteem sufficiently happy, if he has been able to please
you. The first Design of the Prince of Orange would have obliged us to put our
selves in a readiness to march another way, according as he should have had
occasion for us. But now since we are more at liberty, you may act as you
please. He is exceedingly well pleased with your Civilities; and I am assured
that he will always render to you that which is your due.

I hope that before Breda is taken, we shall do something worth the while; and
perhaps some Opportunity may present it self to you, which neither you nor I
think of at present. I heartily wish for one that may put it into my power, to
convince you by my Actions, how affectionately I am, and ever shall be,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Challiot, July 26, 1637. We have received several Advices from Brussels,
giving us to understand, that the Spaniards despise us in such a manner; that
besides the advantage which the taking of Landrechy has given us, I have a
particular Joy upon that Account, because it will make them see, that we are
more capable of doing them a Mischief, than they believe, and insosently give
out.



LETTER LXXXIX. To the same.
My Lord,
THE King advancing now toward Soissons and Laon, as I have already sent you
word, I take Pen in hand to acquaint you, that his Majesty would be very glad
to take such measures, that if it were possible, his Journey might not be
wholly fruitless: For this reason he has had some Thoughts, that while you
advance into the Enemy's Country, pursuant to your Designs, he might, under the
covert of your Army, make a sort of a Blockade about Capelle, by which means
that place, in all probability, would in a short time fall into his Hands.

Before he embarks in this Design, his Majesty desires that you would send a
Party of Horse to view the Country round about the place, commanded by some
understanding Person, who might observe what may be done to incommode it.
Bezancon, who has been there, tells us, that to hinder any Provisions from
coming into the Town, there needs no more but to place a good Garrison at a
Village which lies between Avenes and Capelle, called Estren, where some Forces
might conveniently entrench themselves. I am apt to believe that this alone
will not be sufficient: Now if it were possible without taking off any of your
Troops from what you have designed, to get three thousand Foot, and a thousand
Horse, to be employed in the reducing of the abovementioned place, this small
Progress, joined to those you will make, would put a happy End enough to this
Campaign. I conclude this Letter with assuring you that I am, and ever will be,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Ruel, July 31, 1637.
LETTER XC. To the same.
My Lord,
I Send you this Letter to acquaint you, that we have sent you fifty thousand
Franks to pay for the Fortifications of Landrechy, and those new Works you
intend to make; and twenty eight thousand Franks for two Months Pay due to the
Garrisons of Landrechy and Chasteau en Cambresis. In a word, you shall never
want Money for the future to carry on any of your Designs, however you may have
been disappointed hitherto. The main point of the Business is, to lose no time;
for we are assured on all hands, that the Consternation in Flanders is so
great, that we never had a fairer opportunity to undertake some noble
Enterprise than now. All our Advices bring us word, that Picolomini has in
effect but fifteen hundred Horse, fit for Battle; and from five to six thousand
Foot; with five or six thousand Women.

If you have found out any convenient Post, that you know is proper to be
fortified, I am confident you will lose no time till you have made your self
Master of it, this being a Matter of great importance.

We have sent Vercourt forward on his Journey, who made the Proposal you know
of, and must by this time be within a few Miles of you. He has all along
proposed to surprise the place he named to you, which, could it be effected, it
would, in my opinion, be of mighty advantage to us, because we have reason to
fear, that if we lay Siege to Maubeuge before we have possessed our selves of
this place, the Enemy will pour some of their Troops into it, which will render
the Affair more difficult afterward. But, my Lord, you must take every thing I
make bold to propose to you, whether in this, or any other matter, as my bare
Thoughts, of which you are to take no notice, any farther than you find them
reasonable; it being impossible to give good Advice at so great a distance.

What I desire most passionately of all is, that we may employ the remainder of
the Campaign to good purpose, as well on our side, as all the rest, where we
have begun it so happily.

You must remember to keep your Soldiers in that strict Discipline, that the
People of Landrechy may find no ill treatment at their Hands, endeavoring to
avoid all Disorders, as much as possible, in that place, and every where else.
In the mean time rest assured that I am, and ever shall be with all sincerity,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Challiot, Aug. 4, 1637. You shall most certainly receive a Month's Pay for
your whole Army this Month; it shall be sent toward the 20th. at farthest.



LETTER XCI. To the same.
My Lord,
AFter the King had heard the Relation of the Sieur du Plessis Bezancon, his
Majesty came to be of the same Opinion with your self, viz. that it would be
much better to make Head against the Enemy upon the Sambre, with a powerful
Body, and to attack Avenes forcibly with another, than to block up Capelle.

We have again dispatched the aforesaid Sieur du Plessis to you, to let you
know what Troops we can spare to join yours, that so you may consider how you
would distribute them, to put these two Designs in execution, in case you judge
it worth the while, and that an occasion does not present it self to you, to
undertake some greater Exploit, which oftentimes happens when a Man thinks the
least of it.

We take it for granted, that the first thing we ought to go upon, and which
you have already taken care for, is to see whether the Design of N, proposed by
several Persons, be really advantageous, and probable to succeed. If the
success of it is feasible, as Vercourt proposes it, it is highly probable, that
being in the heart of the Enemy's Country, we shall most effectually incommode
him.

The Prince of Orange has sent to inform us what a forwardness the Siege of
Breda was in on the 28th. of July. His Lines of Circumvallation were finished,
so that he lay under no apprehensions of being dislodged. He promises himself
to be Master of the place by the 20th. of September, and makes no great account
of the Garrison, as knowing it consists of no more than two thousand five
hundred Men. He informs us, that the greatest part of the Towns in Flanders,
and Breda among the rest, are but slenderly provided with Ammunition, and
encourages us to undertake some Siege in the heart of the Country, meaning Mons
or Valenciennes. I don't send you this account, as you perhaps may imagine, to
consider whether these things are practicable, but only to acquaint you with
what has been communicated to us.

On the other hand, we have surprised a Letter at Sea, written by the Cardinal
Infant to the Emperor, after the taking of Landrechy, wherein he complains of
Picolomini and tells him, their Affairs are in a deplorable condition, if the
French, making a right use of their Victory, advance into the heart of the
Country. He positively afsures him, that he cannot take the Field against the
Hollanders with less than thirteen thousand Foot, and five thousand Horse; and
that he has none but Balancon to oppose to the French, who has no more than
five thousand Foot, and thirty Troops of Horse, reckoning Picolomini's Forces,
which he says don't amount to eighteen hundred Horse, and five thousand Foot,
although the other would have them pass for more. He concludes that none but God
can remedy their Affairs.

Now considering all this, which is most certainly true, I leave it to your
Prudence to see what may be done with the Re-inforcement that is marching up to
you.

We can strengthen you with fifteen hundred Horse, composed of a thousand
commanded by the Sieur de Bussy, and five hundred more that are at Doulans.

We can likewise give you the Regiments of Picardy, Navarre, and the two
Brezez, that are quartered near Doulans; which, reckoning the Officers, make up
four thousand effective Men in all.

More than this, we can give you the Regiments of Belnave, Xaintonge,
Bachevilliers, Castlenau, and Montmeze, that will make up four thousand Men
more.

Now I leave it to your consideration, whether when you have received this
Re-inforcement, w^h you may expect by the fifteenth of this Month, you may not
be able to form two separate Bodies, one consisting of seven thousand Horse,
and eight or ten thousand Foot, to march against the Enemy; and the other of
two thousand Horse, and the rest of your Infantry, to attack any such place as
you shall judge convenient.

Besides the abovementioned Forces, I am of opinion we shall be able next
September, to give you six Regiments more, viz. Sauvebeuf, Rochegiffard,
Nissay, Saint-Aubin, Aubeterre, Langeron; which within these two Months have
been set on foot anew, with their old Officers. You shall assuredly receive a
Month's Pay before the Month is out.

As for Money, which will be necessary for the support of your Troops, I
promise it shall never be wanting. At this very Moment, besides the fifty
thousand Livres that were remitted to you a few Days ago for this purpose, I
have sent you thirty thousand Livres more, that if you make an Attempt upon N,
you may want nothing.

All that I have written to you above being presupposed, although the King
gives you full liberty to act as you shall see most convenient for his Service;
and it is a difficult matter for a Man to give his Advice at a great distance,
yet for all that, I am of opinion, that if you could succeed at N, and the
place is really as advantageous as it is represented to be, it would be no very
hard matter, by keeping a considerable Body in all the good Country that lies
between this Post and Maubeuge, to take Avenes, with a few Horse, and no great
number of Foot.

In a word, My Lord, I leave all to your Prudence, beseeching you to believe,
that as I by no means desire you to attempt any thing above your power, so we
at least expect that you should perform all you are capable of doing.

Heaven be praised, every thing goes well on all sides. We do better and better
every Day in the Franche-Comte. Monsieur de Chatillon is in hopes to make some
good progress in Luxemburgh. And just now we have received Advice, that on the
First of this Month the Duke of Savoy met the whole Spanish Cavalry near
Verseil beyond Sezia, and resolved to attack them with Vigor; Which he
performed so well, that there are at least two hundred of them dead upon the
Spot, two hundred taken Prisoners, and above four hundred Horses made a Booty.
Spadin, and several other Persons of great consideration were killed in this
A^on.

This, My Lord, is all I have to communicate to you in this Letter. I have no
more to add, but my desires that you would believe me to be with all sincerity,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Challiot, Aug. 8, 1637. Le Plessis Bezancon will part within a Day or two. You
must excuse me, if I tell you, that in truth you write with so much deference
of 44, that I am afraid you are not satisfied with him. All the Letters he
writes to me, are full of Expressions of Gratitude for the great Civilities he
has received from you: He looks upon it as an honor to be under your command;
but should he ever do any thing to disoblige you, I would most assuredly disown
him, My Opinion is, that we ought to end this Campaign as we begun; for since
the Prince of Orange cannot march into Flanders, as he proposed in his first
Design, nothing obliges us now to separate his Majesty's Forces any longer.
However, if you find the Party aforesaid a Burden to you, the Friendship
between you and me is great enough to make me find an Invention to rid you of
him.


Addition.
SInce the writing of this Letter, the Sieur Talon your Secretary, brings us
advice from the Sieur de Roquepine, who commands for you at Metz, that after an
exact view of Picolomini's Troops that are quartered between Treves and
Vaudreurange, he judges them to be reduced to six thousand Foot, and eight
hundred Horse. Since which advice, the aforesaid Sieur de Roquepine assures us,
that they lose so many Men, as well by want of Provisions, as by sickness, that
he believes they cannot be above five thousand five hundred at most. By this we
may conclude that it will be impossible for him to march into Flanders at the
head of 13 or 1400 Horse, and 4000 Foot; so that by God's help he will not be
in a capacity to do us a Mischief.

I conclude from this Account, and the Siege of Breda, that till the 20th. of
August, or thereabout, you will have no great Business upon your hands; because
the Spaniards will endeavor all they can, to hinder the Lines of
Circumvallation from being finished at Breda; and when they find there is no
possibility of saving that Town, it is probable they will come to attack us in
their own Country, and that we may be so happy as to conclude this Campaign
with a successful Battle.

I conjure you to take care that Landrechy be well fortified, and that nothing
be wanting there.



LETTER XCII. To the Cardinal de la Valette.
My Lord,
I Was extremely glad to be informed by yours of the 9th. of this Month, after
what manner Affairs went on your side. You found by my former Letter, which I
gave Monsieur de Combour to deliver to you, that the King gives you full
liberty to act at your Discretion, and that your Advices and ours did not
differ.

I never knew particularly what sort of a place St. Guillain was, for which
reason I writ to you concerning it, as a thing fit to be undertaken, if you
judged it worth the while. The Difficulties we must expect to find there now,
upon account of the two Men that were hanged, have wholly altered the Face of
this Affair; so that we must comfort our selves, if Maubeuge, as you represent
it, can do us the same kindness. In such a case it will be necessary for you to
fortify your self there as well as you can. I did not so much apprehend the
difficulty of taking St. Guillain, as that of keeping it, which could not be
done without great Convoys, that require abundance of Troops, and in the Winter
are almost impossible. If we could take Avenes, as I most assuredly believe we
may, we should have reason to say that this Campaign was employed happily
enough. This is therefore the Point to which we must stick; and by keeping the
Sambre, whereof now you are Master, still in your power, you may hinder the
Enemy from coming to the relief of it.

Bezancon, when he was here, promised to do Wonders in the good ordering of the
Army; for which reason we have sent him word to go to wait upon you, that by
your Orders he might as far as is possible, hinder the Soldiers from making
havoc of the Corn; for I well foresee that it will be an impossible Matter to
furnish so great a Body with Corn enough, if you don't make them sublist upon
what you find in the Country; where, as I am informed, it is exceedingly
plentiful. In the mean time, one Touches, of Metz, is gone to convoy four or
five hundred Muids of Corn that are now at Guise, to Landrechy, in which he
will be forced to employ more than two hundred Horses which you demanded; and
which have been employed in carrying one thing or another ever since you have
taken the Field.

A Message has been sent to Monsieur Lambert to join de Bussy's Army at Estren,
between Capelle and Avenes, and to stay there till you send him farther Orders.

As for the Owners of the Horses that bring Provisions to your Army, they shall
have all due encouragement to make them continue in the Service. In the mean
time you must take care to prevent them from leaving you.

I have seen a Letter of the Sieur Arnauld, dated the 10th. of this Month, and
written to the Reverend F. Joseph, wherein he wonders that the Month's Pay,
which, according to his account, ought to have arrived at the Army on the 15th.
was not yet come. The aforesaid Sieur indeed, when he was here, solicited for
a Month's Pay for the 15th. upon which I was resolved to use all my Interest
with Monsieur de Bullion, to have it got ready, and do the same every Day, and
yet I cannot bring him to name any precise time. All that I can assure you of
at present, is that it shall be ready without fail some time this Month.

As for Money to carry on the Works, you have already received the fifty
thousand Livres sent for Landrechy, and thirty thousand more, which l' Espine
brought you for St. Guillain or Maubeuge. I sent you word that you should want
nothing; and here I repeat the same Promise to you. I could wish with all my
Heart that you had such a brave. Fellow with you as Terrail was, who petarded
so many Towns belonging to the Hollanders for the Archduke, for that perhaps
is one of the things that we want to try, since the greatest part of the
Enemy's Towns lie naked and unprovided, I am persuaded you will lose no
opportunity to undertake any thing that you judge proper to be done for the
King's Service: For which reason I shall forbear to say any more to you; only
give me leave to assure you that I am, and always will be,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Chappelle, Aug. 14, 1637. Pray send me the Plan of Maubeuge, and the Design of
the Fortifications you intend to make there, or that of St. Guillain, if you
were ever able by chance to procure it. You must use all means, my Lord, to end
this Campaign happily, to which we will contribute on our side all that lies in
our power.



LETTER XCIII. To the same.
My Lord,
AFter I had heard Monsieur de la Meilleraye upon the Subject of his Journey, I
am of Opinion, that of all the Designs which he proposes on your part, there
are only two that can be reasonably undertaken; that is to say, either the
Siege of Cambray, or that of Avenes.

That of Cambray indeed is of much greater importance, but it is to be feared
that the Season is already too far advanced, and that we have not all the
Preparatives requisite for such a Design, especially People to supply the Army,
so as several Accidents, which often happen unexpectedly, may require.

As for that of Avenes, besides that it is more feasible, it seems to be more
agreeable to the present state of our Affairs. It will stand us in mighty stead
to preserve all the Posts we have taken upon the Sambre, the keeping of which
is a sort of Circumvallation for the aforesaid Siege. So that by making our
selves Masters of Beaumont, Solre, and Chimay, if we please, the place will be
surrounded without being formally so. During this Siege, the greatest part of
his Majesty's Horse being entrenched at Maubeuge, with four thousand Men, will
make Head against the Enemy, who will not dare to oppose or give them Battle;
and we may make several Attempts upon them in Parties.

What will chiefly contribute to the execution of this Design, will be to lose
no time to detach the Troops that are to march thither, out of your Army, and
to give them necessary Orders to join on some prefixed Day at the
abovementioned place.

In the mean time, my Lord, if you will give me leave to tell you my Opinion: You
have three things to do; in the first place, you must secure Maubeuge, whether
by fortifying the whole Town, or by making a good Redoubt, capable of
maintaining the Lodgment of the Horse that will be in the place. You must make
as great a Magazine of Corn and Forage at Maubeuge as is possible, and
preserve the Country behind the Sambre, as far as the Oyse and the Meuse, that
you may take up Winter Quarters there for the greatest part of our People.

After all I have said to you, the King entirely leaves it to your own choice,
to undertake which of these two Designs you judge most proper. However, if you
should have a fair opportunity in the mean time to petard any place, you would
do well to make the Experiment. Monsieur de la Meilleraye tarries here two
Days, and then he will most assuredly return to you: But we thought it
convenient to dispatch this Courrier to you beforehand, that neither Monsieur
de la Meilleraye's tarrying here two Days longer, nor any other consideration,
should make you lose one single Moment, to dispose every thing for the
execution of what you shall pitch upon, now you have seen the King's Sentiments
upon the matter. I am,

My Lord, Your. etc.
August 15, 1637.
LETTER XCIV. To the same.
My Lord,
THE Sieur de la Guard being arrived here from Colen, and particularly from
Breda, about an Hour after the departure of Monsieur de la Meilleraye,
occasions me to dispatch this Courrier to you, to acquaint you for certain,
that you have no reason to apprehend that the Cardinal Infant will quit the
Design he has formed, and the Post he has taken, to hinder the Siege of Breda,
to come and give you the least disturbance; things being come to such a Point,
that the Spaniards fortify themselves in all places through which the Convoys of
the States may come, in order to hinder them; so that the Prince of Orange has
sent the King word, that he is like to find himself very much embarrass'd, if
we don't make a powerful diversion on this side. It Is therefore your part, my
Lord, to act with the greatest Vigor you can, without amusing your self at
what we proposed to you, to make a Line of Circumvallation,....................
which must be infallibly carried if it is warmly attacked; and having no other
Enemies to fear than what you have before you.

I have sent a fresh Dispatch to the Marshall de Chastillon, to engage him to
undertake the Attack of..........

If our 84 don't do something considerable, it is to be feared that 2600
finding the difficulty of his.......... will not........ with the 76, for
to.......... with................ This, if you please, shall lie betwixt me and
you. I conjure you therefore upon this consideration, to lose no time; and
believe me that I shall be proud of an opportunity to convince you by my
Actictions, that I am with all sincerity,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Royaumont, Aug. 20, 1637.
LETTER XCV. To the same.
My Lord,
THE King having by my former Letters, to which I have received your Answer,
given you to understand his Intentions, nothing now remains for me to say to
you: It Is your concern to fortify and keep your Post at Maubeuge, as you have
proposed, and to attack Avenes, while the Marshall de Chastillon makes account
to go to attack Mommedy, or some other place.

You will receive the hundred thousand Franks which you demand for your Works,
besides the ten thousand Crowns which you design to employ at Maubeuge. No
diligence shall be wanting on our side to assist you; and pray give me leave as
your hearty Friend and Servant, to beg of you that nothing be wanting on yours.
I confess I was astonished when I found that your Fortifications at Maubeuge
were not begun, and that Beaumont and Solre were not as yet taken. This is all
we have to represent to you from these parts, it belongs to you to do all that
lies in your power. My Cosen de la Meilleraye, and the Conclusion of this
Letter, will assure you of my Affection, and that I shall always be,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Royaumont, Aug. 20, 1637.
LETTER XCVI. To the same.
My Lord,
I Have dispatched the Bearer hereof to you, to bring you four thousand
Pistoles, to begin your Works. Before this Sum is half spent, you shall have
the remainder of what you desired. Thus nothing shall be wanting to you that
may serve to carry on your Designs. The two Swiss Companies that the King
sends, begin their march to day; and the six Companies of French Guards that
are quartered near Compeigne, are to march to morrow.

The Duke of Weymar has passed the Rhine, and since that has twice beaten John
de Were, who came to attack him in his own Retrenchments. He has by this time
quitted them, and advances forward, as he sends me word. The last time that
John de Were attacked him, he left a thousand of his own Men upon the Spot.
This is all I have to say to you at present, who am, and always will be,

My Lord, Your etc.
Paris, Aug. 22, 1637.
LETTER XCVII. To the Cardinal de la Valette.
My Lord,
I Have received your Letter, dated the 23d. of this Month. In answer to which,
I must take the freedom to tell you, that if you imagine the King is not
satisfied with your Services, you wrong him; and if in consequence of that, you
think some ill Offices have been done you here, you are much mistaken. This I
can assure you, that no one has mentioned your Name without doing you that
Justice which you deserve; but indeed if to extol a Man's Merits as high as
it is possible, be a Trespass, a world of People here have trespassed against
you, who I am afraid will never repent, or beg your pardon for doing it. In the
mean time, I think you cannot take it amiss, if as you have managed his
Majesty's Affairs extremely well, we are so vain as to wish you had managed
them better; and that having received certain Informations two Months ago, of
the Enemy's weakness during all that time, we desire you had made a farther
Progress in their Country, if we could have done it, which we have not. Such
Desires are always reasonable, when they don't exceed the Bounds of
possibility; and to say the truth, I don't believe there is any place in the
World where this Decorum is better observed than here, where you must know you
have such extraordinary Friends, that though they should sometimes dispense with
this Rule, yet they would never do it where you are concerned. I must therefore
beg of you to quit these unjust Opinions, protesting to you by that Sincerity
of which I always made profession, that what I have told you is true. And since
Diligence is one of the most requisite Qualifications in a Person that
possesses your Post, continue, I beseech you, to employ the remainder of the
Campaign to as much advantage as you hitherto have done since the opening of
it. The Siege of Breda goes on very well. The Advices you received that the
Enemy had taken Nimmeguen, are false. The Hollanders don't seem to apprehend
the least danger from the Spaniards.

Monsieur de Chastillon has defeated seven or eight hundred of the Enemy's
Horse in Luxemburg, who came with a Design to beat up one of his Quarters, and
three hundred of them lost their Lives upon the place. He is now employed in
the Siege of Damvilliers, where there are seven hundred Soldiers in Garrison,
and about the same number of the Country Militia. He expects to reduce it by
the 8th. of October at the farthest, by which time I don't question but that
you will have tried every thing that carries any Face of Success: To which I
shall contribute on my part all that lies in my power, since no Man honors you
more, or is with greater sincerity than my self,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Ruel, Aug. 29, 1637.
LETTER XCVIII. To the Duke of Hallwin.
SIR,
HAving received certain advice that the Spaniards, who design to make a
Descent upon Languedoc, maintain a private intelligence in some places of that
Province, upon which they ground their principal Designs, I thought my self
obliged to inform you of this with all expedition, that you might take such a
Course to prevent it, as you shall think necessary. Above all, you must keep a
careful Eye upon Narbonne, Leucate, and other frontier places to which it may
be presumed the Enemies design their first Onsets, or upon those Towns that are
situate near the Sea, where they may land with the Vessels they have built for
that purpose. I am satisfied, that upon this, and all other occasions, wherein
his Majesty's Service is concerned, you will behave your self with all the Care,
Affection, and Diligence that can be expected from you. Upon which Assurance I
shall trouble you with no more Lines, but only add, that I am, and always will
be,

Sir, Your, etc.
Paris, Sept. 7, 1637.
LETTER XCIX. To the Cardinal de la Valette.
My Lord,
SInce some unexpected Difficulties, that could not be foreseen, have knocked
your design upon Avenes in the Head, I can say nothing to it. We can only make
our selves some amends by taking Capelle. I could wish that we had known this
Resolution four Days ago, having sent an Express to the Prince of Orange, that
you had laid Siege to Avenes, and Monsieur de Chastillon to Damvilliers. We
must dispatch another Messenger to him, to acquaint him with the reason of this
Alteration; however I am afraid that this will make him judge ill of our
intentions, although you know well enough there is no reason for it. Since the
Situation of Avenes is such, that it cannot well be attacked at this Season of
the Year, we must so contrive matters as to make it fall into our Hands this
Winter, by the Difficulties they will find to subsist a numerous Garrison wholly
by Convoys, which we may render in a manner impracticable to them, since we
have Royaumont and Solre already in our Hands, and you design to make your self
Master of Chimay: All which Garrisons, if they do but watch their
opportunities, will soon ruin the Trade of the aforesaid Convoys.

One of the most important things is to fortify Maubeuge strongly, and that
with speed. Finding by the Letter you sent to me by the Sieur Arnaud d'
Andilly, that you reckon the fortifying of it will cost fourscore thousand
Franks, I have now sent you fifty thousand, which, with the thirty you have
already received, will make up the abovementioned Sum. I beg of you to carry
on the Works with all diligence, and manage them so, that several Persons may
be employed upon several Works, in order to make the greater haste. I can
assure you, that although I have other Affairs of no less consequence upon my
hands, which make me never pass a Night without thinking on them, and putting
my Invention upon the rack to advance them, yet I am sure I take as much care
of your Business as I do of any thing else. There is a necessity not only to
work hard upon the Fortifications of Maubeuge, but likewise upon those of
Landrechy, of Chasteau-Cambresis, and those places you design to keep for your
Winter Quarters.

It Is also necessary to lay up a sufficient Magazine of Corn at Maubeuge, that
may last till Harvest-time, otherwise it is of no purpose to bestow Money upon
fortifying it. For this effect, we have given twenty thousand Crowns to Gargan,
to buy up all the Corn he can find in the Neighborhood: If he should not lay
them out as we directed him, he would do us a great Injury. Pray send me word
whether he deals faithfully with us, and oblige him to it by the Authority you
have over him. Thus I hope we shall be the sooner able to fill this Magazine,
because no Money shall be wanting for that purpose. Rest assured that I am, and
ever will be,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Paris, Sept. 8, 1637. Addition.
IF I thought you would not be informed by some other hand, that the King is
extremely displeased at the Siege of Capelle, I would not acquaint you with it,
for fear of making you uneasy; for which reason I could conceal it no longer
from you. Now my Hand is in, I must tell you farther, that he throws all the
Blame upon Monsieur de la Meilleraye, and, by a glancing Stroke, upon me,
saying, It was he that caused this Resolution to be taken, directly against his
Orders. I must desire you not to be disturbed at this unlucky Accident, which
affects me more than it does any one else. Care has been taken to represent the
unforeseen Difficulties that made the Design upon Avenes impracticable; and
that you undertook the Siege, that now employs you, by the advice of all the
principal Officers; but all this is suspected coming from my Mouth. For which
reason I entreat you to send a Letter to Monsieur de Noyers, in which let there
be a distinct and clear Relation how this Affair came to be resolved upon. For
God's sake never be afflicted for the matter, but take care to preserve your
Person; and see that the Grand Master does the same.



LETTER C. To the Duke of Halwin.
SIR,
BEing informed of a flying Report in your Government, that there is a design
to transport Corn from thence, by virtue of a Passport which one of my
Relations has obtained, I purposely writ this Letter, to beg the favor of you,
that in case any Person comes upon such an Errand, under pretense of a
Passport, to hinder it from having any effect. You may very well imagine, that
I am so far from consenting to have the Province robbed of what is necessary
for its Subsistence, that on the other hand, I would contribute all that lies
in my power to procure an abundance of all things there. I will not enlarge my
self longer to convince you of this truth, being content to assure you at
present, that I am, and ever will be,

Sir, Your, etc.
Paris, Sept. 8, 1637.
LETTER CI. To the Cardinal de la Vallette.
My Lord,
I Writ so large a Letter to you yesterday, and Monsieur Arnaud d' Andilly, who
is parted from hence, has received such particular Instructions in all points,
that I should make but a sorry Compliment to his Understanding, to entertain
you with a tedious Discourse about them. I shall only make bold once more to
conjure you, not to be afflicted at the Dissatisfaction his Majesty has
expressed upon your resolution to besiege Capelle instead of Avenes; for I can
assure you, that you are not concerned in it at all, it wholly falling upon
Monsieur de la Meilleraye, and upon my self by a side Blow. You know well
enough whether we are guilty or no. This gives me an assurance that his Majesty
will find out the Truth at last, and show the same Favors to his Servants as
he has been accustomed to do. It would be convenient for you to dispatch an
Officer to the King, with the Minutes of the Debate when this Resolution was
taken. I am, and ever shall be, without the least Alteration,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Paris, Sept. 8, 1637.
LETTER CII. To the same.
My Lord,
I Cannot sufficiently lament the Death of Monsieur de Bussy, or be too
apprehensive for the Wounds of Monsieur de Rambure. It was a terrible
Misfortune, that only thirty of the Enemy, and the panic Fear of our own Men,
should produce so unlucky an Effect.

The King has bestowed all Monsieur de Bussy's Places upon his Son. He has
likewise granted to Monsieur de Castelnau the same Privilege that he uses to
grant to the Captains of the Guards, when they lose their Ensigns. His Majesty
designs to put one of his own uominating into the place; but then he will order
him to give four thousand Crowns to the aforesaid Sieur de Castelnau, which is
the Sum that the other Captains of the Guards usually receive for it. Let me
conjure you to make your Trenches as secure as you can contrive them.

I dispatched this Express on purpose to let you know that the King's
Displeasure is over, that he is very sensible it was impracticable to besiege
Avenes, and that he is no longer angry with Monsieur de la Meilleraye. Besides
what I have written to him about this Matter, I desire you to satisfy him of
the truth of it, and to preserve your self carefully. Rest assured that I am,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Conflans, Sept. 12, 1637.
LETTER CIII. To the Duke of Halwin.
SIR,
IT IS so long ago since you were informed of the Enemy's Design, that I am
persuaded you are not surprised at their Descent upon Languedoc, and that you
have long since put your self in a posture to oppose their Progress. The King
does not question but that you will upon this occasion discover your Merits and
Bravery, and, in short, do all that he has reason to expect from your Affection
to his Service. His Majesty has sent the Sieur de Bellefonds, to serve in
Quality of Marshall de Camp about you; as also a Commission to Monsieur d'
Argencourt, for the same Employ. He is content you should make use of all the
Forces that are in the Province; and Monsieur de Noyers has writ more
particularly to you about it.

The Bishop of Nismes has sent me word, that the Diocese and City of Nismes
have raised a Regiment, consisting of twelve hundred Men, that will be ready to
march by the 15th. of this Month, and sends me word, that every one behaves
himself so well in this common Danger, that the Spaniards will find it a much
more difficult matter to get home again, than they found it easy to come
there. I am consident you will omit nothing of your Care and Diligence to bring
this about, and we shall in a short time hear the World speak of your great
Exploits. In the mean time, I beg of you to believe that I will always set a
just value upon your Services, as being,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Conflans, Sept. 13, 1637.
LETTER CIV. To the Duke of Hallwin.
SIR,
HIS Majesty judging it expedient, in this present Juncture, to send a
Gentleman to you, to give Orders, and act in his Name, such things as you shall
look upon to be of great importance to his Service; and having chosen Majola,
Lieutenant of my Guards, to take this Journey, I would not suffer him to depart
before I had put this Letter into his Hands, to tell you, that as nothing well
can be added to the Orders which you have laid down in your Government, to put
it in a Condition to oppose the Designs of the Enemy, or to the extraordinary
trouble, which for this purpose you have undergone, so nothing can give his
Majesty so much content, as the Care and Vigilance you have shown upon this
Occasion. I don't tell you what a satisfaction it is to my self in particular,
because you may easily imagine it by the sincerity of my Affection to you. I
will only once more conjure you, to use your utmost Efforts to confirm the good
Opinion which the King and his Servants have entertained of your Courage and
Prudence, and let his Majesty's Enemies know to their cost, how formidable you
are in the Field. This I dare affirm to you, that as no Man living is more
affected at what concerns you than my self, so no Man can more earnestly wish
that you should acquire Glory and Reputation, to which I shall freely
contribute all that lies in my power, as the aforesaid Sieur de Majola will
more particularly inform you. Rest assured, that I am, and ever shall be,

Sir, Your, etc.
Conflans, Setp. 17, 1637.
LETTER CV. To the same.
SIR,
I Add these few Lines to the Letter I writ to you yesterday, to conjure you,
as far as I have any Interest in you, to attack the Spaniards with all possible
Vigor, and not to give them time to fortify themselves in Languedoc, as they
have done toward St. John de Luz. They have not three thousand
well-disciplin'd Men; all the rest are raw Fellows, as we are certainly
informed. If you press them warmly, they will infallibly run for it; and if you
once put them to flight, you will come off as victoriously as the late Marshall
de Schomberg did at Rhee, at Casal, and Castelnaudarry; and it will be no small
Honor, let me tell you, to beat the Enemy out of your Government. I don't
question but that you will do your utmost upon this occasion, as I heartily
encourage you. They that vigorously set upon the Spaniards, can never fail of
bringing them to reason; but it is downright Madness to pretend to humble them
by Patience and Delays. I heartily wish you may prove successful in this
Affair, as well because it will be for his Majesty's Service, as for your own
Reputation. Rest assured that no Man can love you better than my self, who am,

Sir, Your, etc.
Conflans, Sept. 18, 1636.
LETTER CVI. To the Cardinal de la Valette.
My Lord,
IM mediately upon the receipt of yours, dated Sept. 17. I sent this Courrier
to you, in the first place to beg one Favor of you, though I know you need no
solicitation in it, which is to hasten your Siege as much as you can:
Secondly, to tell you that Monsieur de Chavigny sets out to morrow, to meet
you, and will be next Tuesday Morning at Gapelle, where I pray don't let him go
to the Trenches, a Man of his Profession having nothing to do there. He will
communicate all our Thoughts to you. In the mean time, sending a Dispatch to
Monsieur de Chatillon, to give him orders to lay up Provisions at Rocroy, and
the Towns upon the Meuse; I will tell you beforehand, that if the Cardinal
Infant takes the way of Cambray, you must with all expedition send twelve
hundred Men at least, one half to St. Quintin, and the other half to Peronne,
and three hundred Horse to each of these two places; by which means the Enemy
will be able to do nothing on that side. I am of opinion likewise, that it will
be necessary to send back the Cavalry of poor Rambure to Dourlans.

I can assure you, and Monsieur de Chavigny will do the same, that the Cardinal
Infant cannot bring above four thousand Foot and two thousand Horse into the
Field, being constrained to leave the remainder of his Troops, to prevent the
Incursions which the Hollanders may make into the Country, after Breda is taken.

This is the true State of the Enemy on that side. And then Picolomini and
Balancon, having both in Horse and Foot not above nine or ten thousand Men at
most, the greatest part of which are unarmed, it is impossible for them to make
a Body of above fifteen or sixteen thousand Men in all.

In all probability they will not abandon their Post at Mons, because then they
will have the Heart of the Country open, and give an opportunity to Monsieur de
Candalle to cut off their Rear.

Now if they leave any Forces at Mons, they cannot leave less than four or five
thousand Men, by which means they will not be able to bring above ten thousand
Men into the Field; in which case it will be sufficient to have a thousand
Horse in Maubeuge, and four thousand Foot with Monsieur de Tureune.

You may likewise spare from your Siege, since the Lines of Circumvallation are
now finished, a thousand Horse, and seven thousand Foot, and so have always
more than six thousand Horse, and from nine to ten thousand Foot, to bring into
the Field, which Monsieur de Candalle may command, till the Siege you are now
employed in, gives you leave to be there in Person. And when once the aforesaid
Siege is over, I hope I shall soon be so happy as to assist at a Te Deum for a
Victory you have obtained. I desire it, my Lord, no less for your Reputation,
than for the Welfare of his Majesty's Affairs, as being with the utmost
sincerity,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Ruel, Setp. 19, 1637.
LETTER CVII. To the same
My Lord,
I Have dispatched the Bearer hereof, whose Name is Guard, on purpose to tell
you, that the King has sent with all expedition for twelve hundred Horse out of
Monsieur de Chastillon's Army, and that he sends four Companies of his Guards,
and the Regiment of Rochegiffard, which consists of twelve hundred Men, and was
quartered about Senlis, to St. Quintin and Peronne, that by this means you
might be able to keep all your Troops together, without sending them to those
two places, as I desired you to do yesterday. I here once more assure you, that
the Cardinal Infant has brought but two thousand Horse, and four thousand Men
with him, and you may take my word for it, it is as true as Gospel. Provided
that one could avoid a disadvantageous Battle, between this and six Days hence,
if Capelle were once taken, we ought to contrive some way or other to fight the
Enemy, and I hope we should come off with no less Success than we have used to
do of late.

The Duke of Savoy has just now gained a Battle, wherein he has totally
defeated, seven thousand Foot, and five hundred Horse, though he had not above
five thousand Foot, and five hundred Horse. In this Action the Enemy lost all
their Cannon and Equipage. I have a very strong opinion, that we shall have
some good Success; but however we must take Capelle with all speed; and in the
mean time be careful to avoid any ill-favored Shock, which in my poor Judgment
is easily done, since this is the third time that I have sent you a true
account of the Enemy's Force. You may depend upon the truth of it; as also that
I am, and ever shall be,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Paris, Sept. 20, 1637. Five a-clock in the Afternoon.
A MEMORIAL. To the same.
IF the advice we just now received is true, viz. that the Cardinal Infant is
marched with the Troops of his own Army, and those of Picolomini, to Nivelles,
and has taken the way of Pont-du-Loup upon the Sambre, we are of opinion here,
that they have only one of these two things left to do; either to possess
themselves of Beaumont, as Monsieur de Candalle imagines, in which case it is of
the last importance to throw a Body of Horse and Foot into it, that shall be
capable to stop the march of the Enemy: Or else to leave Beaumont, and marching
more to the Left, to go strait for Mariembourg; in which case posting
themselves at Chimay, they may incommode the Siege of Capelle, and alarm
Rocroy, and Charleville, on the other side.

If they take this last way, the Communication of Maubeuge, Landrechy, and la
Capelle will not be interrupted; as well because Royanmont and Solre will
continue in your Hands, as because all the other side of the Sambre toward
Mons will be free.

Let them go upon what Design they will, if they march on that side, it is
highly necessary to keep Beaumont.

If they take this way, St. Quintin and Peronne will be covered, and then the
Cardinal de la Valette may draw from thence four Companies of the Guards, and
the Regiment of Roche-giffard, to fortify it, and so order matters, that the
Succors which he may at present give to Monsieur de Candalle, shall not hinder
his Siege.

He may likewise raise all the Militia between Guise and Tirasche, which the
SIeurs de Longueval, and de Quince may bring to him, to assist him to keep the
Circumvallation of the Siege of Capelle.

Since the King's Return, his Majesty has been pleased to explain himself to
this effect; that if the Enemy marched toward Rocroy, then the Cardinal de la
Valette should follow them with all the Army, in case Capelle should happen to
be taken, leaving at Maubeuge all the Men he can conveniently spare for the
security of the place; and in case it is not taken, that Monsieur de Candalle
should follow the Enemy with a Body of two thousand Foot, and six thousand
Horse, which shall overtake Monsieur de Vaubecourt, toward Aubigny, with
twelve hundred Horse, and all the Militia of Champagne.

After the aforesaid Debate was over, his Majesty being present, has commanded
me to send word to the Cardinal de la Valette, that he should put this present
advice in execution, and whatever else may be sent to him, according as he
shall judge it most expedient, being upon the place.

If the Enemy takes the Road of Cambray, they will leave you the whole Country
between the Meuse and the Sambre open, and consequently the Communication
between Capelle and Maubeuge free.

The Cardinal of Richelieu.
Conflans, Sept. 21, 1637.
LETTER CVII. To the Cardinal de la Valette.
My LORD,
I Am so much the more pleased at the Surrender of Capelle, which News was
brought to me by Monsieur de Cinq-Mars, because this good Success will, in all
probability, put you in a way to attain greater Advantages over the Enemy, now
your Forces are more at liberty to act, and you are not taken up with any
Siege. I hope this, both from the Prosperity of his Majesty's Arms, and from
your Prudence; affuring you, that I no less sincerely pray, that the King's
Affairs may prosper under your Conduct, than for the Preservation of my own
Life; which I shall most willingly sacrifice, at any time, for the Advantage of
the King's Service; and to give your Lordship clearer Convictions, that no Man
living is with more Sincerity than I am,

Your most humble, etc.

LETTER CVIII. To the Same.
My LORD,
I Was overjoyed to find by Monsieur de Chavigny, that you are so heartily
affected to me. I beseech you to believe, that I shall be no less zealous in
whatever regards yourself, and that nothing shall cause the least Alteration in
my Friendship to you.

I have dispatched this Messenger again, to tell you, that being of Opinion
that you may, without laying aside any of the Designs, which the aforesaid
Sieur de Chavigny has acquainted me with, send at least fifteen Hundred Horse
to Monsieur de Chatillon, instead of the Thousand we have sent you, and the Two
Thousand Foot. In my Judgment it is wholly necessary that this should be done
with all Expedition, because, as you have very well observed, one of the most
advantageous Designs we can possibly go upon for the remainder of this
Campaign, is, to possess our selves of Damvillers; as likewise, because we have
received Advice, that Duke Charles is marched to join Cantelme, with all the
Forces he could get together, to endeavor the Relief of that Place. I am sorry
that after this I must send you the News of the Duke of Savoy's Death, which
afflicts me in an inexpressible manner. I am, and ever shall be, your most, etc.

LETTER CIX. To the Cardinal de la Valette.
My LORD,
HAving an Opportunity to write to you by the Sieur Fabert, who is going
toward you, I can only tell you, That the King gives you full Liberty to Act
as you shall judge it most advantageous to his Service. The Retreat of Beaumont
has somewhat surprised his Majesty; but as we are not yet fully acquainted with
the Particulars, we cannot tell what to say to it. I can positively assure you,
that the Cardinal Infant has sent back part of his Troops to Prince Thomas, to
oppose the Progress of the Prince of Orange. It Is certain, that it had done no
small Service to his Majesty's Affairs, if we could have performed something on
your side to content the Hollanders, who are impatient to advance into the
Enemies Country; and complain, tho without any Reason, that we have done them a
great deal of Harm. His Majesty thinks it expedient, that you should send back
for the Two Thousand Foot, and the Fifteen Hundred Horse, which you sent to the
Marshall de Chatillon, in case you are able to affect any thing. Whatever you
^o, you must be sure to take up some Winter Quarters near Chimay, which would
have been very proper to have sustained the Army of Beaumont.

Monsieur de Noyers has Writ so fully to you, that I have no more to add at
present, but that I am, and ever shall be, with the utmost Sincerity, your
most, etc.

P. S. I desire you, my Lord, so long as you continue where you are, to take
care that Landrechy be well fortified; and give such Directions for Sonooyes,
that the Place may be victualled for a Year: For you know well enough, that the
Sieur Gargan exhausted all its Provisions for the Service of the Army.



LETTER CX. To the Cardinal de la Valette.
My LORD,
I Find by the Letter which Billon, Quartermaster of my Guards, brought me from
you, that you have been so reserved and sparing, that you would not take up
Nine Thousand Livres out of that Money which Monsieur de Noyers and I sent to
you some time ago, to employ them upon the Fortifications of Chateau Cambreses.
For which Reason I have sent you these few Lines to acquaint you, That you may
employ the aforesaid Sum to the abovementioned purpose as soon as you please,
since I am clearly of the Opinion with you, that it is necessary; and so much
the more, that you may freely make use of any thing, where I have any
particular Power. Depend upon this, I beseech you; and believe that I am your
most, etc.

LETTER CXI. To the Cardinal de la Valette.
My LORD,
YOu will so particularly know the King's Intentions upon the Subject of your
Dispatches, by the Letter which the Chevalier de Monclair brings you, that it
will be unnecessary for me to add any thing to it. So the only occasion of my
writing to you this, is to renew to you the Assurances of my hearty Affection,
upon which you may certainly depend, and rest satisfied that I shall be proud
of any Opportunity to let you see how zealous I am to serve you I have sent
word to the Count de Guiche, that the King gives him leave to come to Paris, to
be there at his Lady's Lying-in. I am persuaded that you will freely consent to
it at this Juncture, when the Army does not require his Presence. The Sicur de
Montclair will inform you of all that has happened in these parts; to which,
reserring myself, I shall only add, that I am your most, etc.

LETTER CXII. To the Cardinal de la Valette.
My LORD,
I Was extremely surprised to find by the Count de Guiche, that you believed
that some Body had done you ill Offices with the King. I can positively assure
you of the contrary, and that you have been never mentioned here but to your
Advantage. To satisfy you further, If some envious Persons had misrepresented
you in your Absence, yet his Majesty and his Servants know you too well, to
entertain any other Opinion of you, than what you justly deserve, or to give
Credit to any Reports that may be spread to your Prejudice. Let me therefore
conjure you to remove these ill-grounded Suspicions, and rest assured, That as
no body, as far as I can perceive, has endeavored to do you the least Injury;
so that nothing is able to wound your Reputation, either with the King, or any
Person at Court that esteems and honors you as I do, who shall be glad of any
Opportunity to convince you, that I am, with all Sincerity, yours, etc.

LETTER CXIII. To Marshall Schomberg.
SIR,
FOr the entire security of Leucatte, and the better defense of the Frontiers
from any Insults on that side, some Persons of your parts have thought it
advisable to build a Fort, in immitation of that of the Spaniards, called St.
Ange, in the narrow Road that leads from Spain to Leucatte; with a large
Half Moon before the Gate, enclosing a small Hill that commands the Place; as
also a Block-house on an Eminence hard by, which has the like command. I have
already writ of this to Monsieur D' Argencour, and have desired him to
communicate my Letter to you, and to join with you in the Survey of those
Places, and to observe whether these Works are necessary or not. But having
received no Answer from him, I thought it but requisite to acquaint you with
the same thing; desiring, that together with him and some others, that should
be well acquainted with the Situation of the Place, you would make a strict
Examination into the Matter, and enquire whether such a Design might be
profitable or not; it being impossible for me to determine any thing so far off
so well as those that are upon the Spot, and know the Country.

As for Leucatte, I am of opinion, that if it were possible to throw down the
Faussebraie from within, it were the best Means to secure the Place against the
utmost Efforts of its Enemies; the Spaniards having always fetched Earth to
fortify their Trenches from the very brink of the said Faussebraie. Methinks
Measures should not be wanting to effect this Work, and which in my Judgment is
as much or more necessary than any other. I desire you to do what is in your
Power, and to give me a speedy Account: In expectation of which, I am, etc.

LETTER CXIV. To the Duke of Halwin.
SIR,
I Cannot express my Joy for your Success in your late Expedition at Leucatte,
to force an Intrenchment, relieve a Town and gain a Battle, are visible effects
of God's Assistance; and I Am the more thankful because you are chosen for the
Minister of so glorious an Action, advantageous both to your own Country, and
the Kingdom in general. By this it appears that your Courage and Fidelity are
not accompanied with less Success than your Father, Monsieur Schomberg's, have
always been. The Satisfaction I hereby receive is inexpressible. You have
nothing left to do but to make the best use of so signal a Victory. Monsieur
Noyers has acquainted you with the King's Pleasure, and I am well assured you
will not defer your Obedience with less Zeal than you did in your late Action,
which got you so great Honor. This I conjure you too for a thousand Reasons
which I have not time here to mention. Believe, that I am and will be always,
etc.

P. S. I cannot help acquainting you again, that I am overjoyed at the Action
in Languedoc, and the rather because it was performed by you: I can assure you,
I will be unmindful of nothing that may in the least contribute toward the
gratifying your Expectations and Deserts.



LETTER CXV. To Marshall Schomberg.
From the Appartment of the Sieurs Torquefort and Bodin.
SIR,
BY some Persons lately come from Leucatte, I understand that you have not
repaired the Ruins caused by the Siege, nor yet begun the New Works, which you
yourself, and Monsieur d' Argencour, judged necessary to be made; and, in a
word, that the Place is in a much worse Condition at present, than it was when
the Spaniards first set down before it. Truly this News has the more surpised
me, in that I did not believe there remained any thing to be done, to secure it
from any second Attempt of its Enemies, in regard of the long time you have had
to work. I earnestly entreat you therefore to remedy this Default, in such
manner, that no Inconveniency may result from your Omission; and to consider
that it is not enough to secure a Place, if one does not afterward endeavor
to preserve it by Prudence and Foresight. You have so great a Concern in this,
that I do not doubt but you will do whatever is in your Power: and so conclude,
etc.

LETTER CXVI. To the Same.
SIR,
THe desire I have to see the Harbor of Agde finished, occasions my resuming
my Pen to conjure you, so to manage Affairs, either by your Interest or
Authority, that at the next Assembly of the States, the Provinces may be taxed
with such a Sum as may perfect the Works so well begun. I do not recommend to
you the Advantage they will receive by it in general, nor the Benefit and
Convenience that some private Persons have already had, because you know both
much better than I. But I shall only assure you, that such care shall be taken
of the Money so designed, that the Country shall have no reason to grudge the
Charge. The Bishop of Agde will communicate an Order to you, that I have sent
him upon this Occasion. I desire you to see all well executed, and that you
will believe me, etc.

LETTER CXVII. To the Same.
SIR,
I Cannot help acquainting you, that the King has been very much surpised to
hear, that the Cannons the Spaniards lost at Leucatte, are still in the
Ditches, or without the Walls; and that you have not taken care to send 'em to
Narbonne, according to his pleasure, made known to you long time since. His
Majesty therefore hereby expressly commands you to lose no more time, but to see
it speedily done, and to assign for Convoy the Regiments of Languedoc, St.
Andre, St. Aunays, your own Guards, and other Troops that shall be in the
Province at that time, that they may meet with no Inconveniences by the Way.
For my part, I earnestly conjure you to omit nothing that may satisfy His
Majesty in this Particular, for he is inexpressibly impatient till he hears of
their safe arrival at Narbonne. Believe that I am heartily, etc.

LETTER CXVIII. To the Same.
SIR,
ALthough Monsieur Noyers may have already made known to you how important it
would be to the King's Service, that the Army in Italy, under your Command,
should speedily repass the Mountains, to the end that they might oppose the
progress of their Enemies, who have been a long time in the Field, and are at
present engaged in the Siege of Bresme; yet I have thought it not amiss to
represent to you the same thing; earnestly conjuring you, moreover, with all
the Affection imaginable, that you would not be unmindful of any thing that
depends either upon your Authority, your Care, or your Diligence, not only that
the said Troops may speedily repass, but also that they may want for nothing
that may render 'em able and complete. You may be assured nothing can be more
profitable and pleasing to His Majesty, and which I will endeavor to improve
so as it may be serviceable to a Person that I have always honored and
esteemed, etc.

LETTER CXIX. To Marshall Chatillon.
SIR,
I Am overjoyed at the good condition Monsieur Noyers has acquainted the King,
he left you and the Officers of your Army in. His Majesty has so great
confidence in your Sincerity, that he is assured you will speedily make known
to his Enemies, how much is in the Power of a Marshall Chatillon. He expects
you would march Sunday next without excuse, that you might be at the River of
Sum the twelfth, and at Dolaus the fifteenth. I desire you would not fail by
any means, because we have sent the Prince of Orange word that you would be in
the Enemies Coutry precisely the fifteenth. His Majesty approved the March,
Monsieur Noyers reported you designed to make. I wish your Journey prosperous
with all my Heart, and I desire you to believe that I am, etc.

LETTER CXX. To the Same.
SIR,
THe King has been much troubled on account of the Delays to transport his Army
into the Enemies Country, when he had given his word to the Prince of Orange,
that they should be on their March the tenth of this Month. He has sent the
Bishop of Auxerre to make you sensible how much it is for his Interest that you
should repair this Omission with extraordinary Diligence, and not quit it till
you are arrived where you are commanded. In God's Name lose no more time for
several Reasons of great Consequence: But be assured that I am, and will be
always your Security, etc.

LETTER CXXI. To the Same.
SIR,
HAving understood that Messieurs de Saint Preuil, and de la Ferte, have had a
Quarrel, I conjure you by this Letter to endeavor to appease 'em all you can,
or otherways to interpose your Authority, that they may become good Friends. I
have writ to both of 'em, to invite 'em to it, for I should be very sorry,
being my intimate Acquaintance, to have 'em push it on to any Extremity. I am
well assured your Prudence will prevent any farther Miscarriage; and I desire
you once more to believe that I am sincerely, etc.

LETTER CXXII. To the Same.
SIR,
I Have been extremely glad to learn from the Letter, you sent me by the
Gentleman of the Bedchamber, that you were happily arrived before St. Omers;
and the rather because you had so fair hopes of accomplishing your Design,
which I wish as good Success to, as you possibly can yourself; and for its
furtherance will contribute from hence whatever is in my Power. I cannot
sufficiently commend and thank you, for the good Orders you have established in
your March, for preserving the Country, and preventing the plundering of
Churches and Monasteries. I desire you to continue the same Care for the
future, that your Troops may avoid the ill Reputation of Burning and Theft.

We shall not be wanting to Reinforce you according to your desire. You have
never yet asked more than Fourteen Thousand Foot; but I am well assured, before
the receipt of this, you will have above Fifteen Thousand, by the arrival of de
Molondin; whose Regiment, if not Two Thousand, will at least consist of Fifteen
Hundred Men: Of Bellefonds, who commands, above Twelve Hundred Men: Of
Fouquezolles, which I don't reckon for above Five Hundred Men: Of Decamp, which
I take to be about the same Number: And of De la Saludie, which, in my Opinion,
cannot have less than Eight Hundred Men, which make in all Four Thousand Five
Hundred Men. As for the Marine Regiment, you know it is impossible for us to
spare it, being one of the Principal Bodies that composes the Army of Monsieur
de la Force, and which if we should take from him, that he would be
considerably weakened.

I forgot to tell you Courtaumer is also upon his March, who brings you above
one thousand Men, and that we have sent you Twenty Four Thousand Franks to
advance your Works, that the want of Money may not retard you one moment. A
God's Name, Sir, be very diligent, and assure yourself that I will be always
sincerely, etc.

LETTER CXXIII. To Marshall Schomberg.
SIR,
THe successive Advices you have had of the Spaniards Designs upon Languedoc,
together with those we have received from diverse other places of the same
Intentions, Oblige me to write you this Letter, to conjure you to take so great
care of yourself, that you be not any ways surpised. It Is hard to believe the
Spaniards can be strong enough to defend themselves against the Prince's
Incursions into their Country, and Attack us on another side at the same time.
But admitting they were inclined to enter Languedoc, they would certainly
change their Resolutions when they saw the Prince's Army in Spain.
Nevertheless, that they may not be capable to oppose the Prince's Undertaking,
you are reinforced, over and above the Regiments of Languedoc, Vitry and
Monclar, with that of St. Aunais, and at need you may make use of those of
Rousillon and Mirepoix, making in all six Regiments, and which at the head of
the Militia of your Government are as good as the best Army we have. But we
must not think to let you have always these six Regiments, for fear of
overburthening the Country, but only so long as the Prince's Attack may
experience what the Spaniards are able to do. It is your business to have so
great regard to every thing, that if the Enemies will needs enter the Frontiers
on your side, you may be as ready as they, not suffering yourself to be
surpised, as you were the last Year.

We have sent you an Order of Ten Thousand Crowns, on the Receipt of Languedoc,
to make use of upon Occasion.

I say nothing to what you writ me concerning the Prince, because you have
already been acquainted by Monsieur Noyer's Dispatches, with the King's
Pleasure therein: I shall only conjure you by this to omit nothing in your
Power to keep up a fair Correspondence with him, and I desire you to believe
that I am and will be always assuredly, etc.

LETTER CXXIV. To the Same.
SIR,
I Am extremely pleased to hear, that although Courtaumer's Regiment have not yet
joined you, you have now effectually Fourteeen Thousand well disciplined Men in
your Army, and Three Thousand other Soldiers in case of need, which is above
the Number we promised, and you have always desired. You may know by this if we
are sincere in our Promises, or have engaged you where we did not design you
should succeed. You may be assured we shall never put you upon any thing, where
we will not furnish you with Ability to go through, and to convince you the
better of the Desire we have that you should speedily accomplish your Siege:
The King was no sooner acquainted with your Request to be joined by Monsieur de
la Force, to cover your Intrenchments, but he immediately dispatched Orders to
him to advance, and to march directly toward Therouenne, although he had
prepared, and was designed for other Attempts; and all this not to be thought
unmindful of whatever was in our Power to farther your Designs and Success. I
am apt to believe de la Force's Army will not lie idle by yours; for though it
may not happen that you both engage the Enemy together, yet he may perform
something advantageous to the Affairs of His Majesty. In the mean time, I
conjure you to contribute what ever you can to this end, and to believe that no
body Affects and Esteems you more, and is more truly and cordially your Friend,
than, etc.

P. S. Since your extraordinary Diligence, in your first taking the Field, was
so advantageous to you, I desire you to neglect nothing for the future that may
advance your Siege: And to remember, that it is from thence for the most part,
that proceeds the good or ill Success of any Undertaking.



LETTER CXXV. To Marshall Chatillon.
SIR,
I Can never enough wonder at two Expresses you lately sent to Monsieur Noyers,
for I could never have believed that having had several days to view the Place
you besieged, without the Enemies opposing you in the least, you could be so
overseen as to leave a Canal open, where the Recruits entered the Town without
resistance. I must confess, at first hearing this, I could not easily give
credit to it, not being able to imagine that you should not foresee a place
where the Enemies might have effected whatever they could have desired. As to
the other Misfortune of the two Regiments defeated, we might have been the
easier comforted, if the former had not deprived us of the means; yet it is
difficult to hinder my belief, that a Convoy of Thirty Horse would not have
been sufficient to have secured the passage of Two Regiments of Foot.
Notwithstanding these ill Accidents, I am glad to hear your Resolutions still
to continue the Siege in spite of 'em, and which, to encourage you in, Monsieur
de la Force is ordered to your speedy Assistance. In short, you must needs
carry the Place; and therefore for the future, endeavor to repair these two
false Steps by a more extraordinary Diligence.

Your Reputation and the King's Interest, are more concerned in this than I can
express, though not than you can imagine. In a word, if St Omers were Ostend, His
Majesty is resolved to take it. But in truth, I must needs tell you, we should
be well busied to send Troops, if you have not a more extraordinary Care to
manage and to employ 'em, so that the Enemies might not bring their Designs
about without a stroke struck. I conjure you once more not to be discouraged at
this Misfortune: but to be assured you shall always be seconded to his Power,
that loves and honors you particularly, and who is, etc.

LETTER CXXVI. To the Same.
SIR,
THis Letter is nothing but to reinforce what I advised you yesterday, that the
King is resolved, whatever it cost him, to make himself Master of St. Omers,
and whatever difficulty may be found in the Attempt, he hopes God of his
Goodness will afford him means to surmount. Do not concern yourself any
farther, for what has already happened; but be resolved for the future to
endeavor to foresee and prevent the like Miscarriages. I hope Monsieur de la
Force, being strengthened by a Party of your Horse, will be able to fight the
Enemy successfully, if he meets an opportunity, and which may give you
occasion, in the mean time, to prosecute your Siege with Vigor, and without
Interruption. In a word, this Affair, being once undertaken, you cannot decline
it without apparent Prejudice to His Majesty's and your own Reputation; the
increase of both, which I shall always desire, as I am, etc.

LETTER CXXVII. To the Same.
SIR,
YOur last brought me no less Joy, through hopes you gave of a happy and speedy
Success in your Expedition, than your former caused me Disquiet in hearing of
the Recruits got into St. Omers. I have nevertheless always thought, being so
perfectly well acquainted with you, that this petty Accident could never be
capable to discourage you, nor in the least to abate that warmth with which I
know you undertook this Action; it being no extraordinary thing to take Places
that have been relieved, where they have been attempted by a Person of your
rare Endowments and Courage. I don't doubt but you have now began your Attacks,
and opened your Trenches, since you delayed only till the approaches of
Monsieur de la Force had covered you; which he now has, we are advised, for
these two Days. Wherefore there is nothing remains, but to conjure you to be
very Vigilant and Diligent, and to desire you to believe that as I am a Person
have always valued and admired you, so there is none can more desire the
increase of your Reputation, than myself, who am, etc.

P. S. You would do well to Ransom those Prisoners the E^mies have of ours, if
you have not already done it, and to know from them if they will give Quarter
or not for the future, that we may treat their Men as they shall do Ours. The
Folly of the French is so great in this particular, that perhaps after they
have kept 'em a considerable time, they may be inclined to admit 'em into their
Troops; but pray let 'em know, that where any such practice shall be made use
of, the first that are discovered shall be handled after the severest manner,
and this to extinguish the very first thought of any such Intentions.



LETTER CXXVIII. To Marshall de Chatillon.
SIR,
MOnsieur Noyers has writ you so large an Account of the Approach of Marschal
de la Force's Army, that I have nothing left to do but to conjure you to
consider well of his Reasons. For my part I take 'em to be of great
consequence, not only on account of the King's Interest, but also your own
Reputation. I earnestly request you not to be unmindful in the least of your
Duty; and to be assured that I am sincerely, etc.

LETTER CXXIX. To the Same.
SIR,
I Was extremely surpised to see a Courrier sent hither from you, to desire
that Marshall de la Force's Army might be joined speedily with yours, to
accomplish your Siege of St. Omers; as also when I understood by the same
Person, that you had not yet opened your Trenches. I believe you have forgot,
that when you desired only the Regiments of Gassion and de la Ferte, it was on
condition that you should ask no other Army to prevent the Enemies falling upon
you.

You have since desired, that Monsieur de la Force should approach you within
four Leagues, which has been granted, though the King had other intentions;
because, by covering your Siege, he would be always ready to make head against
the Enemies wherever they might m^rch, to enter France and make diversion.
But, by your last Proposals, you require his being joined with you, which would
not only deprive him absolutely of any such Power, but also put his Majesty's
Affairs into but a very ill posture. In truth, the King has been more concerned
than you can imagine at these tedious Procrastinations, and the sad variety he
observes in the effects of 'em. You have already sent word two or three times,
that you would open your Trenches, but still there is nothing done. Such
proceeding is so very prejudicial to the King's interest, in that it gives his
Enemies time to grow capable of interrupting, not only this Undertaking, but
also all other his Majesty's Designs, insomuch that it is impossible for me to
conceal my Sentiments of it. And, having always honored you, as I do still, I
must needs desire you to consider, that it would not be at all for your
Reputation, if, with an Army to back you, and another of fifteen or sixteen
thousand Men under your Command, you could not take so inconsiderable a Place
as St. Omers. In God's Name, Sir, be more diligent; the King's Affairs require
it, and the just and reasonable impatience his Majesty may very well have upon
such occasion, obliges you to it.

We have ordered the Marshall de la Force to send Succors, commanded in
diverse Bodies, to assist you in your Circumvallation. This is all that you can
desire, and pardon me, if I tell you, you are unreasonable if you ask more.
This is what I thought necessary by this Letter, which I conclude with full
assurance of the continuance of my friendship, and that I am sincerely, etc.

LETTER CXXX. To the Same.
SIR,
I Conjure you, a God's Name, to redouble your diligence: The King's Affairs,
his Majesty's Satisfaction, and your own Private Interest require it. And, if
after so powerful Motives, my Sentiments may seem of any moment, I beg of you,
once more, to hasten your Works and the Execution of your Enterprise. Remember,
that nothing is more precious than Time in great Actions; and be assured, that
I will endeavor always to recommend your Services, that your Reward may
correspond with your Expectations: Who am sincerely, etc.

LETTER CXXXI. To Marshall Schomberg.
SIR,
FOr answer to Yours of the 28th of June, I must tell you, that though there be
no likelihood of the Spaniards attacking you in Languedoc, having so powerful
an Army in the very Bowels of their own Country, whether of necessity they must
have speedy recourse, yet we do not see reason to withdraw all the Regiments
from your Province, till we are certain what they intend to do.

As for the Powder you writ for, the King having so many Armies on Foot, and so
many Garrisons to furnish, it is impossible to send you near so much as you
expect. But as it is no easy thing, so neither is it necessary, there being a
great deal to be found in many places of your Government, which, though it be
almost spoiled, yet it may be easily made good again by the many Mills you have
amongst you. So that over and above this, of the 50000 weight, which you say
you reserve for the Campaign, you will have occasion only for 25000, and the
other 25000 you may distribute amongst the Garrisons that want. In the mean
time all necessary diligence shall be used to send you fresh Supplies as often
as it shall be judged you have need.

It is your business to take such care of your Militia, that they may be ready
to join your Regiments, as they did the last Year, if any occasion should
offer. But once more, I cannot believe that the Spaniards will attack you: Or
if they will needs attempt such a thing, it must be with so great disadvantage,
that you may easily overpower 'em, as you did once before. I wish it with a
great deal of earnestness, as being entirely, etc.

P. S. Monsieur Melleraye has acquainted me, that there were 1636 thousand
Weight of Powder in Nartonne, and which he had augmented with 10000 more. Also,
that over and above this, you had 25000 for the Affair of Leucatte, whereof
there was but 5000 spent: So that, if you had pleased, Narbonne alone might
have furnished you with 50000 Weight of Powder, without touching the Provisions
of this Year.

As for the Carriages of the great Ordnance, he believed 'em to be in a very
good condition; for that over and above the care he had taken of 'em, the
Country had raised Money for that purpose, which had been reposited in your
Hands.

An exact Answer to all this, if you please, the first opportunity.



LETTER CXXXII. To Marshall Chatillon.
SIR,
Although your ill success at St. Omers does not a little prejudice his Majesty's
Affairs at this present juncture, yet as every thing one undertakes has not
always a good event, which depends purely upon God's pleasure and not on Man's:
You must not suffer the small Misfortunes you have met with, to lessen or abate
your Courage in the least; but, on the contrary, as those that have as great
share as you have, never show it more than when they are opposed by some
considerable disorder, so you must endeavor to make amends for your former ill
Success, by some other noble Undertaking. I desire you to believe I will
contribute to this purpose whatever is in my power; and you may expect from me
that Esteem and Value you so sincerely deserve, and that I will be proud to
make known how much I am, etc.

LETTER CXXXIII. To Marshall Schomberg.
SIR,
OUr opinion of the small probability there was of the Spaniards attacking
Languedoc, when they had so powerful an Army of their Enemies in their own
Country, was principally grounded on the successive Accounts you sent of 'em.
But since, understanding by your last Express, of the 14th of this Month, that
they were preparing to enter the Province, the King thinks fit that you put
yourself into a condition, from this very moment, to oppose their Designs. And
for that purpose, though his Majesty had intended part of those Regiments under
your Command should serve elsewhere; yet, at present, he is willing that you
retain 'em; and, furthermore, desires, that you would assemble, as necessity
requires, the Regiments of Rousillon, Kelas, Mirepoix, Cabrere, Orgeville, and
Montbastier, which, with those of Languedoc, St. Aunays, and the Militia that
you may speedily raise, will all together make a Body of Infantry sufficient to
resist and fight our Enemies, in case they should invade us. As for Horse, his
Majesty well knowing you would not have enough, though the Gentlemen of the
Country should all be assisting, has sent you ten Commissions, to raise so many
Troops more with 60000 Livres for Levy-Money. But because it may be this Sum
may not come to your Hands so soon as you expect, I have sent 10000 Crowns of
my own Money, upon the said 60000, to the end that you may proceed in your
Levies briskly, and with expedition. You may be hereby assured, that I have no
less desires than formerly to see you gain Honor over your Enemies, and that
my Care of you is not more remiss.

As for the 30000 Livres you writ for about Bread, M. Noyers has acquainted me
you have already had Orders for 'em on the general Receipt of Montpellier.

Whereas his Majesty has altogether designed the aforesaid Troops to oppose his
Enemies Intentions, if, instead of entering Languedoc, they should march
toward Provence, you are desired to do the like, and, as soon as possible, to
join the Count d' Alez. But if neither Languedoc nor Provence stand in need of
you, the King would have you command 'em away into Italy, as well to strengthen
the Cardinal de la Valette's Army, as to ease and discharge your own Government
from so great a number of Men that must needs incommode you extremely.

As to your Complaint against M. de Nismes, I am obliged to acquaint you he has
never said any thing to me of you, that you ought in the least to be offended
at; and if he has mentioned any thing to the Council, as Representative, he has
done it only by order from his Province, who, you know, have always had liberty
by their Deputies to make known what they thought entrenched upon their
Privileges. Wherefore I must needs desire you to will him no harm, but to live
with him as with a Person I have no ordinary kindness for.

M. Noyers having writ to you so largely upon all Matters, there is nothing
left more for me, but to desire you to send frequent Expresses of your Motions,
and to assure yourself that I will endeavor to be as serviceable as you can
expect from one who has always honored and esteemed you, and who am, etc.

LETTER CXXXIV. To Marshall Chatillon.
SIR,
Monsieur de Saligny is returned so well informed of the King's mind about
those Matters he came to represent from you to his Majesty, that, referring you
altogether to him for farther Instructions, I shall content myself in these
Lines, with only assuring you of the continuance of my Friendship and
Affection, and that I should be glad of any opportunities to convince you how
much I am, etc.

P. S. I desire you to remember, that the Affair you have in hand requires both
Secrecy and Diligence.



LETTER CXXXV. To the Same.
SIR,
YOu will be so particularly acquainted by the Dispatch M. Noyers sends you,
with the King's Pleasure, that it would be altogether needless to write more:
Therefore I shall only earnestly entreat you to employ so much diligence and
care in that small concern his Majesty desires of you, that you may in some
measure make amends for your Misfortunes hitherto. For my part, I wish you
success with all my heart, not only for the reputation of his Majesty's Arms,
but also your own; of which I desire the increase, as being, etc.

P. S. Let Secrecy and Diligence be your Guides, and I entreat you to act
suitable to the Desires and Good Will of your Friends.



LETTER CXXXVI. To the Same.
SIR,
THE King having sent back the Bishop of Auxerre to acquaint you with his
desires, to have the Siege of Renty carried on with all imaginable Vigor and
Diligence; I have taken occasion for my part, to conjure you not to slip one
Minuit: For although this Undertaking be not great, yet it is a means to begin
to amend what is past; to which end, I shall always be assisting to my power. I
entreat you therefore to be very diligent in this Affair, by the issue of which
we may see what we have to do: In the mean time, be secure of my Affection and
Friendship, and that I am sincerely, etc.

LETTER CXXXVII. To the Mareschals de la Force and Chatillon.
GENTLEMEN,
THis Letter is intended only to give you account of a signal Victory obtained
by Monsieur Weymar over the two Armies of Goeux and Savelli; where he has bore
away 24, as well Colors as Standards, 11 Pieces of Cannon, all the Enemies
Baggage, six thousand Sacks of Corn, and 40000 Weight of Powder that they were
about to carry into Brisac. The Fight continued from one till six at Night, and
3000 Men were left dead upon the place, of which Monsieur Weymar lost only four
or five hundred: Monsieur Weymar attached them first, after having sought 'em
for two whole days. Tubal and Vernancourt only were carried off Prisoners, by
being too hot in their Pursuit after their flying Enemies. Monsieur Weymar has
above 800 Prisoners.

At the same time we received News, that Monsieur de la Mothe Houdancourt, whom
Monsieur de Longueville had sent to the Relief of Poligny that was besieged,
had driven the Enemies from before that Place, with the Loss of 500 upon the
Spot, and above 100 Prisoners.

To second this great Victory of Monsieur Weymar, it were to be wished,
Gentlemen, That you would also do some great thing on this side. The King has
commanded me to put you in mind of it in his Absence; and I am so well assured,
that you will do your utmost endeavors, that I think no more necessary to be
said. But I am nevertheless afraid, His Majesty will be a little displeased,
that you did not leave Renty before this day; for supposing you should follow
the Orders sent you, Monsieur Hallier is designed to Advance upon another
Expedition. We have every day Advices, That the Enemies are punctually informed
of every thing you do; therefore we earnestly desire you to communicate for the
future neither your Thoughts, your Orders, nor your Intentions to any body. As
also to believe, that I am, etc.

LETTER CXXXVIII. To both the Same.
GENTLEMEN,
I Take up my Pen to acquaint you with a remarkable Sea Fight performed by
Monsieur Bordeaux in the Port of Gatary in Spain, where he has had so complete
a Victory, that the Enemies have lost 1^ great Gallions, with 3 other Ships,
which were all burnt together, with their Seamen, and 3000 Natural Spaniards
that they were carrying to St. Sebastian, to compose an Army to obviate His
Majesty's Designs there. I think it would be proper that you endeavor to make
this good News known to the Enemy, which being joined to their Loss of 19
Ships, at the taking of the Port of Passage, they may see, thanks be to God,
that their Affairs are not in so prosperous a condition as they may imagine;
and which the late Victory of Monsieur Weimar may evince to 'em in a greater
measure. Furthermore, Gentlemen, the King having been informed, that the Enemy
has taken a great Number of your Forage Horses, has commanded me to signify to
you, that you do by no means suffer any hereafter to go a Foraging without
sufficient Convoy, for the remedying of such pernicious inconveniences for the
future, and which in a short time would utterly ruin your Cavalry. I conjure
you also in my own particular, and desire you to believe me, etc.

LETTER CXXXIX. To both the Same.
GENTLEMEN,
THese three Words are only to desire you to cause a general Discharge of your
Cannon to morrow Night, to learn the Enemies our Victory obtained by Monsieur
Bordeaux in the same manner as they acquainted us of a trifling Advantage over
the Hollanders by their Discharge at Cambray. I beg of you to entrench
yourselves so securely, that they may not be able to force any of your
Quarters, Assuring you that I am, etc.

P. S. Monsieur Noyers has sent you Money for the Works you have acquainted us
you design to cause to be made at Crevecoeur.



LETTER CXL. To Marshall Schomberg.
SIR,
Monsieur de la Jaille having represented to me, that there is no foundation
left for the Works of the Citadel of Monpellier, and that there are some begun,
that will never be able to stand, if they be not finished before Winter; I
write you this Letter to acquaint you, that in my opinion, the King would not
take it amiss, if you should convert, toward the finishing of these Works, the
12000 Livres were sent you last, as well to levy 10 Troops of Horse, as for
Ammunition Bread for the Soldiers that were then under your Command, in case
you should have been obliged for the Defense of the Province, to have assembled
and caused 'em to march; reserving the rest of the said Fund to be employed in
the Spring in new Levies, there having been no occasion for any such hitherto.

I desire you to send me word what Horse you shall be likely to have the next
year: Also to Answer my Letter copiously, which I sent you concerning
Rousillon, and to believe that I am, etc.

LETTER CXLI. To the Same.
SIR,
FOR fear you may not have received a Letter which I wrote you from St.
Quentin, whereby I desired a particular Map of your Frontiers, and the Country
of Rousillon, with all the Principal Places and Passes exactly drawn, I write
this to entreat you to get me such a Cast made, and to send it soon after with
an ample Memoire of the Facilities and Difficulties to be met with, by making
War in those Parts; and all this, that in case His Majesty should turn his
Designs on your side, we might be able to concert Measures before we undertake
any Action.

I desire you also to send me a very particular Plat, well designed, of the
Town and Castle of Perpignan; as also the means you judge requisite to take it,
in case His Majesty should have any Thoughts of that Nature.

How many Men would be necessary for such an Undertaking.

If the Town were taken, what Circumvallation were requisite to become Masters
of the Castle; and if that it would be easy to accomplish. Also what Parts of
it were proper to be Attached.

The best means to subsist an Army: Whence we must expect Provisions: Where
most proper to make Magazines: How to bring Subsistence into the Camp, and to
secure 'em, so that the Enemies might not cut 'em off, or molest their Convoys.

What Train of Artillery and Ammunition were necessary for such an Enterprise.
If Horses and Mules are to be found in the Country, sufficient for that purpose.

What Troops one might draw out of your Garrison, in case of need, to relieve
or strengthen the King's Army.

In short, you would abundantly oblige me, to send me your thoughts, not only
upon besieging Perpignan, but also of any other Undertaking upon the Frontiers
of Languedoc, about all which you may confer with Monsieur d' Argencour; and
send me your speedy Result. In expectation of your Answer, I Will conclude my
Letter, assuring you that I am, and will be always, etc.

LETTER CXLII. To the Same.
SIR,
THere having been some Broils lately between Monsieur Valleras a Marine
Captain, and some Gentlemen his Neighbors, and for fear they might have ill
effects, I thought fitting to desire you to set a Guard upon 'em; and in the
mean time, to endeavor by your Authority, to 'em good Friends. I don't mention
any Punishment, that one of your Guards deserves, who instead of accomodating
this Quarrel, has offered himself, and was employed to carry a Challenge to the
said Sieur Valleras; I say nothing of this, because I am well assured, that if
his Action has come to your knowledge, he has received his Deserts. I shall
only remember you how very necessary it is, that you should make known your
Authority in such Cases. I give you my Sentiments hereupon the freer, because I
would be thought to have no common share in what relates to your good, and that
I am unquestionably, etc.

LETTER CXLIII. To Cardinal de la Valette.
SIR,
I Shall Answer Two of your Letters at once, assuring you that such Care is
taken of the Troops in Italy, that by the Grace of God, no necessary
Subsistence shall be wanting: Monsieur d' Argencon has already given Orders at
Lions for the 160000 Livres which you imagined would not be so soon remitted.

The necessary Subsistence for the Garrisons of Cazal and Pignerol, for the
Months of January, February and March, is already dispatched, to the full
satisfaction of both Monsieur Emery and Monsieur Argencon.

All requisite Orders are given for your Ammunitions of War, which you shall
have speedily to your content.

The Troops which you desire, by a Letter to Monsieur Noyers, may not be
disbanded, shall be continued.

Furthermore, they shall not be sent you next Spring till your own time, though
all that have come hither from Italy, have advised us we could not send 'em too
soon, the Winter being once over; notwithstanding we shall comply with your
desires.

Monsieur Turenne has already received his Orders to join you in Italy: We
shall take care to augment his Troops before he goes, that he may be in
condition to be more serviceable

I am going to Paris, where I shall take care to refund your Expenses, and
enable you to proceed.

I am very glad to hear you have strongly fortified several Places; whatever be
further necessary to support you in it, shall neither be complained of, or
denied you.

I am also very glad you have caused the Melting at Cazal to continue.

As to the Duchess, I believe I shall be well advised not to meddle any more
in her Affairs, being obliged in regard to myself and her, by the Letter I sent
her by the Sieur d' Estrade, to keep to that Resolution, providing she will be
pleased to slight that Counsel, that mere natural instinct might inform her as
to the business she has upon her hands. I pray God open her Eyes and give her a
prospect of the danger she is in.

The Prince will be to Morrow at Paris, where I expect, with impatience, to
undeceive him in the Opinion he might have, that yours and M. de la Valette's
Affairs are the same. I Will discourse him as I see convenient, and make him
sensible, that your concerns and mine are inseparable, and that I would not do
any thing for myself, that I would not undertake for you always, and as often
as your interest should require.

LETTER CXLIV. To Marshall Schomberg.
SIR,
I Have seen your Letter, which is very easy to answer. There Is a great deal
of difference between Surprising a Place, and Besieging it. If Aupaux were a
Pass of great importance, and from which we might expect great advantages, the
best way were to besiege it; but, on the contrary, being only a useless Castle,
founded upon a Rock, which opens no entrance into the Country, as perhaps it
might be worth while to surprise it; so a Fortnight's Siege, would not be a
little prejudicial, by reason it would not only alarm the Enemies, but spend a
great deal of time, that might be otherwise better employed, as about those
Designs we projected before you went from hence.

I am very glad to hear you assure me, that every thing relating to Provisions
and Artillery, shall be ready by the Fifteenth of April: So I am likewise, that
you prepare your Men with great and vigorous Resolutions, and promise to see
'em executed. I conjure you this with a great deal of earnestness, and desire
you to believe that I am, etc.

LETTER CXLV. To the Cardinal de la Valette.
My LORD,
I Can never often enough express my concern for the present Trouble you are
in, as well on account of the ill Consequences may happen from it, as out of a
pure sense of your Misfortunes; earnestly assuring you, that there is nothing
in the World can prevent my having a true and sincere Compunction.

The Negligence of those with whom the Duchess had entrusted her Town, is not
only to be lamented, but likewise not be endured: I Will assure you, the late
Action at Chivas has made me pity that unfortunate Princess more than it is in
my power to express. But, nevertheless, at present, we must rather apply
Remedies than reap up inconsolable Misfortunes.

All imaginable diligence has been used to expedite your March; we have sent
backwards and forwards on all sides: But, as M. Hebron said, Men, not being
Crows, it is impossible to make 'em fly. M. Emery is gone again to Lions to
hasten every thing.

I don't know what M. Argencon meant by sending you word, that your Army was
reduced to 18 Regiments: I am sure there has been no change since the first
Project, which I here send you. We have had several times a mind to augment it,
but it was altogether impossible.

When we added the Regiment designed for Dauphine, under his Royal-Highness's
Name, it was all over and above the Complement, without taking any out. In a
word, I protest to you, before God, that there is not one thing that were
practicable, but would be done for the Dutchess's sake, whose welfare is as
dear to the King as she could any ways wish it.

For the better preservation of her Dominions, it is absolutely necessary for
the future, that she resolve to winter a Body of Men in her Country sufficient
for her defense; for otherwise the Enemies will be continually surprising her
before it is possible for any Troops to come from France.

I will not tarry any longer upon this Discourse, which, how profitable soever for
the future, is fruitless for the present; and which will but put you in mind,
that the Duchess might have taken such Measures as her Brothers should not
have reason to promise themselves the doing all the mischief they can desire.
You are so judicious that you will lose no Opportunity to open her Eyes to her
own good, when occasion requires. Wherefore, without saying more, I shall only
assure you of the sincere and inviolable Friendship I shall always have for
you, and that I will endeavor to make it appear by several circumstances, that
M. de la Valette means more and more to crown his ill Conduct. I have
communicated to Sieur Talon a new Accident upon this Subject, which happened
through the Imprudence and Malice of a Lady. M. de Chavigny will write you more
at large. Such Designs I hope in God will be of no effect. I am and will be
always, etc.

LETTER CXLVI. To the Duchess of Savoy.
MADAM,
I Do not at all doubt but your Highness is extremely troubled at what passed
lately in Piemont: But, with submission, I do not think you have so great
reason to be concerned, because your Highness has so good a Brother, our King,
who is resolved to employ all his Force to protect and assist you, and to
prevent your Brethren from accomplishing their ill designs. M. de Chavigny,
whom the King sends you on this account, can acquaint your Highness with the
extraordinary Efforts are preparing in France for that purpose, as also with
the Troops that are sending to Piemont for its defense, and how largely I have
contributed toward these Resolutions. I humbly desire your Highness to put an
entire confidence in him, as in a Person of the choicest merit; and to believe
I would omit nothing, to my power, to assure your Highness how much I am,
Madam, your Highness's most humble and most obedient Servant, Richelien.

LETTER CXLVII. To the Cardinal de la Valette.
My LORD,
THese few Words are not to acquaint you with my Concern for the Misfortunes in
Piemont, because I am assured you are thoroughly sensible of that already: But
to inform you, that, providing the Duchess is willing to be assisted, there is
nothing, that is in the King's power, but he will do, to oppose the unjust
Oppression of the Spaniards and her own Subjects. All depends only upon a
reasonable time to relieve her.

I send you M. Chavigny, in Quality of Ambassador Extraordinary to the
Duchess, to assure her of his Majesty's utmost Protection: As also, that M.
Longueville is coming to her relief with a new Army. I suppose you have not
omitted to provide carefully for Carmagnolle, and to advise her Highness to
secure the principal Places of her Dominions.

Coni and Revel, together with Pignerol, are sufficient to preserve the Head of
the Valleys. You know, moreover, of how great importance are Nice and Mommelian.

We will dispatch, to Morrow, a Courrier to Monsieur the Count d'Alez, that,
according to your desires, he have 1000 Foot ready to put into Nice and Villa
Franca, when ever the Duchess shall command 'em, providing he have Authority
left to supply the French Garrison in their room.

If the Inhabitants of Turin show but the least dubious Affection, you must not
think of disarming 'em.

We are making all imaginable expedition to send an Army into Piemont. In God's
Name, Sir, take care of yourself; for I can assure you, if there were no other
consideration, than your safety, I would do whatever was in my power to rid you
honorably out of this Affair; always desiring your Friendship, and that you
would admit me, etc.

LETTER CXLVIII. To Monsieur Emery.
Monsieur Emery,
I Have seen all your Dispatches, on account of the Affairs of Italy, since
your arrival in Dauphine. I acknowledge your Care, Diligence, and Affection,
cannot be greater for the King's Service; and, I Will assure you, it is not in
his Majesty's Power to do more for Relief of the Duchess, being resolved, over
and above the Army of the Cardinal de la Valette, to send M. Longueville, for
the greater Security of her Dominions, and to ^protect her against the utmost
Efforts of her Enemies.

I am surpised at the Spaniards Resolutions to besiege Turin, and of their
having so great an Army, as you advise me; but, if they that have the Place
entrusted to 'em do but their Duty, I hope they will receive a Baffle. M.
Longueville's Army goes hence Wednesday, and will be at Lions before the
General Rendezvous.

You must acquaint the Duchess with the great Succors are sending to her.

M. Longueville commands both Armies, whilst the Cardinal de la Valette is to
be in the Conclave, but afterward each has his several Post.

M. de la Mothe has Orders sent him, without expecting M. Longueville's Army,
to march immediately with 4000 Foot and 1000 Horse, to secure the Pass of
Escluse, and when Longueville is arrived, you are to attempt the Relief of the
Duchess with French-Bravery.

You must give out speedy Orders for Magazines in Savoy, for the subsistence of
M. Longueville's Troops.

It Is absolutely necessary to possess yourselves of Carmagnolle, Villeneus and
Cahours, and, if you can, of Revel and Coni; all which it is not believed the
Duchess will be apt to refuse, seeing that without 'em you cannot secure the
Country, but with great difficulty.

It Is thought very requisite to store Cazal well with Money. But as to the 2000
Men, proposed to be sent thither, it is thought more necessary to increase the
Army that is to relieve the Duchess, and to seize upon Carmagnolle, Villeneuf,
and Ast, and other places, that may make the Communication entire. For this
purpose Carmagnolle must be well furnished with all sorts of Ammunitions, at
the same time that you put Men into it.

As for Father Monot, the Duchess must be very ill advised if she does not
send him to France.

If the Duchess have not ordered, by the Marquess de Ville, that the French be
forthwith admitted into the above-named places, you must speedily advise the
Cardinal de la Valette, that her Duchy will be lost without it, that she may
timely repair her error, and put 'em into your hands, and which I have hopes
she will be the more willing to consent to, in that the places are not much to
be suspected, and that she will sooner choose to entrust us with 'em, for their
security, than to hazard their being taken by the Spaniards.

Monsieur de Chavigny, being upon the place, I am assured you will together
omit nothing that may advance this important Affair.

The Sieur Noyers will answer Demands about Money, and the Sieur de la Barde
your Desires concerning Letters.

LETTER CXLIX. An Answer to the Ambassador of Savoy 's Memoir.
I Have seen the Embassadour's Memoir, which contains all that can or ought to
be done, as well for relief of Turin, as for the safety of Piemont in general.

There remains only, that the Contents be put into speedy execution.

I have sent a Copy of it to Messieurs Chavigny and Emery, and have acquainted
them, that the Count of St. Maurice is to send another Memoir to her Highness's
Ministers, and to herself, if it can be thought to pass secure.

The principal Point is to provide betimes for the security of those Places
that are pitched upon, fearing that the French may not be admitted till they
can keep 'em no longer themselves, and consequently then not be able to do 'em
any Service; when, on the contrary, if they be diligently taken care of, as is
judiciously observed in the Memoir I have seen, I verily believe we might
easily relieve Turin, or at least secure Piemont, and take it again afterward.

It remains therefore, that the Ambassador take care to influence those that
Treat for Her Highness at Pignerol, omit nothing to put the said Council in
Execution, as his Majesty's Ministers will do the like.

LETTER CL. To Monsieur Chavigny.
SIR,
WE have received a Memoir, drawn by the Count de Saint Maurice, which is very
good. The Contents are chiefly to provide plentifully, and to lose no time.

I am assured you will do for your part whatever is in your Power, and that the
Dutchess's Ministers abroad will not be asleep at this Juncture.

Furthermore, I earnestly entreat you to seek all means, if the Circumvallation
of Turin be not yet made, to furnish 'em with more Powder. Perhaps the Count de
Guiche, with her Highness's Cavalry, and those he shall have from France, both
which I know will amount to above 2000 Horse, may effect it by this
Contrivance. This Valet de Chamber of the Dutchess's assures me, that he can
guide 'em in unknown ways, which may mightily facilitate such an Attempt.

I protest to you, the Affairs in Piemont almost kill me.

Monsieur Longueville goes hence to morrow Post. Monsieur de la Motte is
commanded to march with all the have imaginable with 4000 Foot and 1500 Horse.

Monsieur Emery is provided of the Money he defired, particularly upon his last
Terms.

At the same time that the Troops designed for Italy are marching, do you and
Monsieur Emery presently go upon raising more Recruits that may be ready, the
latest at the end of the Summer. Monsieur Emery is well acquainted how this has
been used to have been done.

Pray take extraordinary Care of the Ambassador of Savoy's Memoir, who has also
promised to send one to the Dutchess's Ministers at Pignerol. You must also be
wary not to give 'em Suspicion, that we secure their Towns with any other End
but their Dutchess's Service. I suppose they will easily be satisfied, that if
we have 'em not, they must of necessity fall into the Hands of the Spaniards.

LETTER CLI. To the Same.
SIR,
I Have writ you cursorily by Gordon your Commissary. There Is nothing left to
do, but to tell you, that I think it would be very proper to get the Nuncio out
of Turin, and to encourage the Count Philippi, that he may have no occasion to
incline the Duchess to a dishonorable Treaty with her Brothers, which would
certainly be both Hers and His Ruin. I conjure you to do whatever is in your
Power, to get more Powder into the City. La Vallee says he can be a safe Guide.

LETTER CLII. To the Cardinal de la Valette.
My LORD,
THis little is only to assure you, That we do whatever is in our Power to
second your Generosity, and relieve Her Highness, which I hope will not be long
before it will be accomplished, as the Marquess of St. Chaumont will acquaint
you further. His Majesty has already dispatched away Monsieur Longueville, who
commands the Army in Italy, over and above yours, which is also forwarded with
all imaginable Diligence. If I were capable of serving Her Highness in Person,
I Will assure you I would quickly be with you to the purpose. I am, and will be,
always, my Lord, your most Humble, and most Affectionate Servant.

Richelieu.

LETTER CLIII. To Marshall Schomberg.
SIR,
I Have received the Dispatch you sent me, to prevent the ill Offices might be
done you by the Prince; and I can assure you, he has as yet made no Complaint
against you. But to tell you the truth, having communicated your Letters to the
King, his Majesty was of Opinion, that the Caution you made use of toward the
Prince, sending him word you should not be ready to enter the Enemies Country
till the 15th of June, might have been of very ill Consequence; for by these
means you might have retarded the Performance of the whole Army, fooled away
this Campaign, and utterly ruined his Majesty's Affairs. I don't know who was
the Author of this Counsel; but sure I am, it was very ill advised.

As to the Change of Rendezvous which you desire, Monsieur Noyers has writ you
what is fit to be granted. But although you had no Money at the beginning of your
Campaign, yet that would not interupt the King's Service, it being unadvisable
to pay Soldiers just at their coming out of their Winter Quarters, when they
are supposed to be full of Money. His Majesty does not intend to pay his Armies
on this side before the first of July, although it is above twenty days, that
under Monsieur Melleraye has been in the Enemies Country. Also the Prince is
ordered not to pay his but after the same manner.

On God's Name, Sir, make no Difficulties of this kind. But be sure to
remember, that the end of the Campaign the King will be obliged to distinguish
between those that have done well, and those that have served with small Zeal
and Affection. I know very well you will be of that Number, who have signalized
both their Courage and Fidelity. So you may assure yourself, that I will do
whatever is in my Power to improve your Services, and to convince you that I
am, etc.

LETTER CLIV. To Marshall Chatillon.
SIR,
WIthout doubt you have heard of the Misfortune happened to Monsieur Feuquieres,
through the Cowardice of his Cavalry, and the rash Resolution of Picolomini, who
attached him with not above 12000 Men Horse and Foot: But nevertheless,
Monsieur Feuquieres gained a great deal of Honor in his own Person. We have
not lost above 3000 Men. The Enemies had almost all their Infantry cut off, and
by the last Courrier we understand positively that they had 5000 killed upon
the place.

The Duke of Lorraine, who was not in the Fight, has since joined Picolomini's
Horse with 3 or 4000 Foot of Luxemberg, wherewith they are marched straight to
Verdan.

The King desires that from Mezieres, where he supposes this Express will meet
you, you would immediately march toward the Enemy, to prevent their taking any
place by Surprise. I am well assured you will lose no time, diligence being so
necessary upon these occasions, and whence principally depends the fafety of
Towns, where they have been wrought into a Pannick Fear. You may increase your
Army with Swiss, as you march; and moreover, the scattered Troops of Monsieur
Feuquieres may join you when you have an Opportunity to send securely for 'em.

I hope you will be so happy as to repair the Honor we have lost, and that
your Horse will so far scorn the baseness of those of Monsieur Feuquieres, that
they may restore the Name of the French Cavalry to their former Grandeur. In
God's Name make all possible have, and provide your self of whatever shall be
requisite in the place where you go. In the Interim, I desire you to believe
that I am, etc.

P.S. Thanks be to God, the Siege of Hesdin goes on every day better and
better. The Miners are working under the two Bastions we are going to Attack.



LETTER CLV. To the Same.
SIR,
THe King having sent the Sieur Cornillon to Monsieur Picolomini, about what he
will acquaint you with, I could not suffer him to depart without assuring you
of the continuance of my Affection, and to tell you that I do not question but
you will revenge the Loss at Thionville, when Occasion presents. I expect this
from your Name, your Courage and Zeal for the King's Service, and you shall
command in return whatever you can desire, from one who is sincerely and
unfeignedly, etc.

LETTER CLVI. To Monsieur Choisy.
SIR,
THis Leter comes to tell you, That a Frenchman came lately from Flanders, on
purpose to acquaint the King, that M.D.L.V. is gone under a Disguise to
Brussels, where after having seen the Cardinal Infant, they had sent him into
Luxemburg, and, as it is believed, to Thionville. I don't know, whether this
News be true or not, but for some time we have been advised he designed such a
Journey. I would have you acquaint Monsieur Roquepine with it, and consult all
together; that is, the Sieur Campelz, Monsieur Grancay, Yourself, and Monsieur
Roquepine, what is fit to be done next, not only to secure Metz, but also to
take away all manner of suspicion. The King has been informed, that there are
several old Sergeants and Corporals, well-wishers to M. D. L. V. in the
Companies, whither he has lately sent Captains. If this be so, the Sieurs
Roquepine and Campelz, in whom his Majesty puts an entire Confidence, must
needs know it, and therefore it will be advisable to pack 'em off to a
convenient distance.

This is very certain, that M.D.L.V. has profer'd the King of Spain, to
undertake Metz, and put the place speedily into his hands, but to know if he be
gone to Brussels, as we are informed, is not a thing of the same likelihood. I
hope you will assure Messieurs Roquepine and Campelz of my Affection; and by
communicating to 'em my Letter, testify the entire Confidence we repose in
'em. The Trust the King puts in your Prudence, inclines me to believe you will
omit nothing that may be for his Majesty's Service; and furthermore, gives me
occasion to assure you how much I am, etc.

LETTER CLVII. To Marshall Chatillon.
SIR,
THis Billet is to acquaint Monsieur the Marshall Chatillon, that Picolomini
lay the day before yesterday, the 29th of this Month, at Maubeuge, and that it
is believed instead of going to Givay, he will march to Namure. It belongs to
my said Sieur the Marshall, to determine if he will make the two Intrenchments
he advised me of, on the two sides of the Mountain, where he reckons to pitch
his Field of Battle. To morrow shall be sent him 6 Companies of Swiss, who come
from Mezieres, Charleville, and Maubeuge, together with the Regiment of
Aubeterre, which has near 1000 Men. I have sent in quest of the Miners. The
good Event consists in all imaginable Diligence wherein I am well assured,
nothing will be omitted on the part of the Marshall Chatillon, to whom I am,
etc.

LETTER CLVIII. To the Same.
SIR,
I Send Monsieur the Marshall, the Miners, which he desired from Sedan, and I
entreat him to keep 'em close to their Work.

To day he will receive the Swiss, with the Regiment of Aubeterre. I conjure him
to cause the two small Intrenchments which he writ me about, and which secure
his Quarters, to be opened to morrow morning.

I don't believe Picolomini will venture hither, but however we must be
prepared as if he would. For this purpose I beg of Monsieur the Marshall, to
remember that he came upon Monsieur Feuquieres through Woods to Thionville; and
that it seems to me, he may do the like here by the Quarters of Monsieur de
Prastani, or behind yours. It might therefore be not amiss to change the
Quarters of the Cavalry, and place 'em where they may more conveniently join
yours: Upon the right Management of which, the good success of this Affair is
altogether grounded. But above all, it seems necessary to send Scouts
frequently out, and so far that they may timely learn the intended March of our
Enemies. I conjure my dear Marshall to this, and to be assured that I am, etc.

LETTER CLIX. To the Same.
SIR,
JUst now arrived a Gentleman from the Lord Steward, to bring His Majesty News
of a Battle lately fought with the Enemies near Manquerque the 3d of this
Month, where His Majesty's Arms have obtained a Noble Victory.

He reports that Monsieur Melleraye, with the Vanguard of his Army, met and
fought the Enemies, commanded by the Marquess de los Fuentes so prosperously,
that without having lost above 100 or 120 Men, he became Master of the Field,
took 4 Pieces of Cannon, and near 300 Prisoners, amongst whom are many Spanish
Officers; and all these, besides 1500 left dead upon the spot: And moreover,
that if our Soldiers had not been too hot upon their Plunder, the rest of the
Spanish Army might have partaken of the like Fate.

In this Fight we have had about 30 Officers killed and wounded, amongst which
poor Montclair had his Left Arm shot off by his Shoulder. This Battle lasted
from Nine in the Morning till Seven at Night, wherein Messieurs de Gassion and
de la Ferte-Senneterre, who commanded the Vanguard, performed Wonders. All the
Volunteers also have signalized themselves bravely upon this occasion.

LETTER CLX. To Marshall Schomberg.
SIR,
I Have no other Answer to make you about your Complaints against the Prince,
but that I verily believe you have no reason to fear. Nevertheless, as I am
well assured you will omit nothing that is for the King's Service, so it will
be but Prudence to give him all the Respect that is due to his Quality. The
King loves him extremely for his Loyalty, and I honor him particularly for the
same Reason. These Considerations, accompanied with those of his Birth, may
incline you to bear him no further ill Will. I conjure you to it with all
imaginable Earnestness, and desire you to believe that I will be always, etc.

LETTER CLXI. To the Same.
SIR,
I Don't pretend to hasten you to the Relief of Salces, because I know your
Zeal for the King's Service, and the particular Interest you have in the
preservation of that Place, will prove sufficient Motives to incline you not to
lose a Minute's time: But my Business, at present, only is, to remember you how
much it will be for the Reputation of his Majejesty's Arms, and the good of his
Affairs in general. I hope you will not be less fortunate than you were at
Leucatte, and that, if the Spaniards have but the courage to stay for the
King's Army, you will make known to 'em how much you are able to do: I wish it
with all my heart, and furthermore desire you to pay the Prince all that
deference is due to his Quality and Charge, to the end that his Majesty's
Affairs may proceed vigorously, and I have a fairer occasion to recommend your
deserts, who am unfeignedly, etc.

P. S. I beg of you to pass by some rash Humors in the Prince, and which are
only the Effects of his Natural Constitution and his Extraordinary Zeal for the
King's Service. You know what I have always been to you, and what I still am.
In God's Name, Do whatever you can to shame the Spaniards in their Undertaking,
and assure yourself I will never suffer your Actions to be obscured, but take
all imaginable Care to set 'em in their due light.



LETTER CLXII. To Marshall de Chatillon.
SIR,
THese few Lines are to acquaint you, That the King would be glad, if, before
you put your Army into Garrison, you would demolish the small Castles about
Metz, which are in your Instructions with Sancy. Nevertheless he refers it to
your Judgment, assuring himself, that as you would not be wanting in what was
for his Advantage, so you would not undertake what would be any ways
prejudicial. I pray God assist you in your Endeavors; and I conjure you to
believe that I am, etc.

LETTER CLXIII. To the Same.
SIR,
I Think fitting to add nothing to what you are ordered by Monsieur Noyers, not
doubting but you will do whatever is in your power to comply with the King's
Pleasure. I shall only acquaint you, I should be very glad you would effect
something before you put your Men into Garrison; and this, as well for the
King's Satisfaction, as to advance your own Interest in his Favor. You may be
always assured of my constant Esteem, and that I am, etc.

LETTER CLXIV. To Marshall Schomberg.
SIR,
MOnsieur Tagenac returning to you, I thought fit to send you this Letter, to
testify anew the Satisfaction I have in his Business, and of the Assurances
he has given me on your part, of your Resolutions to relieve Salces, if
practicable. The Confidence I repose in your Courage, your Sincerity, and your
Carefulness, makes me look upon this Design as good as finished, and to be
almost assured, that God will bless the Justice of the King's Arms under your
Conduct. I pray for this with all my Heart; and desire you, Sir, to believe,
that I will recommend your Services upon this occasion in such manner, that you
shall have no reason to believe any body values and esteems you more, than he
that is truly and sincerely, etc.

Instructions sent by the Lord Cardinal Richelieu to Monsieur Chavigny, how to
proceed in acquainting the Bishops at Paris with the King's Declaration,
forbidding them to confer with the Nuncio Scoti.
SIR,
I Here send you the Order that Monsieur de la Barde and his Colleague are to
show to the Bishops now at Paris; and if there be any amongst 'em that desire a
Copy, as I do not doubt some will for their Satisfaction, as others to
communicate to the said Nuncio, this is what I think proper to be made public.

I should be very glad if you would show it first to the Chancellor and the
Messieurs Bullion and Bowthillien, to the end, that if they think any thing
necessary to be added or altered, it may be done before it be communicated to
the said Prelates.

You would oblige me also show it to the Proctor-General, acquainting him, that
I were willing he should see it before it were public.

I suppose by this Order we shall sufficiently acquaint the World with what has
passed at Rome and at Paris relating to the Nuncio, and give occasion for those
that have a mind to know the Truth, to enquire further into the matter, and I
hope, prevent such as are willing to conceive an ill Opinion of the King's
Proceedings.

You must also Order the Captain of the Watch to be more Diligent than usual at
the Nuncio's Door, arresting all such as shall come out thence at an
unseasonable Hour; that is, after the Night once shut in.

If by chance they should meet with some that you know of, we should be glad to
hear it the next Morning, after they had lodged all Night in the Watch-house.

If there be an Opportunity of taking any of these, it must not be performed
near the Nuncio's Lodging, but in the turning of Harp or James-Street, for fear
it come to his Excellency's Ears.

LETTER CLXV. To Cardinal Bagni, concerning the Affairs of Monsieur Scoti.
My LORD,
THE Friendship I have always had for you, has made me hitherto decline what I
thought might trouble you; But at length give me leave to acquaint you with the
unadvised and rash Behavior of Monsieur Scoti, some Months ago perpetrated,
and since condemned by all the World. Nay, at present his Proceedings are so
very extravagant, that I shall forbear Particulars for the same Reason. I am
willing to believe, however, that this good Prelate has a great deal of Zeal;
but, certainly, he is so unacquainted with France, and deviates so much from
the good Instructions you have given him, that it will be rather prejudicial
than advantageous to him in the end, if he does not moderate his Heat. I refer
you for a further Account to the Relation I have ordered Monsieur Chavigny to
send you.

Sir, I take no notice of what he may say in my Prejudice, because, on the one
side, I am willing to forgive all upon God's Account; and on the other, I think
my self sufficiently known in the World, not to fear any Aspersion, that I
would wrong, through a private Interest, the very meanest of Persons. I wish to
God your Eminence may be capable of working upon this turbulent Spirit, that he
may deserve a better Character than he has already with most People, and that
you would be pleased to make use of all occasions to experience the sincere
Professions that I am, and will be always, my Lord, etc.

LETTER CLXVI. To Marshall Schomberg.
SIR,
I Send from Mance directly to your Quarters, to know what is to be farther
done at Leucatte. It seems strange to me, that although there have been 80000
Livres remitted thither for the Works, yet there is nothing much advanced,
although the Place be so very important both to the King and the Country, as
the first Town that it is likely the Enemies will pitch upon. I promise my self
however, that you will speedily contribute for the future what is in your
Power, that it may be forthwith out of Danger; which prevents my saying more at
present, but that I am, etc.

LETTER CLXVII. To the Mareschals Chaunes and Chatillon.
GENTLEMEN,
MOnsieur Noyers having acquainted you by the Return of Sieur Cornillon with
the King's Pleasure as to the Propositions you made him, my Business is only to
inform you of his Majesty's great Satisfaction for your being left in so good
Condition, and to assure you afresh of the continuance of my Friendship and
Service; and that I would be glad at any time to give you all imaginable
Demonstrations, by making his Majesty sensible of your great Worth and Courage.
In the mean time be assured that I am, etc.

A BILLET. To both the Same.
THis Billet is to desire Messieurs, the Mareschals Chaunes and Chatillon, not
to fail to march to Morrow, which is the Third, and that because I have just
received News of M. Mellerave, that he will be to Morrow at Hanap, where he
will expect the said Mareschals the same day.

The Enemies believe that Monsieur Melleraye is to besiege Avesnes, where they
have lately augmented their Garrison with 3000 Men. And he will do what he can
to confirm 'em in that belief: But as that cannot continue long, it will be
your Business, Gentlemen, to make haste that they may surprise 'em in the
places you know of.

Monsieur Melleraye sends me word, that it will be necessary to take three
Castles in the way, viz. Olhein, Contay, and Brouay. He believes they cannot
resist the whole Army long.

He thinks it necessary to demolish Brouay, and keep the other two to favor
the Campagn.

I earnestly request Messieurs the Mareschals to redouble their endeavors,
that the King's designs may succeed, and to believe that I will be always as
serviceable to them as they could wish.

LETTER CLXIX. To both the Same.
GENTLEMEN,
THe knowledge you have more than me, That, if possible, it were good to have
two Strings to one's Bow, encourages me to think you will not take it amiss, if
I propose, that in your Journey to Lillers, if you could surprise St. Venant,
which is but two Leagues off, it would much facilitate your besieging Air,
providing your first design should happen to fail.

As I desire you to consider of this, so I would not have you undertake it by
any means, if you think it improper.

Monsieur Paluau will acquaint you with Monsieur Melleraye's Sentiments
hereupon. In the mean time be assured, that I am unfeignedly, etc.

A MEMOIR. To the Mareschals Chaunes and Chatillon.
GENTLEMEN,
THe Generals are desired to have their Convoys very strong, as well of Horse
as Foot.

It Is thought that eight days hence there may be ready at Dourlans 700000
Rations of Bread or Biscuit, which are after the rate of 30000 Rations per day
for 23 days.

To convey these to the Camp, it is supposed there will come 14000 Horse, which
may serve for 350 Carts, which will bring 280000 Rations, after the rate of 800
Rations every Cart.

Also there must be two Turns made successively, and this over and above the
Carts that are to be found in the Country, which must be also taken great care
of.

Moreover, the Generals must cause so many Equipages in every Regiment to be
laid down, that their Horses may be spared to carry Bread to the Camp, and this
paying 'em for it.

Monsieur Cornillon informs us one thing of great importance, which is, That
the Peasants will scarce arrive time enough to make the Circumvallation. We
shall not be wanting in the mean time to hasten 'em, if the Generals do but
acquaint us they insist upon their coming.

Nevertheless, they are desired to cause the Soldiers to work with great
diligence, paying 'em well for it. This will be a good subsistence, till their
Pay comes, which we design to dispatch from Paris in two days.

The Generals are also desired to set a Price on Corn that is brought to their
Camp, and to make a Magazine of it, and get it ground by the Mills in their
Quarters, and afterward to have Bread made.

Monsieur de Saint Preuil advises us, that there are certain small Castles
between Dourlans and Arras, which may be apt to disturb the Convoys. But
Monsieur Melleraye has promised to take care to get 'em into our Hands.

Monsieur Noyers will be the 18th of June at Amiens, to expedite Matters
further, and the King the 20th at the same place.

LETTER CLXXI. To both the Same.
GENTLEMEN,
I Can never enough express my joy for the happy beginning of your Siege, and
which I hope will have the like prosperous end. For this purpose I think it
absolutely necessary that you push on the Circumvallation with all imaginable
diligence, and prevent, by your vigilance and carefulness, the Enemies putting
any new Succors into the place. By these means I don't question but you will
accomplish your undertaking. I wish it with a great deal of earnestness, as
well for the King's Honor as your Reputation: To both which I am a hearty
Well-wisher, being cordially, etc.

LETTER CLXXII. To both the Same.
GENTLEMEN,
THE King arriving here Yesterday, was extremely pleased, when I acquainted him
that you work on the Circumvallation with a great deal of Diligence. His
Majesty says likewise, that on the first 15 days chiefly depends the Success of
such an Enterprise; whereupon he has commanded me to conjure you from him to
redouble your Care, and to push on the Circumvallation with so great Vigor,
that the Enemies may have no Hopes of relieving the Place but by Force.

We shall take care you want no Provisions, and over and above what we now send
you, at the end of this Month you shall have Biscuit Bread and Meal sent you
for the next. And for this purpose you must provide a place to secure it,
whether it be by raising a Magazin, or placing it in Monsieur Melleraye's
Quarters, as we have writ more particularly to the Bishop of Auxerre.

The Pay is certainly by this time gone from Paris, wherewith you may acquaint
your Army; and that, by God's Assistance, you shall want for nothing that is in
the Power of, etc.

LETTER CLXXIII. To the Mareschals Chaunes and Chatillon.
GENTLEMEN,
THese few Words are only to advise you, to order your Convoys for the future,
so strong, that they may have no occasion to be afraid of the Enemy. It Is
thereupon absolutely the good Fortune of your Siege depends; wherefore I am
assured of your utmost Diligence. I desire you to be mindful of this Advice,
since the Enemies have no other way to frustrate your Designs. I beg of you to
make me easy in this Particular as soon as possible, and to be assured that I
am, and will be always, etc.

A MEMOIR. To both the Same.
GENTLEMEN,
IF the Generals, instead of the beforementioned Cavalry, will send 500 good
Horse to Monsieur de Saint-Preuil, we will put the Regiment of Plessis-Praslin
into Luchen, together with Molondin's Swiss Company of 120 Men. With these
Monsieur de Saint-Preuil may depart from Dourlans to Guard the Convoy to
Luchen, providing that at a certain time the Generals will send a greater
Convoy to see 'em further to the Camp.

Monsieur Nantueil is at Ancre with 250 Horse, to obviate the Motions of the
Garrison of Bapaume. The same Day the Convoy goes from Dourlans, he shall march
from Ancre, to lie upon the Road with 200 Horse, and to come to Leuchen in case
they should meet with the Enemy.

These Proposals are sent to Monsieur Saint-Preuil for his Opinion, until the
General shall send theirs.

LETTER CLXXV. To both the Same.
GENTLEMEN,
I Take my Pen to rejoice for the good Condition the Sieur de Choupes has
informed us he left your Works in; likewise for the Zeal and Affection which I
find you continue for the King's Service, and the good Effects we have reason
to promise ourselves from your Siege.

I have just now learnt, that the 200 Spaniards, which Monsieur Ranzau
surrounded, had submitted themselves; which I take to be a matter of no small
Consequence. I think you would do well to send 'em the first Convoy to
Dourlans, whence they may be brought to this City, where they shall be well
guarded. In the mean time, we may be informed of their Quality, and what
Exchange is proper to be made.

The Army's Pay is come hither, which waits only the Grand Convoy to depart. I
don't question but you will give all requisite Orders for its Security.

The King promises himself, that you will open your Trenches as soon as
possible, and that you will carry on your Attacks briskly.

I shall not fail to recommend your good Services to his Majesty, as often as
you shall give me occasion, assuring you that I am, etc.

P. S. I pray you to have particular care of the 200 Spanish Prisoners, and to
send 'em safe hither. There is great likelihood there may be some considerable
Officers amongst them under Disguise.



A BILLET. To both the Same, and Monsieur Melleraye.
SIR,
THis Billet comes to acquaint the Generals, that the King extremely wonders,
when he had made known to 'em several times, that the Grand Convoy was to be
the last of June at Dourlans, which consists of 40 Days Provision, Battering
Cannon, and other sorts of Ammunition, together with the entire Pay of both
Armies, that they should send to Dourlans but 1000 Horse and 600 Foot to guard
'em. I should think, if they had not some Divine Assurance of their being
secure, they must needs have been extremely unadvised to hazard to considerable
a Booty. For this Reason the King has stopped their going away till Tuesday, that
there may be sent 1000 Horse, with 1500 Foot more, to Dourlans; as also,
another Body to march before the said Convoy, till they are past the most
dangerous Places.

This Affair is of so great Consequence both to the Siege of A^ras, and the
rest of his Majesty's Designs, that there could not be too great Care taken
about it.

One Day's Delay of the Convoy at Dourlans were sufficient to acquaint the
Enemy, or at least to spoil some of the Provisions.

LETTER CLXXVII. To Marshall Chatillon.
SIR,
HAving understood that the Circumvallation of Arras was entirely perfected, I
could not help expressing my Satisfaction about it; and the rather, to see
Frenchmen accomplish that which the Hollanders could not do in so short a
time. I hope the Conclusion of your Siege will be as fortunate as the beginning
was prosperous; and which, that it may be, I Will assure you, neither my Prayers
nor Endeavors shall be wanting; as also to seek all occasions to testify how
much I am, etc.

LETTER CLXXVIII. To the Mareschals Chaunes and Chatillon.
GENTLEMEN,
A Man must be blind that is not sensible, that if the Enemies had had a mind
to attack the Circumvallation, they would not have done it before now; and that
at present, if they have any such Design, they must needs be guilty of an
unconceivable Extravagance, which is neither consistent with the Spaniards
Humor, nor the present Condition of the Low Countries, which would be entirely
ruined, if they should once lose a Field-battle.

This once granted, which is not only certain but evident, there is no body but
must conclude their Designs could not be any other than to ^ntercept the
Convoys. Also over and above this general Reason, if they lay in wait at
Beaufort, as was reported, it is plainly demonstrated.

Then the chief Business the Generals ought to have on their side, as we on
ours, is to send a great Convoy, by which means the Siege of Arras may be
continued without Interruption.

When it is ready to set out, the Generals ought to send a strong Body of Horse
to meet 'em within a League and half of the Place whence they come, that they
may have no Reason to apprehend any Danger in their Journey.

If the Enemies continue at Beaufort, the Generals will do well, if they can,
to cut off some of their Convoys.

I also conjure once more the Generals to remember, that if they don't secure
our Convoy, to which we can fit out but 1600 Horse, and 9000 Foot, in vain do
they labor at the Siege of Arras, which must be taken, whatever rate it be at.

LETTER CLXXIX. To all three the Same.
GENTLEMEN,
WEdnesday or Thursday Night Marshall Melleraye will come out of his Camp with
3500 Horse, and seem to go to Miraumont, but at the same time will march
directly toward Vaux in the Road to Peronne.

At this Juncture we'll dispatch away our Troops of Corbie for Miraumont, and
yet the whole Body shall go but to Ancre, while Parties only advance, to make
'em believe all will follow.

At the same time we'll dispatch a false Convoy from Dourlans, which shall go
as far as the Mountains. By these means the Enemy will have no regard but to
Dourlans and Corbie, and give us leisure to dispatch in the Night from Peronne
a small Convoy of 200 Carriages, which Monsieur de Melleraye is to meet near
Vaux.

LETTER CLXXX. To all three the Same.
GENTLEMEN,
WE have returned Choupes, to have by him your last Resolution about the
joining, and which shall be punctually performed, according to the Report he
makes.

For fear he should be taken, you would do well to send a Duplicate of what he
brings by two other different Dispatches.

The Enemies are at Pas.

You must also take care to provide for the Security of the Pass from Corbie to
Miraumont, as also from the Camp to the same place.

If the Troops of Leschelle are returned, being strengthened by Horse, we
believe ours may go securely to Miraumont.

As to the Convoy which is to march the Day after the joining, it is the
General's business to secure it by an opposite Campment to the Enemies, that
they may not be able to cut off the Pass between Miraumont and Ancre.

We'll reserve 2000 Foot to guard the said Convoy, together with 400 Horse; but
this would not suffice by any means, if we were not protected from the Enemies
Army by the Opposition of yours.

In order to the joining of Marshall Melleraye's Troops, the King thinks fit,
that instead of going to encamp, he advance half way to meet the Marshall
Chatill^n; and that being joined, they march immediately toward Buquoy, that
the Enemies may not leave Pas, without being liable to be engaged by our Army
in the Flank.

If the Enemies march off from Pas, the Generals must do the like, to obtain
the same Advantage.

After they are encamped, they must send Advice to Corbie for the Convoy to
march, which they must take care to secure by a considerable Party between
Ancre and Miraumont.

Our Troops will carry Provisions for Six Days.

All shall be punctually performed that is desired, and without Delay.

Of Five Field Mareschals that are in the Army, three must be left with the
Duke of Chaunes, of which Monsieur Guiche and Monsieur Gassion ought to be one.

LETTER CLXXXI. To all three the Same.
GENTLEMEN,
IF the Enemies are at Miraumont, as is reported, it will be impossible to join
at Corbie, and very hazardous at Peronne, because they will not be above two
Leagues off from Fremicourt.

In this case there is no other Remedy, but to make the best Shifts you can,
and to lengthen out your Provisions, living upon Barley, Rye, or some other
extraordinary way, so that you may make 'em last till the end of the Month.

We'll take care to send Corn to Hesdin and Doullens, that the Generals may
send for it as often as the Enemies Motions will give 'em opportunity.

It Is believed, that continuing the main Body of the Army at Corbie, the
Enemies will be so jealous of the Pass of Miraumont, that they will give the
Generals an Opportunity to send 1500 Horses to Doullens for 50 Carriages, which
shall be there ready for 'em; and that this Convoy may be secured, 3000 Horse
are proposed to be sent to meet 'em.

They may also send as many Carts as they please to Hesdin, where they shall be
furnished with Corn and Flower.

The Generals must be sure to lose no Opportunity to send to Doullens and
Hesdin for Provisions, because we cannot possibly move from Corbie without the
Enemies following us.

LETTER CLXXXII. To the Same.
GENTLEMEN,
THis Billet is to acquaint the Generals with my Concern, for fear the Convoy
they have lately received, may incline 'em to omit some Opportunities to fetch
the rest of the Provisions; but I hereby conjure 'em to slip none, nor to delay
to send for the rest of the Corn that waits for 'em.

Having been thus earnestly entreated, as they have been by frequent
Dispatches, to send for these Provisions, I don't doubt but they have done it,
and furnished them with sufficient Guard for their Security.

In the Name of God, Gentlemen, be obedient, as above advised. I conjure you to
it heartily, and will endeavor to acknowledge your Diligence. But if you
neglect it in the least, for my part you may relieve yourselves.

LETTER CLXXXIII. To the Mareschals Chaunes and Chatillon.
GENTLEMEN,
I Earnestly entreat Messieurs the Mareschals to consider, that the taking of
Arras does not depend chiefly upon frequent Provisions of Necessaries, but
rather in advancing the Attacks so vigorously, that the Enemies, seeing
themselves pressed, may be obliged to surrender before they come to an
Extremity.

I desire 'em to be sensible of the Importance of this Billet, and to give me a
speedy Account to Satisfaction.

LETTER CLXXXIV. To both the Same.
GENTLEMEN,
THE King has been extremely displeased to hear, by a Letter you sent to
Monsieur Hallier, that your Mine will not be ready to do any Execution before
the 15th of this Month. He has commanded me hereupon to conjure you from him,
to make use of all extraordinary Efforts to spring it before that time; which I
do with so much the more Zeal, as, over and above his Majesty's Service, I have
for your Reputation. If Money can be any forwardness, I Will assure you it shall
not be with held, but plentifully remitted to the Power of, etc.

LETTER CLXXXV. To the Marshall Chatillon.
SIR,
I Cannot express to you the King's Joy for your taking Arras, and my
particular Satisfaction for your behaving your self there so bravely. I must
own I have always expected this good Success, as well from the Blessing of God,
as the Care and Courage of those that served in it. I take a particular
Pleasure in assuring you, that none esteems you so much as I, and from whom you
may receive more sincere Effects of true Friendship, as being always, etc.

LETTER CLXXXVI. To the Mareschals Chaunes, Chatillon, and Melleraye.
GENTLEMEN,
THese few Words are only to acquaint you, That Monsieur Noyers will lie to
morrow Night at Dourlans, which he will leave Friday Morning at Four, being the
17th, with the Convoy sent him by Monsieur Hallier, which is to conduct him to
the Head of Canche, where I desire you not to fail to send 1000 Horse to see
him to the Camp.

He brings you the Remainder of the Pay, and what else is necessary for the
Works. You are too well acquainted with the Esteem and Value I have for him,
not to fail to send such Safeguard as I have desired. Omit it by no means, but
believe that I am, etc.

LETTER CLXXXVII. To Marshall Chatillon.
SIR,
YOU will be informed by Monsieur Noyers, that we are unmindful of nothing that
may render Arras able to resist a Siege, if the Enemies were inclined to
attempt it. It shall in a short time be provided of all kinds of Provisions.
Over and above Corn, we will store it with Peace, Beans, Rice, Butter, Cheese,
Salt-fish, Bacon, Oil and Candles. We will not also forget Drugs, Medicines,
and old Linen.

As to the Ammunitions of War, we will leave 200000 Weight of Powder, 8 great
Cannon, and 12 small, over and above those that were before in the Town.

For your part, it is your Business to hasten the Works of the Town, and to do
whatever is in your Power to maintain your Army in a good Condition.

Monsieur Noyers has writ largely about what relates to the Works to the Sieur
Arnold, who is upon the Place.

As to the Army, the King has commanded me to acquaint you, that for the
Preservation of it, you would do well to license no Officer to be absent, if he
be not sick or wounded. I conjure you to this Practice, as well for the King's
Advantage, as your own particular Interest, that you may not incur the
Character of being too Indulgent where a stricter Discipline is required.

His Majesty thinks proper that you demolish all the Lodgments through the
whole Extent of the Circumvallation, and which we made use of ourselves during
the Siege, that they may be of no use to the Enemy; but if that they should
think fit to besiege it in the latter Season, the bare Incommodity of bad
Weather, might be alone sufficient to ruin their Army. I beseech you to have a
particular Regard to what you are above desired, and to believe that I am, etc.

LETTER CLXXXVIII. To the Marshall Chatillon.
SIR,
THE Spaniards refusing to perfect the Treaty for Exchange of Prisoners, I
write you this Letter to desire you to cause a strict Search to be made
throughout the whole Army for the Prisoners that are in it, and to send 'em
safely to this City, where they shall be kept according to the King's Command.
I am assured you will make no Difficulty of this; wherefore I shall conclude with
fresh Protetestations, that I am, and will be always, etc.

P. S. You may satisfy all such as shall have these Prisoners, that I will be
responsable for their Ransom, and will actually pay 'em ass^on as they shall
come out of Prison. The Count de Fuensaldagne had a Meeting promised to treat
of Exchanges with the Count de Guiche; but before they met, the former sent a
Trumpet to acquaint the latter, that the Cardinal Infant had revoked his
Commission, in case he would not give his Word first to exchange Jean de Were
with the Marquess de Gesvres. To which he was answered, That Jean de Were was
already exchanged with Monsieur Horn, which was true; but nevertheless the
Negotiation broke off.



LETTER CLXXXIX. To Marshall Schomberg.
SIR,
MY Business is not to answer the Commendations you load me with on account of
the taking Arras, because it is to be ascribed only to the Blessing of God on
our Arms, the Justice of our Cause, and the Prudence and Courage of his
Majesty. But I will content myself to tell you, that I do not doubt but you are
sincere in your Joy upon this Account, being always assured of your
Steadfastness and Loyalty for the King's Service. To recompense which to my
Power, will always be the Endeavors of, etc.

LETTER CXC. To Marshall Chatillon.
SIR,
I Send you 100, or 120 Deserters, which have been stopped in this Town; and
amongst which there are a great many Officers. I desire you would try 'em by a
Council of War as soon as possible. Over and above that his Majesty's Interest
requires, he has expressly commanded me to acquaint you with his Pleasure on
this Account. I desire you to remember, that the Officers hitherto have escaped
unpunished; wherefore it would be well to let these serve for Examples. The
Belief that I have, that you will approve your Obedience to his Majesty's
Commands, concludes me, etc.

LETTER CXCI. To the Same.
SIR,
I Have been surpised to hear, that you have not yet retrenched your Bread,
but distributed every Day above 30000 Rations; which occasions me to represent
to you, that if you go on after that rate, you will introduce great Disorders
into his Majesty's Army, and reduce the War to unsurmountable Difficulties. I
am certain you will be ready to confess, that there is no Reason to pretend to
have but 15000 Men effectively in your Army, and yet to distribute above 30000
Rations of Bread per Day. I desire you to remedy this Disorder, that I may give
his Majesty an Account; and moreover, take care to subsist your Army. In regard
of your Reputation, I don't question but you will be mindful of this Advice, and
how much I am, etc.

LETTER CXCII. To the Same.
SIR,
THE daily Complaints are made us, as well by the Waggoners that go to and from
Arras and your Army, as by the Sutlers that come from thence, of the ill
Conduct of the Convoy, chiefly at the return of the Wagons, whereby they
affirm, That the Germans, since the beginning of the Siege, have taken above
30000 Crowns, or Value, which obliges me to write you this Letter, to desire
you to remedy this Disorder, and by your Authority to prevent the like for the
future. I am assured you are so very sensible of the ill Consequence of this
Affair, that I think it needless to say more. Nevertheless I cannot help
telling you, that if you do not take more care of the Wagons, Sutlers and
Traders for the future, which come and go to and from the Camp, it will be
impossible to subsist the Troops, and defend Arras, as the King has commanded.
I conjure you once more to put an end to these Inconveniences, and to believe
that I am and will be, etc.

LETTER CXCIII. To Marshall Chatillon.
SIR,
I Don't question but you will take all the Care imaginable of the Discipline of
the Army. I am very glad to hear you have regulated the Bread, and that you
will punish the Deserters hereafter to your Power, and endeavor to prevent the
like Disasters. I have seen what you have writ me from diverse places, whereby
you signify you are able to subsist the Army till the end of this Month. Upon
which I have nothing to say, only that you knowing the King's Pleasure not to
have his Army come into France before the Conclusion of the Month, you would do
prudently to keep 'em where they are, or toward St. Pol on this side, or
toward the Quarters of Theronenne on the other, till the said time be expired.
As to the Post of Marquion and Inchy, besides many other Reasons, the
Difficulty of getting Provisions, by reason of Bapaume and Cambray, were alone
sufficient to lay aside that Design. I therefore beseech you, Sir, to subsist
the Army where they are, and wherever else you shall judge most commodious,
till the end of this Month; and to believe that there is no body sets greater
store by your Friendship, nor desires to give more frequent Proofs of his own,
than, etc.

LETTER CXCIV. To the Same.
SIR,
COming to Understand by your Letter to Monsieur Noyers, that you intend to
march from where you are, Friday next, I write you this, to reinforce what I
have formerly advised you on this account, that it is very requisite for the
King's Service, that you think of some means to subsist the Troops in this, or
some neighboring Place, till the end of this Month, and this for several
Reasons that I cannot acquaint you with at present. I pray you therefore, for
my sake, to endeavor it to your Power, and to assure yourself I will recommend
this, as also all other your past Services, to his Majesty's Consideration,
that you may be denied nothing from him, as by me who am, etc.

LETTER CXCV. To the Same.
SIR,
IT would be to no purpose to have taken Arras, if we don't endeavor to
preserve it; and which may easily be done, providing it be well stored with
every thing. Upon this account it is necessary for the Army to continue where it
is, or thereabouts, till the end of this Month, which is the shortest time can
be proposed to provide the Town of Provisions as it ought to be.

These Provisions, as it is contrived, cannot possibly come by any other way
than Dourlans, seeing some of the Corn comes from Abbeville and Xaintonge by
Sea; which is the Reason, that without great Incommodities, and wasting the
Scason, they cannot be otherwise had. But as the Armies lie, this way will be
the most convenient.

Also, providing the Armies were at Marquion, the Convoys could not come by
Dourlans, because of the Promise to the Merchants; therefore there would be
much greater Difficulty for the Carriages to come so near Bapaume than there is
at present. And though they could be secured from time to time by sufficient
Convoys, yet the Sutlers coming to and fro, being very necessary for the Armies
better Subsistence, would be absolutely interrupted.

These Reasons conclude, That though there be some small Inconveniences to be
suffer^d, even where the Army of Monsieur Chatillon is at present; yet it is
much better than to tempt unavoidable Hazards in going by Marquion. Whereupon
Mare^chal Chatillon is desired to make use of such Prudence, Industry, and
Authority, as Matters may proceed more conformable to good Conduct, and the
earnest Wishes of his most Affectionate Servant, etc.

LETTER CXCVI. To the Same.
SIR,
I Have received, with a great deal of Satisfaction, the News that Monsieur
Mont-bas brought me on your Account. I hope it will always be to good Effect,
and that God will be pleased to continue the King's Success under your Command.
I wish it with a great deal of Sincerity, and entreat you to believe that I
will always endeavor to make your Merits sufficiently known.

I say nothing of your continuing in the Quarters, where you are, or
thereabouts, because I writ largely of it yesterday; and that Monsieur Noyers
has writ you of it at present. I shall conjure you only to consider well of it,
and to be secure of the Continuance of my Friendship and Service, and that I am
assuredly, etc.

LETTER CXCVII. To Marshall Schomberg.
SIR,
I Have seen your Letter, importing, That the Spaniards had a Design to besiege
Narbonne, now they had agreed with the Catalonians. Whereupon I shall only say,
that such Advice ought not to be altogether rejected; tho, for my part, I
cannot believe they will undertake such an Enterprise so late in the Year, and
in a Country where there is neither Forage nor Wood to be had. Nevertheless
it is good to be on our Guard, that we may not be surprised. There can be
nothing more done for the Town's Security, than what you acquaint me has been
already, if it were to be attacked; and I assure myself, you will not be less
careful, and well-affected, to prepare and assemble your Forces to drive out
the Enemies, if they should enter your Province. Nothing shall be wanting from
hence to assist you, as Monsieur Noyers has writ you more at large; to whom I
refer you for further Instructions, assuring you that I am affectionately
yours, etc.

LETTER CXCVIII. To Marshall de Chatillon.
SIR,
YOU will know by Monsieur Heudicourt, what I think farther requisite to be
done for the rest of your Campaign. I earnestly desire you to recruit your
Horse well, that being put into Garrison, they may be ready upon all occasions
to resist the Enemy, if they should be Fools enough to molest us at Arras. I
wish with all my Heart you may conclude your Campaign by beating up some of
their Quarters, if they shall give you an Opportunity to do it with good
Success. As I honor you extremely, I should be overjoyed of having a fresh
occasion of recommending your Deserts, who am cordially, etc.

LETTER CXCIX. To Marshall Schomberg.
SIR,
I Have often discoursed Monsieur Alby about matters relating to you. His
Letters, I hope, will sufficiently acquaint you with the Continuance of my
Affection and Friendship. All that I could desire for your greater Advantage is
more Briskness.

The Prince is returned toward your Government, but which I hope will cause
you no Uneasiness; assuring you, there is nothing in the Power of any Man that
can prejudice you, or hinder your Friends serving you to their Power. He has
assured me, he has no ill Designs toward you; there(...) have (...) fresh
occasions to believe the contrary, I desire you to think him your Friend.

Monsieur Noyers has writ you amply his Majesty's Mind as to the present
Affairs. I conjure you to be hearty and careful, and to be assured that I am,
and will be always, etc.

LETTER CC. To Monsieur Chatillon.
SIR,
THE great Desire I have to see the Canal of Loire in the Seine finished as
soon as possible, obliges me to conjure you anew, as I have done often before,
to further the Work to your Power, according to the Letters Pattents sent you.
The Offer the Undertakers make you, to indemnifie you, seems to me so
reasonable, that I don't doubt but you will be satisfied with it, and therefore
will not fail to encourage the said Undertakers speedily about it, that it may
be finished in October, as they have promised me, if they be not interrupted.
Doing this, you will oblige me in particular to testify, upon all occasions,
how much I am, etc.

LETTER CCI. To Marshall Schomberg.
SIR,
IT having come to the King's Ears, that you have not behaved yourself to
Monsieur Epinan as you ought; I thought fitting, as your Friend, to acquaint
you with it, and to give you my Opinion, that he being employed on so important
an Account, you ought not to have entertained him with such Coldness and
Indifference; but on the contrary, to have assisted him to your Power, that his
Majesty's Business might be the likelier to succeed. His Majesty promises
himself this from your Affection and your Zeal (...) on account of your own
Interest; assuring you, I shall always endeavor to be serviceable; and
acquainting you, I have no greater Pleasure in the World, than to hear my
Friends live in Amity together. I believe you will do what is to be desired on
your part, as I earnestly conjure you; as also to believe, that I am truly, etc.

LETTER CCII. To the Same.
SIR,
THE King having granted the Clergy a general Convocation, the better to
facilitate their assisting his Majesty with the Supplies desired, I write you
this Letter, to desire you to employ your Interest, jointly with the Prince,
that the Bishop of Nismes may be chosen for the Province of Narbonne, and de
Pamiers the Nephew, or de Lombez, for Toulouze. Perhaps they may object, that
some of these were of the last Assembly. But notwithstanding, those who mean
best, think 'em the fittest to serve both Church and State. Upon this occasion
I am to inform you, that the Regulations for deputing Bishops do not require
observing either Place or Order. I also desire you to take care, that the
Persons chosen for these Provinces of the second Order, may be affable, and
easy to manage. But you must be sure to conceal from all of 'em what I have
writ to you hereupon. Only you may let 'em know that I would be glad to have
his Majesty satisfied herein. In all which I desire you to be assisting to your
Power, and to be secure. I will secretly acquaint his Majesty with your great
Zeal for his Service.

LETTER CCIII. To the Same.
From the Sieur Bodin 's Apartment.
SIR,
You Will find by Monsieur Noyers's Dispatch, what the King's Service requires to
be done for the Assistance of the Catalonians. I conjure you therefore, by the
Affection I know you have for the Success of his Majesty's Affairs, to omit
nothing possible to effect it; and to manage matters so, as Monsieur Motte may
speedily enter their Country with the Troops designed for their Relief, whilst
you prepare the rest of the Forces to go and attack Collioure by Land, as you
are more amply advised by Monsieur Noyers.

I need not inform you how advantageous this will be, because you may know it
as well as I; but I shall only tell you, how much it imports his Majesty's
Reputation, to have it carried on with all the Vigilance and Care imaginable. I
am the better assured of your Diligence, in that you know how obliging it will
be to me, and extremely serviceable to his Majesty, whom I shall always
influence with your Deserts, as I am sincerely, etc.

P. S. I have just now ordered away Monsieur Bazanzon to Monsieur Bourdeaux, to
press him to put to Sea as soon as possible, with the Vessels and Galleys under
his Command, to go and relieve the Catalonians, and to make themselves Masters
of Cap de Quieres, and from thence to sail instantly to Collioure, to assist
you by Sea in taking that Place.



LETTER CCIV. To the Same
SIR,
THE Confidence I put in Monsieur Bezanzon prevents my saying any thing more,
than that I desire you to give entire Credit to him, that you may make haste to
enter Rousillon, to attack Collioure by Land, as has been ordered you. The
Affair is of so great Importance, both to the King's Service and your
Reputation; and so very easy, if well undertaken, as you have confessed, that
I not doubt but you will accomplish what his Majesty has commanded. I conjure
you to lose no time about it, but to believe that I am, etc.

LETTER CCV. To the Chancellor.
SIR,
THE Interest of the State having been always what I have only had before my
Eyes, I think at present that the Public ought to be altogether satisfied by
the knowledge of Monsieur Vendosme's Design against me, if I request his
Majesty to pardon the said Monsieur Vendosme, and to approve of the Resolution
I have taken to think no more of the Ill projected against me: The King's
Clemency upon this account not being granted, but upon my most humble
Supplication, will, I hope, prevent their believing any likelihood of such
Undertaking for the future, his Majesty's Mercy being the chief Means to stop
it. I beg of you, that you would get his Pardon passed, and believe that I am,
Sir, your most affectionate Friend and humble Servant, etc.

LETTER CCVI. To Marshall Chatillon.
SIR,
HAving acquainted the King with your further Desires to have the Regiment of
Piemont sent you, his Majesty has been pleased to do me the Honor, to let me
know he is willing it shall be so: And now, you having all that you can ask, to
put your Designs in Execution, I hope you will not be backward in your
Proceedings, but that you may speedily accomplish your Intentions, is the
hearty Desire of, etc.

LETTER CCVII. To the Same.
SIR,
THE King sends you Monsieur Fabert to acquaint you anew, that he approves your
Design proposed to him upon Sedan, but that he would have you first take
Bouillon, as a place that may be capable of giving you a great deal of
Diversion. We are informed the Enemies intend to fortify Torcy, the bare
Prospect of which is so great a Dishonor to the King's Arms, that I do not
doubt but you will speedily prevent 'em putting their Design in Execution.
Remember, Sir, it very much concerns your Reputation, to let your Soldiers lie
idle, when they have so fair an Opportunity to interrupt so disadvantageous a
Design, which, I am confident, they can never be able to maintain. The
particular Kindness I have for you, over and above my Zeal for the King's
Interest, causes me to conjure you to lose not one Minute, whereby you may
advance your Name to that degree, the Honor of your Ancestors requires. I am,
etc.

LETTER CCVIII. To the Same.
SIR,
I Am extremely concerned for the Misfortune besel you. God has been pleased to
chastise the Count, and to give us a slight Scourge. We have all deserved it
for our peculiar Faults; and you particularly, for want of Resolution to do
that before, which you know you were obliged to both by your Duty and
Conscience. I desire you to consider seriously of it, and to believe that I am,
etc.

LETTER CCIX. To the Countess of Soissons.
MADAM,
I Can never enough express my Grief for your not having Command enough of your
Son. If he had hearkened to your Advice, I am satisfied you would never have had
the Affliction, which his Fault and his Death together must needs occasion you.
I beseech God, from the bottom of my Heart, that he would be pleased to comfort
you, assuring you that I am, etc.

A MEMOIR. To the Mareschals Chatillon and de Breze.
THE Generals will have to Day or to Morrow the 800 Swiss Guards, in three Days
more 700 Horse, and in five or six Days after, the Regiment of Monsieur Aumont.

The Cannon arrived yesterday at Retel.

After to Morrow they will have Muskets and Pikes for the unarmed Men, and
three Days after, Clothes and Shoes.

I entreat 'em to take particular Care to recruit both Horse and Foot that were
defeated, and to speak to all their Commanders, and to animate every Soldier in
particular to seek Revenge.

Monsieur Gremonville brings Money for the Soldiers that were broke, till they
can be readmitted into the Body of the Army. And till their Pay can be
remitted, he has a Fund of 12000 or 15000 Crowns, to lend the Officers that
have occasion.

I conjure the Generals to send out frequently such Parties that may be capable
of informing 'em of their Enemies Motions.

I desire 'em also to lose no time in raising those Works, that they shall
judge necessary at Retel and Chateau-Portien; to the end, that if the Enemies
March should oblige 'em to quit this Post to follow 'em, they may leave the
said Places secured by such Garrisons as they shall think requisite.

LETTER CCX. To the Marshall Shomberg.
SIR,
I Can never enough thank you for your Remembrance of me, as also for the
Affection you express for me in your Letter, of which I have never in the least
doubted.

When the Siege of Perpignan is concluded, you would oblige me to come hither
as soon as possible. Cardinal Mazarine shall meet you before you arrive at
Monpellier, to advise you what is thought fit to be done in pursuance of the
Overture made by the Bearer. In the mean time, I Conjure you to believe I am,
and will be always, etc.

This, and the other Letters which follow, of Cardinal Richelieu 's, writ by
Monsieur Chere, or Monsieur Charpentier his Secretaries, were sent without
Signing, His Eminence being lame of his right Arm.



LETTER CCXI. To the Same.
SIR,
Public Considerations being always to be preferred to Private, I believe you
will think it requisite, as soon as you have received this Letter, to make a
Progress about your Government, and the Frontiers of Guyenne, to gather such
Recruits, both Horse and Foot, as you proposed yourself. You will also be so
near Perpignan, that you may presently be there upon any occasion requiring
you. The King's Interest Obliges me farther to Conjure you not to omit putting
your first Thoughts in speedy Execution, and I shall endeavor always to make
known your Worth and good Service. In the mean time believe me, I desire you,
Sir, your most Affectionate Servant, etc.

LETTER CCXII. To the Same.
SIR,
I Have received the Letter you were pleased to write me, together with the
Memoir delivered me by this Gentleman the Bearer, whereby I understand the
present Condition of your Siege of Perpignan, the Success whereof we must
expect with patience; but I hope, with God's Assistance, it may be such as we
have had hitherto reason to believe. In the mean time, I give you a thousand
thanks for your kind invitations to see me before I left this Country, and
shall always be mindful of a Recompense to my power, who am your most
Affectionate Friend and Servant, etc.

LETTER CCXIII. To the Mareschals Schomberg and Melleraye.
GENTLEMEN,
THese few words are only to tell you, that since Marshall de la Motte is
willing you retain still the 2000 Foot which were designed for him, I have
nothing more to say, but that I approve of the Agreement made between ye. As
also of your good Conduct, from whence I expect speedily to hear of the taking
Perpignan, and it may be, of your routing the Enemy. In the mean while I desire
you to believe me, Gentlemen, Your most Affectionate Servant, etc.

LETTER CCXIV. To both the Same.
GENTLEMEN,
I Cannot incline to believe that the King can receive any great Advantage by
the Militia, although you propose 'em to enter Catalognia by force: And in my
Opinion, you would but deceive yourself by trusting to 'em, who will not care
to march any farther when you shall talk of raising Troops, for fear they be
trapan'd as they were once before.

Therefore in my Opinion, Marshall Schomberg, Monsieur Alby, and Monsieur
Nismes, would do better to choose out of them between 1200 and 1500, who would
go freely to serve in Catalognia, providing they might be promised to return
about the end of October, and which ought to be faithfully performed.

Over and above these Troops, Tavannes Regiment, and the 300 men of Monsieur
Villeroy, must be sent to Monsieur Motte.

You may also spare him the Regiments of Effiat, Cauvisson, and Montausier.

As to the Cavalry, I believe you may easily send him the nine Troops of Guards
which continues with you till the end of October. Also Boisack's Regiment, who
may serve himself in the quality of a Field-Mareschal. The Regiment of Lerans
may also be dispensed with.

As for Rousillon, I am of Opinion you ought to leave there the Horse-regiments
of Anguien and Ballon, and that you dispose of the rest of the Foot as you
judge convenient, either to Rousillon, or the Frontiers of Languedoc; for if
you should leave Rousillon altogether disfurnished of Men, you might soon
repent it; for the Enemy might easily send by Sea to Roses 5 or 600 Horse,
which might do a great deal of mischief in a short time.

The King's Will is, That you Blockade Salces up so closely, that it shall be
impossible to relieve it. Which makes me think it not too much to leave two
Regiments of Horse in Rousillon, and two or three of Foot for this purpose; as
also to secure Lampourdan.

I have no Orders from the King, to allow you to leave Rousillon, till you have
first laid Provisions into Perpignan to suffice 3000 Men for a Year. Two or
three days ago I have dispatched away 100000 Livres we have borrowed for that
purpose. In a word, be assured, Money shall never be wanting.

I say nothing to you of the Garrison of Perpignan, because the King has
ordered thither the Swiss and Champagne, and you would do well to add a
Regiment more. In the mean time, be secure of my Friendship, and that I am
assuredly, etc.

A PROMISE. From Cardinal Richelieu to the Duke of Bouillon.
MY Lord Cardinal Richelieu not being in a condition to Sign a Promise, for
Assurance of the Liberty of the Duke of Bouillon, pursuant to a Power the King
has granted him, has desired me to do it for him, and to sign it for his
Excellency, As follows:

I Promise to the said Sieur the Duke of Bouillon, That as soon as the Town,
Castle, and Citadel of Sedan, shall be delivered into his Majesty's Hands, all
imaginable care shall be taken to conduct the said Duke out of his House of
Pierre-encize, to go to Roussy, Turenne, or others of his Houses as he pleases,
etc.

LETTER CCXV. To Marshall Schomberg.
SIR,
You Will know particularly by Monsieur Besay, how well satisfied His Majesty is
with the Capitulation of Solces. He will also acquaint you how glad I am, as
well for that, as your good Success at Perpignan.

All that you have now to do, in my Opinion, is, to establish so good Orders in
Rousillon, that the Country may recover itself, and the Troops there be
refreshed.

If Marshall de la Motte have any farther need of Assistance of Horse or Foot,
and shall require 'em of you, the King would have you send him the Regiment of
Anguien, and Contey, putting the Italians into Perpignan, in the room of those
of Anguien, as also the Regiment of Horse of the same: but this only in case of
need, or as the King's Service shall require. The said Monsieur de la Motte not
lying far off, you may hear frequently from him, and Act pursuant to his
Motions. So trusting altogether to your Zeal and Conduct, I conclude my self,
Sir, your most Affectionate Servant, etc.

A Report made to the King at Grenoble by Cardinal Richelieu, in presence of
the Mareschals of France; and afterward at Lions, to the Queen Mother, in
presence of the Lord Keeper Marillac, upon account of the Negotiation of the
Peace in Italy.
THere are five principal Difficulties found in the Negotiation of a Peace in
Italy:

The First, Regards the Emperor's restoring the Duke of Mantua to his
Dominions, and his security of enjoying 'em for the future.

The Second, Concerning the Liberty that every Sovereign Prince has, to put
whatever Garrisons he pleases into his Towns.

The Third, About the Right the Duke of Savoy pretends to Montferrat, and the
Duke of Guastallo to Mantua.

The Fourth, Upon restoring several Places belonging to the Garrisons,
withheld by the Emperor; as also what His Majesty enjoys in the Territories
of his Higness of Savoy.

The Fifth, About repairing several Infringements of the Treaty of Monzon,
agreed between the Two Crowns of France and Spain, concerning the Differences
of the Garrisons with those of Valtelina.

All these Points have been debated several times between the Parties, together
with the Mediation of the Legate and his Holiness's Nuncio.

There have been several Contests about the Investiture of the Duke of Mantua.
The French immediately demanded to have it performed pursuant to a Treaty, and
that with Reason; for the Duke of Mantua having claimed it so long since, by
his Son, sent Envoy, methinks the Emperor should not think of deferring it
longer, the previous Ceremonies being once past. On the contrary, the
Imperialists and Spaniards offered to perform it in three Weeks after the
Treaty, because they would have time sufficient for him to demand it a new.
Now, although this Formality seemed to be only for gaining more time, yet
France has agreed to it.

As to the Second Point, The Spaniards insisted, That the French should so
absolutely quit Cazal, that the Duke of Mantua might never admit any of 'em
into it again. To which was Answered, by those that acted for the King, That
their Proposition was not reasonable, because the Duke of Savoy had always
equally entertained French and Spaniards when he pleased; that all Sovereign
Princes have ever had this Liberty, and that if his Highness of Mantua was to
be deprived of admitting Strangers, because he was an Italian Prince, in the
like manner the Spaniards ought to be excluded Milan, Naples and Scicily, being
no Natives there. Also, That France did not require the French should remain in
Cazal, but only that the Duke of Mantua should not be denied a Right to make
use of what Garrison he pleased, and which might extend as well to Germany and
Spain, as to France. The Marquess of Spinola would by no means consent to this
Article, Affirming, That though he should lose four Battles, he would not do it:
For, says he, I can never look upon my Master's Territories to be safe, as long
as the French have any Footing in Italy.

To obviate the ill Apprehension he had upon this Article, It was offered, That
the Number of the French admitted into Montferrat, in case the Duke of Mantua
would please to accept 'em, should be limited to 12 or 1500 Men, which might
not be capable of giving any reasonable cause of Suspicion; but nevertheless,
the Marquess persisted in his Refusal. At length the Mediators interposed to
this Effect, That although it were said, that all the French should go out of the
Duke of Mantua's Territories, and they should Quit 'em accordingly, yet the
Duke of Savoy might easily suffer 2 or 300 to pass in small Numbers through his
Country, without being thought to know that they went to serve his Highness of
Mantua.

To this Overture was Answered, That over and above, that it was Infamous in
itself, the Spaniards that should suffer it, would pretend we had infringed the
Treaty that was to be made, and thereupon tax His Majesty with Breach of Faith;
the Consideration of both which, would be enough to withhold us from any such
Practice.

As to the Third Point, Two Difficulties arose: First, That the Duke of Savoy
would have his Division in such Place as he liked best in Montferrat, although
that Choice belonged only to those that Pay. The Second, He always insisted on
the Payment of 15000 Crowns per Annum, which were promised him the year before,
with Trin^, out of the same Revenues which the Duke of Montferrat had, when the
Right he claims to the said Dominions fell to him, Whereby he would have
excluded most of the Prerogatives the Duke of Mantua now enjoys, although they
were altogether Hereditary. By which means, instead of 15000 Crowns a year, he
would have had above 50000.

To this the Duke of Mantua replied, That those 15000 Crowns were to be paid
out of the Revenues he enjoyed when he promised to pay 'em. Nevertheless, the
Duke of Savoy would never quit any of his Claims; and did positively aver, That
if it was given any other way, the Duke of Mantua must never expect to live in
Amity or Peace with him.

As to the Fourth Point, The Imperialists and Spaniards have demanded, That
Susa, Pignerol, and whatever else the King holds in Italy, might be restored on
the same day they should give up the Passes of the Grisons. It has been
Answered in favor of France, That all that could be expected, was, That the
Restitution of Susa should Balance the Passes of the Grisons; because Susa was
taken to get the said Passes, in order to march against Spain, who then
Attacked the Duke of Mantua, and that it was not the same with Pignerol, which
was taken to avoid an irreconcilable War with Spain: However, Cardinal
Richelieu, who Acted for the King, when he gave his Consent to the Restitution
of Susa at the same time with the Passes, did still insist, That as he could
not consent to the Restoring of Pignerol, as having no Orders from the King,
who at that time knew nothing of its being taken, did assure 'em, that the
greatest Difficulty would not be in the Restitution, but the manner of its
being Restored.

He said, moreover, to the Legate, That being so far off from the King, and in
such an Employ as he was, he ought neither to advise him to restore, or not to
restore Pignerol; but on the contrary, would wait His Majesty's Orders. But
nevertheless, if all other Matters concurred to accomplish it, he doubted not,
but that Her Highness, the Duchess, might easily obtain the said Restitution,
by means of the Queen her Mother, and that thereupon, he should have Permission
to acquaint His Holiness from His Majesty of the same.

The said Sieur Cardinal, has diverse times represented to those that were to
Treat, That his Master desired Pignerol, only to secure the Treaty that was to
be made; so that the only way to incline him to surrender, were, to satisfy
him about the same. For this purpose, he has always desired, on the King's
account, the Princes of Italy, to enter into a League, for the defense of the
Duke of Mantua, in case he should be attacked again. Which has been all along
refused, unless, that at last, they seemed a little inclined to hear him.

He has likewise required the Mediation of the Pope, and College of Cardinals,
which was also denied, unless, that in conclusion, the Legate told him, That if
he had insisted only upon that, the Peace of Italy had not been so long
deferred. Then Father Valerien, a Capuchin Friar, who came from Germany, on
purpose to facilitate the Peace, proposed, That the Emperor would oblige the
Catholic League, and the College of Electors, to the Defense of the D. of
Mantua, if he should be attacked. But the Sieur Cardinal, desired him to know
from Coalta, and Spinola, if they had any such Orders.

After which Answer, the said Father freely confessed, That this Proposition,
was only his thoughts, without any relation to the Emperor, or his Ministers.

The said Capuchin made another Overture, which was, That seeing we desired
Pignerol, only for Security of the Peace, if we had no other design, we might
easily consent to restore it, at the end of two years; during which, the
Emperor should keep the Passes of the Grisons. The Sieur Cardinal told him, he
believed, the King would consent to this Proposition, with which he would
acquaint his Majesty, as soon as they were agreed about it. Whereupon the
Capuchin immediately went to 'em, but soon returned, and reported, That they
would not consent to it by any means.

As to the Fifth Point, The Marquess Spinola said, he had no Authority to make
good any Infringements of the Treaty of Monzon.

To which was represented, That it would neither be just nor reasonable, to
have two Differences at a time with Spain in Italy, and to have sent a puissant
Army thither, yet to return without deciding either. Notwithstanding which, he
positively replied, he would have nothing to do to repair a Treaty that bad
been made by Count Olivarez. To which was answered, That the Question at
present, was not about Repairing the Treaty, but. Performing it. Whereupon, he
promised in General, to Perform the said Treaty of Monzon; but to specify the
Infringements, he would never do it. To which was Answered, That we would be
contented without specifying 'em, providing he would speedily make 'em good. To
which he replied, That he could only Promise in general, that the Treaty of
Monzon should be performed, and leave deciding the Infringements to another
time. But it was replied, That would look like an Abuse, since the
Infringements were plain, by the Tenor of the Treaty, and to promise to
perform it, without repairing them, would be to little or no purpose.

The Question is at present, Not if Peace should be made, because it is
preferable to War for a thousand reasons: but if we should be contented with
the bare Investing the Duke of Mantua, without farther Security, than the
Emperor's, and the King of Spain's Word, that he should not be molested for the
future.

Also, If we should consent, that the Duke of Savoy should be paid the 15000
Crowns Rent, as he demands.

Also, If it be reasonable, the Duke of Mantua should be excluded a Liberty of
putting what Garrisons he pleases into his Towns.

Also, If we can, or ought, to end the Duke of Mantua's Controversy, without
concluding; likewise, that of Valtelina, and the Treaty of Monzon. And if there
be Security enough left, though we should restore Pignerol; as also, If the
King's Reputation be not concerned, in only terminating the Difference of the
Duke of Mantua, and leaving that of Valtelina, and the Grisons, to the
Spaniards Faith.

COUNSEL. From Cardinal Richelieu, after that of the Queen Mother, and the
Lord Keeper.
ALL the Reasons mentioned before by the Lord Keeper, make it plainly appear,
that a Peace is to be greatly desired: For my part, I have always wished it
upon the same Considerations, and have omitted nothing, in my power, to procure
it. Your Majesty, and His Lordship the Keeper, knows, That after the taking
Pignerol, I immediately dispatched an Express, to make known the
Inconveniences depended upon continuing the War, as also the Reasons which
might be brought for a Peace, by restoring Pignerol. But you both know also,
that I had no other Answer, but that His Majesty inclined to the noblest side,
and was coming to attack Savoy.

Nevertheless, not to be against the Negotiations for Peace, returning home, I
writ a Letter to the Princess of Piedmont, on purpose, that it might be
communicated to the Duke of Savoy, and the Prince, by which I desired her, to
further this Negotiation; hoping thereby to content both Princes, This Letter I
left with the Vicar General of Pignerol, who took upon him to carry it himself,
that he might have an Opportunity to incline these Princes to a good and
lasting Peace. Hereupon, he sent twice to Turin, but could not be admitted;
therefore Marshall Schomberg, who was acquainted with this design, sent me my
Letter again.

The Lord-Keeper's reasons also make it appear, That a War cannot be undertaken
without great Inconveniences, being a Scourge which God ordains to punish bad
Men.

But, nevertheless, hence it does not follow, that we should purchase a Peace,
on dishonorable and base Conditions; but that we should rather bear with the
greatest Afflictions a War can produce.

The Aversion the People have to War, is not a sufficient Motive to accept such
a Peace; because they are uneasy, and complain, as well of a necessary Evil,
as of one that ought to be avoided. As, also, ignorant to know what is
convenient, as ready to murmur at Grievances, are absolutely necessary to
prevent greater.

He that makes Peace on dishonorable Terms, would never be able to maintain it
long: As also, would lose his Reputation for ever, and expose his Country for
the future, to endless Wars. It being certain, that no body would fear to
Attack, that had observed the Volubility of our Tempers on this Occasion; and
the Advantages we had lost, which were not easy to be regained. Our Neighbors
also would slight our Alliance, as trifling; because of our Fickleness, and
would rather choose to bear with the Tyrannies of Spain, than hope to be
relieved by Us.

But to return to our Particular Case, In my Opinion, we cannot agree to a
Peace, upon Three of the Conditions abovenamed, viz. First, That the Duke of
Savoy shall have such Division of Montserrat, as he desires. Secondly, To
exclude the French out of Cazal. And Thirdly, To Quit the Treaty of Monzon,
without having the Infringements made good.

I say, that to consent to these Conditions, would be to render France, the
Contempt and Scorn of all Christendom, and to engage us in new Wars; which
would have all the Grievances of this, and none of the Advantages.

Therefore, there is nothing more to be done, but to continue the War, for which
all necessary Preparations are now read; and in the mean time, to think of all
imaginable means to Negotiate a more Honorable Peace, than has been hitherto
Proposed.

So we may make War to occasion Peace, and time to come, prove a more
favorable Instrument of effecting it, than times past.

An Account how Cardinal Richelieu behaved himself upon the first Discontents
of the Queen Mother.
At Lions, on his Return from Italy, in September.
AS soon as ever his Eminence had knowledge of the Queen-Mother's Resolutions
to discard him from her Service, he omitted nothing in his Power to prevent it.

He humbly entreated her to consider, that not one Minute of his Life, but he
would have sacrificed a thousand Lives for her.

That he had always served her, not only with Fidelity, but also such Success,
as every thing fell out to her Wish.

That he behaved himself in his Persecution so, as deserved her Approbation,
and for which all good Men commended him.

That the King himself had declared to him several times, that the chief Reason
of his Esteem for him, was, That being forbid the Court, he never offered to
come near it.

That she was in so high a Condition, that her Honor, her Grandeur, and her
Power with the King, took away all means from the cunningest People to incline
him to neglect her Service.

That as often as he could have the Honor to approach her, all his Care was to
make known, that no body had, or could have more Zeal to serve her than himself.

That he hoped she would be sensible of this Truth: But although he should, for
the future, be as unfortunate in being slighted by her, as he had formerly been
happy in receiving her signal Favors; yet nothing should prevent his being
ready always to expose his Life, upon the least occasion, for her Safety; and
at the same time profess to all the World, by Word, Writing, and all his
Actions, how sincerely and devoutly he was her Servant.

All these Protestations and Professions would be vain and fruitless, if his
Heart did not go along with 'em, and hers relent. Sometimes she seemed to be
satisfied, but immediately would fly out again; which gave him reason to think,
there was something still lay concealed from his Knowledge.

He experienced, at his Costs, how difficult it was to alter Women's
Resolutions, where they had been undertaken by Passion.

He had a Proof, that their Obstinacy, where they have no good Reasons to
allege, will either make use of very bad ones, or else pretend to know what
they don't care for giving account of.

Knowing that the Minds of great People are often such, that having misused one
of their Servants, they have in themselves so great a Confusion of their Fault,
that they persevere to conceal the Wrong. He resolved to receive that by
Favor, which was due to his Innocence by Justice. But notwithstanding, this
was also of no effect.

He thought it might be with his Condition, as with an acute Ague, which Nature
not being able to expel by her utmost Efforts, must be contented to wait till
it were done by insensible Perspiration.

But he was deceived in his Judgment, for he never had any Ease; having no
sooner got rid of one Distemper, but he felt another, or foresaw a Relapse,
which often times is of worse Consequence than the beginning; being assured,
that in case of Suspicious, the last are most dangerous; inasmuch as they have
their first Impressions, and their Novelty besides, to recommend 'em.

A Remedy to all these were very easy and reasonable, if the Queen would be
pleased to consider.

He proposed one to her ingenuously, and begged her to make use of it, since it
would be both just and advantageous.

His Misfortune being grounded only on Suspicions she had of him, and
Detractions she had been pleased to hearken to against him it were no
Difficulty to remedy both.

As to Suspicions, the way was, to trace 'em from their beginning, and before
they had taken Root in her Mind.

As for Detractions, there were two Remedies:

First, To shut her Ears against 'em; but which he desired not at present, for
fear he might be thought, by endeavoring to cut off the Course of Calumnies,
to shut up the Way to Truth.

The Second, That it would please her Majesty to conclude nothing against him,
till she had first examined into the matter; with Condition, that they should
be rewarded who spoke Truth, and they severely punished, who offered to impose
a Lie upon her.

He further represented to her Majesty, that if she were pleased to exempt them
from Penalty who had slandered him falssy, he was content.

He submitted never to enquire after their Names, who had so abused him; and to
yield himself Convicted and Guilty, if he h^d ever any the least Thought to
their Prejudice. Also, to comply with her Majesty's Pleasure, he would ever
return Good for Evil, if they ever came to his Knowledge.

He offered to reward any one at his own Charges, who could produce any
injurious Truth against him.

Nay, he went so far beyond what Reason could require from him, that he would
give himvelf up for condemned, if her Majesty did persist in any Suspicion,
after she had acquainted him with the Cause, and given him leave to speak for
himself.

He also submitted himself to be more than Guilty, if in this case he did not
retire from Court, laying down all his Offices, and freely consenting that all
he had might be confiscate.

These Propositions were so just, that the Queen could not withstand approving
'em: But still the Difference lay in the Practice; for her Mind had been so
engaged and prepossessed to his Prejudice, that he could never see any good
effect from 'em. On the contrary, in spite of these Remedies, her Ear never
received any Account of him, nor her Mind was biased with any Suspicion
against him, but it immediately sunk into her Heart, and was forthwith to be
seen in her Countenance.

Nay, he was reduced to this extraordinary Unhappiness, that all those who were
not directly opposite to the Cardinal, were suspected. And if by chance he was
well received, or kindly spoken of, by any one, it was sufficient Cause to be
suspected of keeping Intelligence with him, to her Majesty's Prejudice.

Moreover, if any thing was spoke, by what Person whatsoever, that did not
please her, it was immediately imputed to the Cardinal; and oftentimes she put
a false Construction upon a good Meaning, to have the better occasion to rail
against him.

Thus the Cardinal's Misfortune was without Remedy, it being impossible for
most People not to speak well of him, either out of regard to their Sentiments
of his Actions, or a Reflection upon his good Name.

Some People, who were well acquainted with her Weakness, in what concerned the
Cardinal, would never let her incline to the least charitable Opinion of him,
but would immediately fire her again with some new Artifice, causing a Report
that would be sure to displease her, though it was visibly false to every body,
but which she would nevertheless easily believe, so much was she blinded by her
Passion.

The extraordinary Respect and Obedience he paid her, joined with his
incredible Patience and Perseverance to honor and serve her, were looked upon
from him as no other than Dissimulation and Design.

He had enough to do to represent to her, that Angels, the most confirmed in
Grace and Glory, could not be innocent, if they could be proved guilty, though it
was neither in their Power or their Nature to be so.

He often laid before her Eyes, that he ought not to answer for any Bodies
Actions, Words, Intentions or Thoughts, but his own. But still all was
fruitless.

At last he argued, That those who did not care to make use of Means to
continue their Servants, must needs be willing to leave 'em; and so concluded,
that his Retreat must be the end of this Affair.

This he grounded upon two Reasons:

First, The Queen not being pleased to give an Account of the Occasion of her
Anger and Indignation, the Effect might be delayed for some time; but the Cause
not being taken away, she could never be thoroughly appeased.

Secondly, That not resolving to make known the Jealousies and Suspicions she
might have of her Servants, they might be convicted in her Thoughts of a Crime
they were never guilty of, without having any Means to prove their Innocence.

The Law never reputes a Man guilty till he is convicted; and is always ready
to receive a Justification, where there is no positive Proof to prevent it.

If he had been allowed this Justice, he had even esteemed himself happy in his
Misfortune; but on the contrary, he had no such Liberty granted, but bare
Suspicions were both his Witnesses and Judges.

The evident Falseness of their Calumnies made his Accusers cautious not to
make known their Informations nor their Persons.

As they were assured they could never maintain their Allegations, they thought
it best to repose their Security in their being concealed.

They persuaded the Queen, that if she should discover herself to him, there
would be no Security for them; for he would not only know 'em by their Names,
but also guess at 'em by the least Circumstance of the matter.

They added farther, That his Wit was so piercing, that if he had but the least
knowledge of what they accused him, he would immediately disguise himself so,
that black should seem white; and that consequently, she could never be able to
find out the Truth.

By these Means, all the Avenues and Ways he might make use of to show his
Innocence, were stopped up, and these Precautions had that Power over the Queen,
that whatever he could say in his behalf, appeared rather to be the Industry of
his Wit than an innocent Truth.

She made as much of them that told her a Falsehood, as who discovered a Truth.
She kept all secret from one and the other, and both were treated alike. Which
occasioned every one to lend his Money freely, without fear of its being
enquired into the false Alloy.

She put as great Trust in her Jealousies as Oracles, and flattered herself
like Magicians, who are bewitched with their false Science, and which deceives
'em in most Points, for one that may happen to be true.

The truth of one trifling Suspicion made her conclude fifty of greater
Consequence infallible.

All these Considerations tormented the Cardinal's Mind, more than is possible
to be expressed. He would freely have given his Life to have undeceived the
Queen in the Designs and Artifices of his Enemies; and has a hundred times
begged of God to take him out of the World in her good Opinion.

He found himself attacked by a Disease, and saw no Remedy to free him; which
made him resolve upon a Retreat, as the only way to cure.

On the other side, he considered, That he who quits a Party, loses it; and who
turns his Back upon the Court, gives opportunity to them that are armed with
Hatred and Envy, to injure him unrevenged.

He knew there were some that wished him ill, for no other Reason, but that
they could not endure the Prosperity of the State, and the Establishment of the
King; and consequently, endeavored to weaken both by prejudicing him.

He considered also, that being once retreated, they would endeavor to make
his most signal Services, not only false Steps, but Crimes.

He thought further, that if he should continue at Court, and endeavor to
regain the Queen's good Opinion, by doing her all the Service he was capable
of, he could not prevent ill Men from representing to her, that he tarried only
to oppose her Pleasure.

He reflected, that when he had formerly been in her Favor, he found it
difficult to preserve himself against the ill Advice was given her; but now he
thought it almost impossible to persuade her, he served her well, though he
should kill himself in the Endeavors.

He thought, whilst he was in Place, he could have no other Power than to
injure himself; it being certain, that if God should give him any Opportunities
to do his Country Service, it would be to no purpose, because he should be with
held by so many Considerations, fearing to do amiss and displease, that it
would be almost impossible to put any of 'em in Execution.

He saw plainly, that though the Queen herself might be well affected to the
State, yet there were a great many People that sought to please her otherwise,
contributing to some ill Event, the Blame of which might possibly be imputed to
him; so that he could not hope to have any Success from the best Design.

This he has often been sensible of, by the Crosses he has met with in the
greatest Affairs that have been concerted for these three Years.

He easily perceives his Afflictions do so enervate the Vigor of his Body, and
weaken his Mind in such manner, that he shall not be able much longer to
support any Public Employment.

Also, that he has so much to do, to defend himself from those that torture him
within, that he shall not be capable any longer to resist his Enemies that
assault him without.

He considered moreover, that as he has been hitherto able to resist the
Enemies of the State by the Queen's Favor, he shall, for the future, be
altogether incapable to oppose them, being in Disgrace.

He also saw well, that the Queen being once possessed against him, she could
not want malicious Spirits to foment and augment her Prejudice, especially when
they found she had so great a Disposition to it.

Whereas he formerly had been a Comfort to the Queen in her Afflictions, he
considered that her Jealousies, and their Designs against him, might now make
him the Cause.

Thus having thoroughly weighed all these Reasons, he resolved upon his
Retreat, as the only means to justify his Fidelity, and convince her Majesty,
that his Business at Court has always been hers and the King's Interest, which
as their Respect for him obliged him to it, so that for them made him quit it.

As Soon as the Queen was informed of his Resolutions, she did what she could to
dissuade him from it: But her Jealousies preventing him to think himself
secure, he persisted in his Design.

He represented to her further, that during his late Persecutions, though those
that swayed the King, aimed at nothing but his Ruin; yet he feared neither
their Power nor their ill Will, so long as he had her to speak in his Defense;
and that she would hear nothing to his Prejudice. But now matters were in such
a plight, that her Heart is shut up, her Mouth closed, and her Ears open to
every body against him.

So that finding himself slighted by her Majesty, he determined to retire from
the World. But the King hearing of it, would by no means suffer it, and
endeavored all that was in his Power to incline her to take him again into her
Favor.

A MEMOIR, Presented the King by Cardinal Richelieu, after the Queen Mother had
Banished him from her House, concerning Means to avoid Cabals at Court.
SInce it has pleased the King to make use of me in his Affairs, I am assured
he will think it just to give no Credit to what may be said in my Prejudice, by
those, who upon this Occasion, have professed themselves my Enemies.

His Majesty may please to be assured, that as I have, am, and always will be
faithful and zealous in his Service, so I shall not in the least fear the
Jealousies may be raised against me, and the false Accounts may be given of me.

To remedy which, there is no better way than to discover their Birth, and to
be satisfied of their Validity, before they take Root.

As to the ill Offices may be done in the World, I know but two ways to prevent
their doing Harm.

One is to shut the Ear against 'em; but which I cannot desire, where the
Persons to be heard are not my professed Enemies, for fear it may seem, that
under pretense of preventing Calumnies I would obviate Truths.

The other, to hear nothing, without honoring me with the knowledge of it,
that I may defend my self: As also on Condition, that they who detect important
Truths should be rewarded, as they that imposed Trifles on the State should be
punished.

I say the King is obliged in Conscience to this; for otherwise it would be
impossible to serve him in his Affairs, where those that are employed make so
many Enemies, that if it be allowed to detract in private, the Malice and
Cunning of the Court would not permit an Angel to subsist six Months.

His Majesty is so much the more obliged to grant this, in that I submit to
whatever Punishment he pleases, if providing he discover any of my Enemies to
me, I am not willing to be prescribed by him what Thoughts to have of 'em.

Then I am humbly to conjure him, that if he intends to maintain his Authority,
it would be necessary continually to have his Eyes open, and to lose no time to
perfect these Propositions, unless he has a mind to be ruined.

It is with this Affair as with a stubborn Disease, which one Medicine not
being able to master, it may be conquered by str^nger Remedies, often repeated.

The Cardinal lost the Queen's Favor by not routing the Cabals in their Birth.
It is better in such a case, to do too much than too little, providing it
extend to no more than banishing the Court. They who have it in their Power to
do Mischief there, will make us believe they have also the Will.

By too little, one runs a Risque to be ruined; when on the contrary, doing but
a little too much, without offending ones Conscience, one secures ones self,
and there can no great Inconvenience happen, there being no greater Enemy of
Cabals, than Fear and Doubt.

We must not think to have Mathematical Demonstrations of Conspiracies and
Cabals; they are rarely known so far, till they are incapable of continuing any
longer.

They must thereofre be foreseen by strong Conjectures, and prevented by speedy
Remedies.

LETTER CCXVI. To the KING.
SIR,
I Cannot divine, what should be the reason of your Equipage of the hundred
Artillery-Horse is not yet ready; I am sure, I gave Orders for it, as soon as
ever your Majesty commanded me. Monsieur Bullion, and Monsieur Servien have
acquainted me, they have done all on their parts, and I believe 'em. If it were
for my life, I could not be more diligent, and careful, in your Majesty's
Service; which I cannot believe, has been any ways retarded, since I am
advised, from Monsieur Melleray, by Monsieur Bouthillier, that on Saturday
last, the hundred Horse were sent to Chaalons.

I must own, at first, I was against your Majesty's Journey, fearing your
Health might be impaired by your Natural Impatience, of which I have often
heard you accuse yourself: But since having assured me, both by yourself, and
other Persons, that you were in perfect health, and fearing lest a
disappointment might be to your prejudice, I have freely consented to your
going; Assuring your Majesty, that if you can bear with the ordinary
Incommodities of Travel, this Journey will be very much for the Advantage of
your Affairs. Also, I am so far from being against it, that I think it ought to
be speedily performed, since you have given it out for some time, and sent
Expresses of it to all your Armies, and Provinces.

After which, I hope your Majesty will give me leave, as an ancient, and
faithful Confident and Servant, to tell you, with all the Respect that is due
to a Master, that if you are apt to believe the Intentions of your most
confirmed Creatures, are otherwise than they appear to be, it will so deaden
and baffle their Spirits, that they will not be able to do you such Service, as
they shall desire. And whereas the freedom you are pleased to give 'em,
occasions their telling you frankly, what they think for your good, so you must
not expect, they will have the same complaisance, in what relates to your
Prejudice. I conjure you, a God's Name, to make your Journey pleasant, and not
to vex yourself at a thousand things, that may not happen to be performed, just
as you expect. I entreat you, also, at the same time, to believe, that whatever
be your Pleasure, shall never be thought amiss, or thwarted, by a Person that
prefers your Satisfaction infinitely to his own; and, who will be always more
studious to Serve, and Please you, than to preserve his own Life; throughout
the whole Course of which, he will endeavor to make known, by all his Actions,
how much he is, your Majesty's most Dutiful, and Obedient Subject, and Servant,
etc.

The KING's LETTER, To Cardinal. Richelieu.
Trusty and Well-beloved Cousin, and Councellor,
I Am very much concerned for the haste I was in Yesterday, in writing you a
Letter, on account of my Journey. I now desire, you would burn, and forget it
at the same time: As also, believe, that as I would not be willing to Displease
you in any thing, so I shall never have any other thoughts, but to follow
punctually, your good Advice and Instructions. I desire you also, once more to
forget -- and satisfy me by this Bearer, that you think no more of it. As
likewise, to assure yourself, that I shall be Uneasy, till I have another
Opportunity, to testify the extreme Affection I have for you, and which, Death
can only put an end to; Beseeching God, with all my heart, that he would have
you always under his awful Protection, etc.

LETTER CCXVII. To the KING.
SIR,
I Have not endeavored to forget the Letter you were pleased to write me
yesterday, because I can assure your Majesty, I never took any thing amiss in
it. I beseech you, farther, to acquaint me with all Transactions, and I will
continue to send your Majesty my different Sentiments thereupon. What made me
oppose your Journey at first, was, the knowledge I have of your Constitution,
which might be capable of Disorder. But, on the contrary, the great Zeal I find
you have to acquire Honor by your Arms, made me easily consent to it, as I do
hereby a second time. But nevertheless, having seen a late Dispatch from
Monsieur Vaubecourt, I think it necessary you defer your going, till Saint
Michael be invested, and your Troops gathered together. It is impossible there
should not a great many Changes happen, in the Designs one undertakes in War,
because Resolutions must be taken upon the spot, according to the Mation of the
Enemies.

Otherwise one gains oftentimes more by Patience, which is required in some
occasions, than by fighting; which is the reason that the French Nation being
very forward, and hot in its Nature, is esteemed by all the World, the least
fit for War; when those that are not so lively, but more heavy, and less fiery,
are thought the properest for it. I humbly beg of your Majesty, not to weary
your self out, nor to be vexed at any Backwardness you may imagine in your
Servants. I can assure your Majesty, that I think myself, not a little obliged
by the Letter you were pleased to honor me with, and am of Opinion, that if
you had thought fit to chide me, which you never yet did, through the excess of
your natural Goodness, your manner of writing, alone, is so obliging, that the
satisfaction received by your charming words, from the Pen of so great a King,
would abundantly surpass the Injury. The Letter which you are concerned about,
is far from offending the meanest of your Servants, as your last has
extraordinarily obliged him. I return your Majesty a thousand humble thanks,
for your concern for the death of my Sister, who, I dare say is happy, as well
in respect of her being delivered from a great many pains she endured, as for
ending her days with so sincere a love toward her Maker. I am, and will be
always, etc.

LETTER CCXVIII. To Monsieur Chavigny.
SIR,
I Send the King the Letter which he has desired, by which, he may find his
Servants have not had any reason to Complain, as in truth, they never did, only
they must needs be a little affected with his Majesty's concern for them. I
have communicated to Monsieur Bullion the Article which the King was pleased to
send me on the Reverse of one of his Letters, which related to what Monsieur
Hallier acquainted him; That he had no Fund to subsist the Troops that should
arrive: Whereupon, he has assured me, and I know it to be true, that there has
been 20000 Livres put into Chauley's hands, above these eight days, for that
purpose. Also Monsieur Servien told me, he had acquainted Monsieur Hallier,
that a Commissary of the Treasury, and an Ammunition Officer were sent toward
him: And, to be sure, this Affair concerning him so much, Monsieur Hallier, by
this time, has not been wanting to take due care. Nevertheless, Monsieur
Bullion has sent a second Order, to dispatch another Commissary, that there may
be no further occasion of Complaint. It were to to be wished, that those who
Command the Armies, were as ready to obey Orders for their Subsistence, as they
are often forward to complain, when for the most part, their Negligence is the
truest cause of their want.

LETTER CCXIX. To the KING.
SIR,
I Am overjoyed to hear of your Health, and to find there is nothing to be
added to the Answer which your Majesty writ Monsieur Angoulesme, and to the
Resolution which had been taken. I don't believe those of St. Michael, expect
your Majesty so soon, which I would not have 'em, that your Soldiers may
surprise and plunder 'em out of hand.

Monsieur Angoulesme, will, no doubt, be convinced by your Dispatch, that you
know more of the Matter than he: And I cannot help once more acquainting your
Majesty, That nothing could be better thought on, than what you commanded him,
and no more proper way to convince him of the weakness of his Designs.

The Swiss cannot be better bestowed, than where your Majesty designs 'em, in
Champagne and Picardy, where I shall not fail to solicit earnestly, Monsieur
Chatillon, to employ 'em in something, that may be for your Majesty's Advantage.

After all, I cannot but expect good Success, from the Prudent Measures your
Majesty takes.

If my Life could deliver you from Melancholy, which I know afflicts you
sometimes, I would freely lay it down for that purpose. But as it cannot, I
shall only study to preserve it, to be employed, as often as there shall be
occasion, for the greatest, and best Master in the World, to whom I will be
eternally, etc.

LETTER CCXX. To the KING.
SIR,
I Am rejoiced to hear by the Count, That your Majesty was never better in
health, than on your Journey; as likewise, by the last Letters from Monsieur
Bouthillier, that you had taken Physic, whence, through God's Assistance, we may
hope a good Effect.

The Count also acquainted me, calmly, with the Affronts he thought he had
received, complaining openly only of his Misfortune; and Monsieur Chavigny,
who, he was of opinion, had power to prevent it. I told him what I thought
requisite upon the matter, and must needs say, I left him pretty well
satisfied. I can never enough wonder at the Baseness, Ignorance, or Malice of
those, who, as your Majesty acquaints me, endeavor to disparage your Designs.
But I think it necessary to stop those Gentlemen's Mouths, as soon as possible,
in the same manner as your Majesty has done formerly some others.

The Pope treats the Duke of Parma after that rate, that it is necessary we
take speedy care about him.

The Affair of Clauzel is of great Importance, but having writ largely of all
to Monsieur Chavigny, I shall trouble your Majesty with no more, but that I am,
and will be always, etc.

LETTER CCXXI. To Monsieur Bouthillier.
SIR,
I Suppose the Rebels of St. Michel will not go far beyond that place, without
being taken by Force, or surrendering at Discretion. I know the King is
resolved to use 'em with a great deal of Rigor, and I Will assure you, it is a
matter of so great importance, that it is scarce to be expressed.

My Thoughts are, That the Officers deserve an immediate Punishment, even next
to death.

As to the common Soldiers, the Galleys would be very proper for them, as the
only means that should be allowed to save their lives.

For what belongs to the Inhabitants, the Officers of Parliament, and others,
the Council of Ruel thinks they are to be divided into two Classes.

First, Those that have fomented, and favored Duke Charles's Party, contrary
to their Oath of Allegiance to the King.

And, Secondly, Those that were drawn in Mere passive.

It Is thought the King might pardon the first Class, but as to the second, they
ought to be all hanged, unless the number be too great; in which case, the King
might pack off the most factious, and decimate the others, or send 'em to the
Galleys.

As for the Jurisdiction of the Parliament of St. Michel, it is thought best to
add it to the Sovereign Council of Nancy.

I say nothing of the Walls of the City, because every body knows the King has
already condemned them.

In a word, the present Affairs require some Examples made more than ordinary;
otherwise, we shall have Rebels so frequently in Lorrain, that there will never
be an end, and the King shall have no sooner turned his back, but they will rise
again.

The Lord Keeper and you, are earnestly desired to see, that a false Generosity
of some great Lords, may not prevail with the King in behalf of any one, where
his future Welfare requires so great rigor.

I am very well satisfied with Monsieur Bonthillier's Conduct, and that the
Posts between the Cardinal de la Valette, and you, are open: As also, that you
intend to lose no time after the taking St. Michel, to send toward Metz what
Troops the King orders, to keep those parts free from factious Spirits, that
may infect 'em.

I very much wonder at the Malice of Cramaik, a Person you have writ me, by the
King's Order, twice about. I am overjoyed his Majesty has intercepted his
Designs, and esteem myself not a little indebted, that he would be pleased to
acquaint me so soon of it.

Principiis Obsta. The Remedy of Provence is very proper upon this Occasion.
One ill Man may corrupt a great many at Court.

LETTER CCXXII. To the KING.
SIR,
I Praise God with all my heart for your Majesty's health, and with which I
begin my Letter, because it is what I desire most. I can never be enough
thankful for the Account you were pleased to send me, of the Person that had a
mind to lengthen out your Majesty's Affairs; which I have Answered, by Monsieur
Chavigny, who, pursuant to your Orders, sent me the particulars. Having no more
to add to the Memoire, I have sent him to Communicate to your Majesty. I shall
not lengthen this Letter, but to give you a Million of thanks, for bestowing an
Abbey, at my Request, upon Cavois. I have so many occasions, every day, to
testify my Acknowledgments to your Majesty, that not thinking words good
enough, I do solemnly protest, I will make it the business of my Life, to
confirm, by my Actions, how much I am, etc.

LETTER CCXXIII. To the Same.
SIR,
BEing in so good humor, as I am informed by Monsieur Bouthillier, your
Majesty is at present, I cannot think, any ill can happen to you. And, I hope,
that St. Michael being once taken, which I know can never-resist your Presence
long, you will pursue your design to assist Messieurs, Angoulesine, and de la
Force; who thereby, may be able to gain such advantage over Duke Charles, as
you can wish; and which, I am sure, I desire, with a great deal of earnestness,
that I may see you once again, return glorious from the Field.

Monsieur Vitry, by two successive Courriers, assures us, the Spaniards will be
able to effect nothing in Provence. All the Country is sheltred toward St.
Margarite, and St. Honorate, by great Heats. There is no Harbor in these
Islands. They cannot well land any where. Also, the said Sieur Vitry assures
us, That he has so plentifully provided the Isles of Hieres with Men, and all
sorts of Ammunition, that there is nothing to be feared.

There is nothing new from Italy. I have sent one of my Gentlemen to the Duke
of Savoy, to press him to do what he ought, pursuant to the Treaty made with
your Majesty.

The Duke of Parma's Valor and Conduct, is spoken of here with great
Admiration.

LETTER CCXXIV. To the Same.
SIR,
IT IS impossible for me to express the satisfaction I have, to hear, by
Monsieur Bouthillier, of your Majesty's good Humor, and Health; who has also
acquainted me, how differently your Troops live, now they are with you, than
when they were from you. Every body knows, and one may speak it without
flattery, that no Person can equal your Majesty, in communicating Orders.

I cannot comprehend my Transport for Cardinal de la Valette's Advantage over
his Enemies. I am assured your Majesty's Forces have performed wonders there;
so that you would do well to harress 'em no more, but let 'em have a little
rest after their so great Fatigue.

I pray God with all my heart, to give your Majesty as good success over the
Lorrainers, that your Expedition may be as prosperous as you could wish, or I
earnestly desire, etc.

LETTER CCXXV. To the Same.
SIR,
I Am very glad that St. Michael is surrendered, which is the beginning of the
Glory and the Advantage, which I hope you will reap by this Expedition,
provided that your Majesty put in Execution that which Monsieur Bouthillier
tells me you propose, you will gain much toward the Peace of Lorrain. That
which you were pleased to grant in the Capitulation, is very judicious, because
it does not hinder you from keeping all the Ringleaders of the War in Prison,
nor from sending the Soldiers to the Galleys, and chastizing some of the most
factious Inhabitants, and keeping two hundred Wagons six Months, as your
Majesty's Gentleman reports. I beseech you, in the Name of God, not to decline
from your first Design, which is so necessary to your Reputation and Welfare,
which, without this wholesome Rigor, will always be beginning, and never
accomplished. I have sent a short Memorial to Renaudat; I believe he has not
prevented me, being well acquainted with your Majesty's Humor. I have a lively
Representation of your Impatience to perform some eminent Attempt, to the
Prejudice of Duke Charles. I heartily desire of God that it may succeed, that
your Majesty may return with as much Glory and Contentment, as is desired by,
etc.

LETTER CCXXVI. To the Same.
SIR,
I Can never sufficiently condole your Majesty's Concern for the Inconstancy of
the French. If the Lease of my Life would afford you any Comfort, I would
gladly lay it down. Your Predecessors have labored under the same
Difficulties, and your Successors will do the same: Things will take their
Course.

I send back to your Majesty that which we thought most seasible; upon the
Advice which your Majesty was pleased to send us, wherein, as you did me the
Honor to send to me, we have always followed that which my Cousin Melleraye
gave you. I believe it is necessary that you send it, as it is signed by your
Majesty, if you think it convenient to change nothing.

I conjure your Majesty, by the Name of God, not to be dejected; and be
assured, that when you return hither, you will be looked upon by Paris, and the
whole World, as you were in times past, as the best Master that ever was. We
have already considered what we must say and write, both in the Kingdom, and to
Ambassadors, upon your Majesty's Return; that your Majesty being gone to
appease the Commotions of Lorrain, and to raise a powerful Army, and after that
to reinforce the Cardinal de la Valette, and d' Angoulesme, and de la Force,
thought it convenient in this Juncture to return to the Center of his Affairs,
to send necessary Orders to all other Places, and to raise new Forces against
Spring: Therefore pray let not your Majesty be in pain; and be assured, that I
will omit nothing for the future, as in times past, which may depend upon me
for your Service and Satisfaction, of which I will always have more Care than
of my own Life, as being, etc.

LETTER CCXXVII. To Monsieur d'Hemery.
SIR,
THE Loss of Revel ought to make Madam sensible, that she herself is lost, if
she do not immediately make use of some extraordinary means to save herself. It
is indeed necessary to have Cahours, but that does not heal the Distemper with
which we are troubled, since it is but a Magpy's Nest on the top of a Tree, and
requires Time and Pains, and vast Charges, to fortify the bottom. Madam is in
jest to think of surrendering this Place upon the Terms of Revel; his Majesty
will in no wise hear it spoke of; therefore it must be surrendered at
Discretion. I told the Ambassador, who will write conformably, that it is
altogether necessary that Cahours be kept by the King's Troops. Here is a
Discourse, that to find a speedy Remedy for these Evils, we must some way or
other take Coni: it is easy to mention what we ought to desire for the
re-establishment of Affairs: For this purpose, we ought to retake Coni and
Revel, Ast, Villeneuve, d'Ast, or Verrue; but I fear much it will be difficult.
In the mean time, we must strive to attain this End, and to disarm Turin. If
you are at a distance from Madam, send de la Cour thither, with Instructions
necessary to the Safety of Italy.

That Coni may be reduced with ease: This is all, Care must be taken that
Longueville sit down before it, before the Enemy suspects any thing of it.

To this end Cardinal de la Valette must oppose them in some advantageous
place, while Longueville shall make a Retreat to go to Coni. We rely on their
Prudence. Count Philippes has sent great Complaint of you to the Ambassador
of Savoy; but, as you may easily imagine, we laughed at it; and I told the
Ambassador what was convenient upon that Account. I am, etc.

LETTER CCXXVIII. To Monsieur d'Hemery.
SIR,
I Am much amazed to understand, by Degraves, that the Inhabitants of the three
Towns, which Madam has put in the King's Hands, are not disarmed. If you have a
mind to lose them, you must delay, as you do now, every thing that is necessary
for their Security. If the Inhabitants are not already disarmed, fail not to do
it immediately upon the Receipt of this, without losing one Moment, it being
the only Means to preserve the said Places for Madam. I think you ought to have
done it before, and, to have omitted it, is pure Madness. I expect, upon this
occasion, which is of very great Consequence, the Effects of your Care and
Diligence; and in the mean time assure you, that I am, etc.

LETTER CCXXIX. To Monsieur de la Cour.
SIR,
I Cannot be sufficiently amazed at the Continuation of Madam's Blindness,
because it is to that degree, that it exposes her to a certain Ruin. I know not
what can hinder her from accomplishing the Establishment which she promised to
make in Montmillian and Savoy, because she cannot be secure without it. Tell
her from me, that which I now write, and let her know, that if we can find no
Security in what she promises for herself, we will have no further Negotiation
with her.

I am glad that Don Felix and the Marquess of St. Morice promote the Execution
of the things promised upon that account, they testify thereby the Zeal they
have for Madam's Security and Reputation.

Having seen the Complaints, which you say the Marquess of St. Germain makes,
because he received no Reward from the King, while he was at Grenoble, nor the
others who were with Madam. I cannot sufficiently wonder why he himself does
not acknowledge, that it was done on purpose, for fear of making him suspected,
and to give no opportunity, to those who would hinder this Establishment, to be
able to do it. If he thinks that the King's Liberality is abridged, he is
mistaken. Let him take care to deserve, and we will procure him a Reward. You
will oblige me, if by a cleanly Conveyance, you will let those who are
concerned, know the Contents of this Letter.

I recommend to your Care the Fort of Perouza, and the Soldiers Quarters, and
to impart to us what things are necessary, so opportunely, that we may provide
them in due time. In the mean time be assured, that I continue my Friendship,
and am, etc.

LETTER CCXXX. To Monsieur de la Cour.
SIR,
THE Advice that we have had, that the Cardinal of Savoy and Prince Thomas have
Practices and Intelligence in Madam's Court, by which they are contriving great
Designs, obliging me to inform her Highness, that she may apply some necessary
Remedies. I also think it convenient to impart it to you, that being informed
thereof, you may act more conveniently for her Good, and the King's Service.

To that end, I send you a Memorial, which will let you know his Majesty's
Intentions; and that which he judges convenient for Madam to do at this
Juncture, to prevent the Mischiefs that her Enemies are preparing for her. The
Confidence she has in you, the Zeal you have for the King's Service, your
Prudence and Address, persuade me, that her Highness will have great Regard for
what you will say upon this occasion, and that his Majesty will be very well
satisfied with your Negotiation. I desire it, both for his particular Interest,
and your own, which shall be ever recommended by, etc.

LETTER CCXXXI. To Monsieur de la Cour.
SIR,
AFter I had received your last Letters, concerning the impertinent Proposals
which were made to Madam by Monety and Father Michel-Ange d'Aglie, I desired
that Mondin should go to her immediately, to let her know what I think
convenient to preserve her from absolute Ruin. You will see the particulars I
have wrote to her Highness, by the Copy of the Letter I send to you, according
to which, you may act vigorously.

The King has this confidence in you, that when there happens some unforeseen
occasions, which may destroy Madam, you have Foresight, Power, and Courage
enough to oppose them, and to prevent her from coming irreparable Faults.

I do not know how Men are so impudent, as to dare to advise Madam to sign
something with her Enemies, before she first consults the King, on whom alone
depends all her Protection; and how Madam is not sensible, that such Men, being
desirous of her ruin, that she ought, by timely Remedies, to prevent their
mischievous Practices.

You must break up all those fine Negotiations; and do it so cunningly, that
Madam have the advantage, which her Enemies pretend to receive to her prejudice.

The true means to do it, is, To disperse a Declaration to inform the World,
That her Highness desires a good and sincere Agreement; but, that as she has no
other design, than to attain to so good an end, so she will hearken to no
Proposal, which being void of due respect to the Dignity of her Son, and of
necessary Precautions for the safety of his Person, which being dearer to her
than her own Life, can produce no other effect, than her destruction, and the
ruin of her States, and good Subjects, to whose Preservation she will always
have a particular regard.

You must in this Declaration make use of the most advantageous Circumstances
of times past, to confirm the pernicious Designs of Prince Thomas. That being
done, it is convenient to remove all those fine Negotiations, by whose malice
or simplicity, Madam, in the end, may be undone. Pray be diligent in this
Affair, and be assured, that no body has a greater kindness for you, than, etc.

P. S. Sir, I add this one word more, That Satisfaction is given to the
Marquess of St. Morice. You must take care that this may be brought over to
Madam's interest: Upon which account, the King will never complain of his
Benefits. You have so much prudence and address, that I do not at all doubt,
but you will make this Affair succeed according to his Majesty's desire. I am,
etc.



LETTER CCXXXII. To the Duchess of Savoy.
MADAM,
Though I wrote to you eight or ten days ago, about the bad circumstances, in
which, I think, your Affairs are in, the late Express which I have just now
received from your Highness, and your Commands, to give you my advice about the
new Proposals which were made by Moneti, and Father Michael-Ange de Aglie, give
me an opportunity to reassume my Pen: I assure you, that the King desires
nothing more, than to see you well reestablished in your States, and to have a
good understanding with your Brothers-in-law. And, that his Majesty will be
always ready to restore the Places which he possesses in Piedmont, into your
Highness's hands, as soon as the Spaniards will, in good earnest, do the same
with those which they hold, so that you may be the real Mistress of them. But
as the safety of your Person, and that of your Son, the Duke of Savoy, are the
principal things which you ought to consider, his Majesty will never consent,
that they fall into the hands of persons, whose whole interest consists in
their destruction: And your Highness is too well advised, not to see, that all
Proposals which are made you, without this Precaution, let them be never so
specious, are nothing but a Snare to destroy you.

I am not amazed, that Prince Thomas proposes, That you go into Piedmont, and
carry your Son along with you: But I cannot think that there is any body nigh
you, who can advise you to it, without adding at the same time, that before you
think of it, you ought to be Mistress of the Citadel, as well as of the Town of
Turin.

Upon this Condition, I think, you may pass the Mountains, without taking your
Son along with you; for whose safety, you cannot take too much care, to secure
him from those difficulties which may happen to him.

You know, Madam, better than we, the Reports upon the subject of the death of
the Commander of Sales, because we have them only from your Parts. They ought,
as I think, make you fear the destruction of your Son, by the same way, so much
the more, as there is a difference betwixt the possession of a soveraign-State,
and that of a simple Government. You must be insensible, if you do not fear,
that those, who were not afraid to touch your Honor, by several Falsehoods, and
Calumnies, may also aim at your Life, which is not so dear to you as your
Reputation.

In a word, Madam, since God has made you Mother of a Prince, who is the lawful
Successor of the States of his Father, the Duke of Savoy, you are obliged to
do your utmost, to preserve his Person, and his States. You will not want
Forces, because the King offers you his; and he commanded me to write to you
particularly, That, provided you will do what you can, he will spare nothing
that may tend to your preservation, and re establishment, in that which you
have lost. But because it is certain, that his Forces will be of no use to you,
if your mind and prudence do not concur with his power, to promote your safety.
It is your part to take care, that you be not surpised by bad Counsels; and to
fortify your self against the weakness of your Sex, which is sometime subject,
in its Conduct, not to add firm Resolutions, which are necessary in the
managery of great Affairs.

The Observations which you have sent hither about the Proposals which are made
you, are so judicious to let you see the Cheat they would put upon you, that I
praise God, that he has inspired you with such knowledge; and beseech him, that
he would confirm you in that desire, which you now have, to preserve yourself
from their malice.

I think it is very convenient, that you let those Princes, that cause such
ridiculous Proposals to be made, and your States know, that as you will be
always ready to come to a good Agreement, by which your Son may remain such an
absolute Master of his States, that he may not apprehend, either himself, or
them, to be in any danger; and that you will not hearken to Negotiations, which
have no other aim, but to gain time to your prejudice, and to the ruin of the
People which God has committed to your charge; which they desire to amuse by
such hopes.

When you have made this Declaration, I believe it requisite for your service,
to be deaf to all Proposals that may be made, if by the first Article, the Duke
of Savoy, and your Highness, are not reestablished in the authority that
belongs to them, and if it be not permitted you to provide for both your
safeties, by what ways you think it most expedient.

These two Articles being pre-supposed, I repeat it yet once more to your
Highness, that the King is always of opinion, That you treat your
Brothers-in-law with all advantages imaginable, which they may reasonably
desire, and which, are consistent with your safety to grant. In the extent of
those terms, matters may be so adjusted, that those Gentlemen may be fully
satisfied; without that, your ruin is inevitable. This is, Madam, what I
thought good to say, upon the present occasion. Finally, I advise you, to
oblige all those who are about you, to declare publicly against those, who so
publicly seek your ruin, that a Man must be either blind or malicious, not to
confess it.

I am persuaded, that there is none who will not venture his life and blood, to
defend so good a Cause, and will do it generously, provided, he be assured,
that you take those Resolutions which are necessary for your safety, which I in
particular, do passionately desire, as being, etc.

LETTER CCXXXIII. To the Duchess of Savoy.
MADAM,
I Have received those Letters, which it pleased your Highness to honor me
with, which imparted both the joy you testify for the happy Success of Cazal,
and the Accomodations of matters with your Brothers-in-law: Whereupon, I say,
that though I have explained my self sufficiently to your Ambassador, who, I am
certain, has not omitted to send to you what I told him; yet I cannot forbear
to add, That Prince Thomas's Conduct toward your Highness, both by the rigor
which he used toward those, which he suspected to be well affected to your
Service, and by what he contributed toward the loss of Cazal, and by the
Artifices, which he always used in the Negotiation, which he manages with your
Highness, ought to make you break off entirely, and prevent the Advantages,
which he hopes will accrue thereby, and to make use of those, which the Victory
of Cazal gives you.

I cannot conceive how they who have the honor to be nigh your Highness, if
they are well affected to your Service, can suggest any other counsel, seeing
if you listen to such a Negotiation, you afford a notable opportunity to your
Enemies to prejudice your Affairs.

If they will persuade you, that by this Accommodation, you secure the Tuition
of your Son, and that you will receive some advantage by the change, which the
Princes agree to make, of the Governors of the Places which they hold: I am
amazed that common sense does not dictate, that in dividing your Authority with
your Brothers-in-law, it will by so much the more be diminished, as the fear
which the Subjects, and Magistrates shall have of them, will induce them rather
to be on their side than yours.

As to what they declare to you, that this Agreement may put an end to the
Civil War in Piedmont; one must be void of judgment, not to foresee that your
Highness being allied to France, and the Princess to Spain, the cause of the
Division, and consequently, the War still remains.

Further, it would be very prejudicial to the King's, and your Highness's
Service, if His Majesty should attack Turin, while you are agreed with your
Brothers-in-law: Because, in this case, every one would say, That it was not
your Son's interest which put you upon this design, but his Majesty's, to
possess himself of this place. And since he writes particularly to his
Ambassador upon this subject, to let you know his mind, I shall not say any
thing about it in this Letter. But yet I will add, before I conclude, That
those who advise you to continue the Negotiation with those Princes, and to
conclude it without an Union at the same time with France for your Interest,
testify too publicly, that the fear of them, prevails more than the affection
which they owe to your Highness; upon which account give me leave to add, That
it would, Madam, have been very serviceable to you, that after so much
contempt, which Prince Thomas has shown of your Highness, if you had neither
admitted him into your Presence, nor given Audience to his Envoy: and the
rather, because he has raised some difficulties about some matters relating to
your Son's, and your Interest; for if you had done thus, you had obliged him to
have recourse to more humble measures, to regain your Highness's Friendship,
seeing that the happy success of his Majesty's Arms at Cazel, may, in time,
reduce him to great extremities.

To conclude, I beseech your Highness, to consider that all your Welfare, next
to God, depends upon the King's Protection, and to follow the advice, he gives
you, who have no other end, but to defend you from your Enemies, and to
reestablish your Son and yourself in such a Condition as he desires; which, as
to my particular, I wish with all the Zeal imaginable, both for the Glory of
his Majesty, and your Son's and Highness's Welfare, etc.

P. S. The Affair of Querasque let us you see, that beside the Premises, Prince
Thomas has no other Design, but to reduce your States, by amusing you with fine
Words.



LETTER CCXXXV. To the Duchess of Savoy.
MADAM,
I Cannot tell who it is that advises you, at present, to go into Piedmont,
while your Affairs are in those circumstances, since such a Journey may be so
far from making them better, that it may be dangerous to your Person. When
Turin is taken, you may go into Piedmont with reputation; and, deporting
yourself with discretion, which you generally do, your Presence will be useful
to your Son's and your own interest. If something must be denied Prince Thomas
it is better that your Ministers should do it, than your Highness: And it is
more convenient that you be at some distance from Turin, than nigh it, till it
is taken.

As to the Composition of Turin, which you are pleased to mention, the King
will give the Count de Harcourt Orders what he shall do, both for your
Advantage and his Service.

As his Majesty is always disposed to receive Prince Thomas, when he has a mind
to unite himself to France, it is convenient to use, to your advantage, the
present opportunity, which God is pleased to give you, and so to behave
yourself, as not not to lose the Fruit by too much precipitation.

The Letters which were taken in the Baggage of the Marquess de Leganez, give
you such a manifest proof of the Infidelity with which Prince Thomas seemed to
treat with your Highness, that you must either be blind, or your own Enemy, if
you do not believe, that all his Treaties with you will be of the same nature,
unless he come over for the King, and wholly deceive the Spaniards.

The best and the only thing that you can do, for the advancement of your
Affairs, is to send all the Troops you can to the Count Harcourt, without
losing a moment, and use all diligence to promote that business. He, on his
part, labors with so much Care and Expense, that he deserves to be seconded by
your Highness in such an important Juncture. As for me, Madam, nothing shall be
wanting, on my part, to testify, that I am, etc.

I am glad that your Highness has given Orders for the Security of
Montmeillian, in expelling Monod; he was a very dangerous Man in a place of
that consequence.



LETTER CCXXXVI. To Monsieur de la Cour.
SIR,
I Am very glad to learn, by your Express, the Passages of the Place where you
are, and Madam's present Inclination to unite herself entirely to the King's
Interest, and to follow the Advice which his Majesty and his Servants shall
give her for her Welfare: But she has hitherto been so insensible, that I fear
it is only a seeming Change in her Mind, and that she has no mind to be
delivered out of the Precipice, which through her own Neglect she is fallen
into, instead of doing her utmost to assist Count Harcourt in the Execution of
a Design, in which she is principally concerned, and to reinforce him with
fresh Troops, she not only took away those which were maintained at the King's
Expense, and which she was promised should be drawn off as soon as they had
received the King's Money. This Negligence affects me so sensibly, that I
confess I am out of Patience, and I cannot tell what Opinion to have of Madam's
Intentions after such an extravagant Trick. I conjure you to represent to her
the Prejudice she does to the general Affairs, and to her own in particular, by
that ill Conduct, which is enough, either to ruin the Enterprise of Turin, or
at least, to give this Advantage to the Enemy, to take another Place without
much Resistance, while the King's Army shall regain, with much Difficulty, that
which others have lost, because they would not keep it.

Monsieur de Chavigny writes so fully, in Ciphers upon the Subject of your
Express, that nothing remains, but to conjure you to solicit Madam to do that,
which Reason, and the Necessity of her Affairs together, ought to have made her
have already done, that if she persevere to neglect her own Advantage, the King
will take his, as Reason and the Public Good shall require. In the mean time,
be assured that I am, etc.

LETTER CCXXXCVII. To the Prince of Orange.
SIR,
MOnsieur d'Estrade will acquaint you what past with us in the business of
Monsieur Bouillon, in which your Highness's Intervention could not make for his
Assistance. He will tell you also, how I acknowledge those advantageous
Sentiments you had relating to my Sickness, and of the Troubles some turbulent
Spirits would have given to his Majesty's Affairs. I want Words to express my
Gratitude, for the Favor you have done me on those Occasions; but I desire you
to believe, that I will omit none, to show you, by the Effects, that I really
am, etc.

LETTER CCXXXVIII. To James, King of England. Concerning the Marriage of the P.
of Wales.
SIR,
THis is not the first time that I am sensible, that great Kings often conceive
things according to their great Qualities, and not as they are in themselves;
that they magnify mean things by the Esteem they have of them, and those whom
they honor by their Benevolence cannot be inconsiderable. The Letter with
which your Majesty was pleased to honor me, confirms me in this Truth; because
it lets me see, that I have so much Merit in your Esteem, as in effect I have
Admiration of those great and rare Qualities which are in you: They are, Sir,
so shining, that if by the knowledge of them I have no Advantage above the rest
of the World, who may be ignorant of them; yet at least I am assured, that few
admire them so much, and none can do it more than I. Respect has always induced
me, in the Service of the King my Master, to answer your Majesty's Expectation
in accomplishing the happy Alliance, projected betwixt the two Crowns. It was
no difficult thing; for I satisfied my Desire, and did my Duty at the same
time: Because that as on one side, the King never thought but of proper
Conditions, to give you an opportunity to oblige the Hearts of your Catholic
Subjects with new Chains, which you have already gained; your Majesty on your
part, has of your own accord granted that, which being desired for their Good,
was also principally for your Advantage. If they receive much Favor from your
Majesty, you will thereby gain a Glory, the more inestimable, because it will
be eternal.

It is a thing, Sir, not to be at all doubted of; because, that as the first
Water of a running Stream is sufficient to let us know, that its Channel is not
stopped, so it is enough to know, that your Majesty, whose Bounty is
inexhaustible, has once engaged to be gracious to your Subjects, to be assured
that they will receive continual Effects of your Benevolence; and consequently,
your Majesty will more closely unite those Hearts which are already yours.

Heaven, without whose Concurrence, nothing can attain to Perfection, hearing
the Prayers of so many Creatures who depend upon your Majesty, will unite those
two Monarchies with an indissolvable Knot; that as their joint Forces have
formerly made the Levant tremble, so they will now strike Terror in all their
Enemies, and dissipate all the Efforts of those who desire to hinder that
Happiness that they may effect in Christendom. I beg it of God with all my
Heart; and that he would bestow upon your Majesty all those Blessings, which
such singular Qualities, which concur in your Person, deserve. I am eternally,
etc.

LETTER CCXXXIX. To the Prince of Wales.
SIR,
THE Letter which your Highness was pleased to honor me with, is a Favor
which transcends all the Bounds of my Gratitude; and, for want of Words, be
pleased to let me preserve in my Soul a lively Sentiment of this Obligation. In
the mean time, that I may not be ungrateful, I every where proclaim those Great
and Royal Qualities, which show, that the Excellency of your Wit is equal to
your illustrious Birth. With this Sense, my Lord, I shall in some sort do my
Duty, but not according to my Desire, which in matters relating to you can have
no Bounds. If God had given me all those Qualifications which your Highness
believes are in me, I should esteem myself very happy to employ them in your
Service, to acquire your good Grace, which I will merit by the Obedience I will
pay to your Commands. I am, etc.

LETTER CCXL. To the Queen of England.
MADAM,
BEing informed by Mr. Montague, of the great Desire your Majesty has of a
strict Union of those two Crowns, I have so much the more endeavored to add
weight to those Proposals which he has made, that he may let you particularly
know what was done about them, and with what Sincerity the King was pleased to
receive them, and gave them a favorable Answer, according to your Desire. As
for me, beside the Zeal which I have for your Majesty's Service, the particular
Esteem which I have for your Person, and the noble Qualities of the King your
Husband, and the Respect I have for them, make me that I never omit any thing
which depends on me for your Satisfaction, which I am assured Mr. Montague will
not fail to let you know: And as it is a matter of importance, that the King
your Husband be pleased to send hither an agreeable Ambassador, being certain
that many things are frequently spoiled or advanced, according as the
Ministers, who manage them, are ill or well received by the Princes with whom
they are concerned. I presume to beseech your Majesty to weigh those
Considerations, because they have no other Design, but to promote your Service;
which shall always be so particularly considered by me, that you shall be
sensible with what Sincerity I am, etc.

LETTER CCXLI. To the Queen of England.
MADAM,
IT is the greatest Happiness that I could enjoy, to see by the Letter which
your Majesty was pleased to honor me with, that you are satisfied with my
Actions. I beseech you to believe, that they will never have any other Aim but
your Service, and that which I know is agreeable to you, being sensible how I
am obliged to you by several Respects and Considerations. In the mean time give
me leave, if you please, to tell you, that the Negotiation of Mr. Montague is
not published; But yet it was told to the Ambassador, as is usual in all
States. As to what remains, your Majesty may believe, that that which is done,
was not to let any other, but your Majesty, accomplish what you had so well
begun, the Sieur Fontenay having no other Order, but to satisfy your Desires
both in this, and all things else. This Affair would never Prosper, if, as it
was begun by you, it should not be determined by your Authority. As for my
particular, Madam, I beseech your Majesty to do me the Honor to believe, that
I will always have a great Passion for your Honor and Service, which you shall
perceive upon all occasions, and all other Proofs you desire, of him, who is
entirely, etc.

LETTER CCXLII. To the Same.
SIR,
I Deferred, for some time, to answer that Letter, which your Majesty was
pleased to write to me, esteeming it more proper to let you know, by my
silence, the respect I have, and will have for your Majesty all the days of my
life, than to make Excuses, though they be very just, to your Resentments. I call
them just, Madam, because I never gave room for a thought, or did any thing
upon any occasion, no not in that in which your Majesty shows you are offended.
I believe time will plainly demonstrate this truth to you, which I will always
confirm by the most sincere effects, in all occasions which shall offer, to
give you Proofs of my most humble Service. I desired Monsieur Perron to assure
your Majesty of it from me, beseeching you to honor me with this belief, that
I will yield to no body in the resolution to be eternally, etc.

LETTER CCXLIII. To Monsieur Poigny, Ambassador in England.
SIR,
IF I had known the refusal that the Queen of Great Britain made to receive my
Letter, which I had the honor to write to her by Perron, I had not presumed to
have taken the same boldness as to send by you, without knowing that she was
better affected to me than she is.

You will oblige me by letting her Majesty know, That I shall always so respect
her Person and Quality, that she shall be so far from complaining of my
Conduct, that she shall have cause to commend it: Upon this Consideration, I
conjure you never to mention my Name, as long as it is disagreeable to her; but
assure her Majesty, that her Displeasure shall never hinder me from having that
Zeal which I always had for her Service, and I shall esteem it a great
happiness and honor to have opportunity to give her fresh Proofs of it. And,
as for your particular, be assured, that I will omit none to show you, that I
am, etc.

LETTER CCXLIV. To the Queen of England.
MADAM,
I Think the honor of your Favor which you are pleased to assure me of, so
great an happiness, that I want sufficient words to express my joy and sense of
it. If your Majesty please to remember what was done in your most tender Youth,
to qualify you for a Crown worthy of you, you will confess, I am assured, that
I have forgot nothing that I ought on that Subject, to contribute to your
satisfaction. I know very well, Madam, that as the generosity of Persons of
your Quality does not forget the Services that are done them, it is a kind of
ineivility in those who did them, to refresh their Memory; but that which I now
mention, is so agreeable to your Majesty, that you will not take it ill if I
have some satisfaction in that which you every day receive in the place where
you are. I beseech you to believe, that I have always the same Passion for your
Service that I had then; and that I can never lose it, nor will ever cease to
beg of God as many Blessings for your Majesty, as you yourself can wish: All my
Actions shall tend to show you, that I am and ever will be, etc.

LETTER CCXLV. To the Queen of England.
MADAM,
MR. Montague having informed me, That your Majesty would not take it ill to
receive some new Assurances of my most humble Service, I thought I should
commit a great crime, if I failed to desire you to believe, that I never had
any other design but to honor and serve you; and that it is impossble for me
to do otherwise in times to come. Pray do me the favor to believe this Truth,
because all my Actions shall confirm it far better than my Words, and that I
am, and always will be, etc.

LETTER CCXLVI. To Marshall Crequi, upon the Comprotection.
SIR,
AS the King cannot be sufficiently amazed at the weakness, with which the Pope
prohibits Cardinal Anthony from the exercise of the Comprotection, and at the
want of consideration, with which Cardinal Barberini gives him this Advice: So
he cannot sufficiently esteem the Sincerity and the Courage of Cardinal Anthony.

His Majesty is as well satisfied with the last, as he is displeased with the
two former.

Let the Pope do what he will, he can never compromise, that Cardinal Anthony
should not be Comprotector of France, since he has deprived Cardinal
Bentivoglio of this Charge for that purpose.

Cardinal Anthony accepted of it by the consent of his Holiness, without which,
neither the King nor he had ever thought of that Affair; Cardinal Barberini
also showed no dislike of it to his Brother.

The Pope may, by his Authority and Violence, hinder Cardinal Anthony, his
Nephew, from the Exercise of this Charge; but as he cannot do it with Reason,
he will never do it with the King's Consent, who being sensible, that the
Enemies of St. Peter's Chair, the Pope and his Family are the Authors of so bad
Counsel, will be pleased very much to oppose it, because of the Respect which
he owes to the Church, and the Affection to his Holiness's Family; which is
such, that his Majesty gives Orders to the said Ambassadors to hinder any
Preconisations to be made in the Consistory of the French Benefices, till it
please his Holiness to permit Cardinal Anthony to make them in executing his
Office.

The Ambassadors shall give this Answer to the Pope and to Cardinal Barberini,
with all Compliments imaginable; but with as much Resolution not to depart with
the Comprotection of Cardinal Anthony.

They shall also tell Cardinal Barberini, That his Majesty would find it very
strange, if he should have any Umbrage of the Comprotection of France, in the
Person of Cardinal Anthony; because he only desired he should Exercise that
Office, to let the World know the particular Affection he has to the Pope's
Family, and to have more Ways to keep the two Brothers united, when their
Interests shall more require it.

They shall also particularly make known to Cardinal Anthony, the Satisfaction
the King has in him, and shall give him Assurance of his Protection and
Assistance in all things.

They shall communicate to Cardinal Bentivoglio, the Resolution the King takes
to put an end to the Preconisation of the Consistorial Benefices, till the
Pope, putting an end to the Prohibition which he has given Cardinal Anthony,
repair the Injury, which, by that means, they would do France: And shall let
him know, That it is not that his Majesty dislikes that he should continue to
Execute the Office of Comprotector, but only that he might not give this
Advantage to the Spaniards, to think that France yields to their Desires.

In the mean time, if his Holiness, coming to himself, will give his Majesty
that Satisfaction which Justice and Reason require, permitting Cardinal Anthony
to Exercise the Functions of the Office of Comprotector, for whom it does not
seem that the Pope has lost his Cause, and the King has gained his; yet his
Majesty thinks it good, that the Ambassadors consent to this following
Expedient, which is, That it be a Month before Cardinal Anthony execute the
Functions of his Office in the Consistory, upon condition, that, from that
moment, his Holiness pass his Word to the said Ambassadors, That, from that
time, he shall agree, That he Execute his Office, without having a new License
from his Holiness.

This Overture has not been made to Cardinal Bichi, that the Ambassadors may
be able to manage it so much the better, because they only are acquainted with
it.

If the Pope is not satisfied things shall be left in the forementioned
condition, without any Preconisation of the French Affairs in the Consistory,
yet Marshall Crequi shall return by the way of Venice, giving his Holiness a
Testimony, That the Respect his Majesty has for the Church is such, That,
notwithstanding former Passages, the King has not failed to give him order to
Negotiate the Pope's Affairs at Venice, as though his Majesty had not been
disobliged. In taking leave of his Holiness, the said Marshall, as well on the
King's as his own part, shall make him all the Compliments imaginable; assuring
him withal, That his Majesty will never change his Resolution concerning the
Comprotection, being by no means able to endure, that any other, beside
Cardinal Anthony, exercise that Office.

LETTER CCXLVII. To the POPE.
Most Holy FATHER,
AMong other Displeasures with which the Piety of the King is afflicted, as he
beholds the Miseries the Church suffers, by the Division and Discord of
Christian Princes, his Majesty has been sensibly dissatisfied with the evil
Proceedings of some of the Spanish Ministers toward your Holiness, and with the
little Respect which was paid you by one of those who are the most obliged to
honor you. I cannot enough admire, that he has so far forgot himself, as to
have used nothing but Complaints, and some less decent Terms, instead of
Praises and most humble Thanks, which are due to the singular Goodness and
Wisdom of your Government. Your Holiness has always appeared so manifestly to
desire the Peace of Christendom, and to appease the Differences which might
trouble it, that there is no body, if he be not prejudiced with Passion, but
must acknowledge, that you have omitted nothing, that you thought convenient,
to promote so good a Design. If, amongst all those who are compelled to behold
this Truth, some do profess the contrary, any Man may plainly see, that it is
Interest alone which makes them shut their Eyes at Justice, and open their
Mouths to speak against the Sentiments of their own Conscience. It seems, that
God has permitted things of this nature, which are lately passed, that your
Holiness may receive new Testimonies of the Zeal of the most pious and the
greatest-Prince of Christendom, who will always think it a singular Glory to
promote your Interest, and to partake of the Cares and the good Resolutions
your Holiliness has always had for the Advancement of Religion, and the
Establishment of the Public Tranquillity; to which, he thinks, it will not a
little contribute, to let the World know, the Deference which is due to the
Holy Chair, and to the Person of a Pope, of such rare and singular Virtues as
your Holiness. As for me, most holy Father, I should think my self altogether
unworthy of the Honor I have in the Church, and the Favors I receive from so
virtuous a Prince, as he is, to whose Service I am devoted with all manner of
respects, if I did not earnestly desire that Peace which your Holiness and his
Majesty so passionately wish for Christendom, which has hitherto been disturbed
by those who desire to appear contrary to one another. I hope, that God will
make this Truth more manifest to the World, and that your Holiness will have
reason to confess, that, as the King gladly makes use of all his Power to the
Glory of God, the Good of the Church, and the Public Tranquillity, he will lose
no opportunity to give you Proofs of his sincere Affection for the interest of
your Family: which, according to his Intentions, and your Holiness's Merits, I
will always endeavor to promote, as it is my Duty, who am, etc.

LETTER CCXLVIII. To the Same.
Most Holy Father,
Though the Choice which it has pleased your Holiness to make of the Person of
Monsieur Mazarin, to employ him in the Negotiation of the Affairs of Italy,
makes every one conceive how capable you judged him for it: I think myself
obliged to give this Testimony of him, That he has behaved himself so well,
that beside the Love of all the Princes with whom he has treated, which he has
gained; the King also was very much satisfied with him: He will assure your
Beatitude, of the sincere Affections his Majesty has for you, and to what
degree he honors you, not only by reason of your Dignity, but also because of
the great Merits of your Person. As to my particular, I most humbly beseech you
to believe, that I perceive myself so inseparably united to this Duty, that all
my Actions shall be so many Proofs of this Truth, and of the Zeal and
inviolable Constancy, with which I am, and ever will be, etc.

LETTER CCXLIX. To the Same.
Most Holy Father,
I Have this great while struggled in my self, if I ought to represent to your
Holiness the great Mischiefs which France suffers by reason of the Delays,
which for some time have been made use of in the Court of Rome, in the
Expedition of the Bulls of the Bishops, nominated to your Holiness by his
Majesty; but at last, the Salvation of Souls, the Reputation of your Holiness,
and the Fear of my being accountable to God, if I do not inform you what is
said upon this Subject, have prevailed with me to take Pen in hand, to beseech
you to prevent this great Evil.

I am sure your Holiness will judge, that it is reasonable, that you concur
with the great Care that the King takes, to make choice of the best Subjects of
his Kingdom to be promoted to Bishoprics; and that by this means, those who
are designed for that Office, may make use of the Talents that God has given
them, to the Salvation of Souls; he would not see by the Vineyard's side many
unprofitable Laborers, because they are not introduced by him who ought to set
them at work; the great Fruit that they reap, who have been lately promoted to
such Offices, gives occasion to Men to complain of the Miseries of the Church,
being by so much the greater, because little Obstacles stop the Current of
those great Favors, which it expects from your Hands.

As the Church cannot be divided from the Authority of your Holiness, so France
would not be separated from your Goodness, which she is sensible is so great
toward her, that she will always think herself as assured of that for which
she is purely dependent, as of that which she may expect from Justice. It has
always been an ancient Custom of France, to take Informations of the Life and
Manners of Men before the Bishops. The King might pretend, that they ought to
remain in those Terms. But if the Desire that he has to show, that he will pay
to the Holy Chair as much Deference as he can, without diminishing the Rights
and Dignities of the Crown, induce him not to hinder, that those nominated to
Bishoprics, who shall have more Convenience to take Informations before the
Nuncio's of your Holiness, may make use of this Liberty, provided that those,
who, according to the ancient Custom of the Realm, shall be invested before
French Bishops, may obtain their Bulls as readily, as though they they had
applied themselves to your Nuncio's. Your Holiness shall have that, which your
Predecessors never obtained of those who have hitherto possessed the Crown,
although they have winked at it upon certain occasions; as the singular Virtues
which were remarkable in your Person, while you were in this Kingdom, cannot be
blotted out of our Memory. I am also certain, that your Holiness does so well
remember what you saw practiced there, that you need but have recourse to your
Zeal, to promote the Welfare of France; the Knowledge that you have of what has
been always observed there, is sufficient to make you acknowledge the Justice
of her Desires. If you consider also, that Informations made before French
Bishops, cannot be refused, without doing a notable Prejudice to the Court of
Rome, who could not receive them without judging of their Probity, which was so
well known, that there was no room to doubt of the Validity of what passed
before them. I am sure, that Men's Souls will speedily receive of you that
Assistance which they hope for; and that your Holiness, by opening the Mouths
of those who expect that Liberty to instruct the People, which is altogether
necessary, shall stop theirs, who cannot but complain of the Difficulties which
have hindered them from receiving the Effects of your Power and Goodness. This
is that which I beg of you in all Humility, desiring of God that he would add
many Years to your Life, many Blessings to your House, and as much Happiness to
your Person, as is desired by, etc.

P. S. As I take the boldness to write to your Holiness upon a Subject which
concerns the Salvatiou of Souls, of which you have a particular Care, I am
assured, that you will not take it ill, that I have taken the liberty of
writing to Cardinal Barberini upon another Subject, which is of very great
Importance to the Church, to the Peace of Christendom, and to the Grandeur and
Safety of your Family.



LETTER CCL. To Cardinal Anthony, upon his sending him a Diamond Cross, and a
Diamond Box, with the King's Picture in it.
My LORD,
THE King being informed, that those who have always envied his Happiness, and
who have no true Love for your Family; forgetting nothing that may give you
Trouble, and make you bear the Cross upon his Account, commanded me to send you
one as a Present from him, to let all the World know, that he cannot endure,
that for his sake you bear any other than what comes from him, whose Weight
will not be troublesome; and because it is not only upon this occasion, but upon
all others which may happen, that his Majesty pretends to ease you of all the
Pains and Sorrows with which you are afflicted. He desired you also to receive
this Picture from his own Hand, believing that your Eminence, being fortified
by his Shadow alone, will be able to resist all the Enemies of your Family,
against whom he will very gladly use all his Power upon all occasions which may
present for your Advantage. I obey this Command with so much the more
Satisfaction, because I am, and always will be, etc.

LETTER CCLI. To Cardinal Barbarini.
My LORD,
THE Joy that I have for the good Understanding betwixt his Holiness and his
Majesty, will not suffer me to be silent; and I think I should be wanting to
myself, if I should fail to testify it to your Eminence: That Moment that this
Letter shall come to your Hands, it will give you a particular Proof of my
Affection, and Desire of the Welfare of your Family, whose Interest you hazard
so much by the Delay of the Promotion, that I could not but inform you of it. I
do not consider this Affair by the Misery which may happen by the Death of his
Holiness, (to whom I earnestly desire length of Days) because the greatness of
the Loss you would have by the Death of so good an Uncle, stifles in my Thought
the Consideration of all its Consequences. You must be blind not to see, that
this shaking of your House would be a Forerunner of its Ruin; but you lose so
much from this very Moment, by not making the Promotion, and fail to take
Advantages so important for you, and the Church, that it is impossible to
conceive the Reasons which have retarded it hitherto. Those who envy the
Grandeur of your Family, and desire its Depression, have this Satisfaction, to
live in hope to see that which they desire, to your Disadvantage; and instead
of fearing your Eminence, if this Promotion were made, you give them
opportunity to despise you, by the Belief that you will not lay hold upon an
occasion, which may put you in a Condition, not only not to fear them, but to
have no need of them; my Endeavors after the Interests of France, which are
dearer to me than my own Life, would not permit me to give you this Counsel,
after the execution of which, you may have less Consideration for the Crowns;
because you would not have so much need of them, if the Interests of the
Church, and all Christendom, which the King prefers before his own, did not
concur with yours. The Ambition of the Spaniards is too well known to the whole
World, not to discern, that they have no other Design, than not only to make
Popes which may be favorable to them, but who may so absolutely depend on
them, as to consider the Desires of Spain as the Rule of the Actions of the
Holy Chair; and you are too quick-sighted as not to see, that if you do not
fill those many Vacancies in the Consistory, you will not be strong enough to
hinder them from obtaining their Ends; by consequence of which, the Church will
be involved in a Servitude both shameful and intolerable, if the Contempt that
you have of yourself, hinders you from a due Consideration of an Affair of so
great Moment to your Family: The Public Interests do not suffer you to do so,
the Peace of Christendom, the Glory of God, and the Liberty of his Church,
oblige you, upon pain of answering before the Tribunal of Heaven, to contribute
your utmost to their Advantage, seeing there are no Reasons able to
counterpoise those powerful Considerations. I cannot imagine that you surmize,
that the Subjects nominated by the Crowns are not agreeable, both because I
know, and dare answer, that those who apply themselves to France, will
passionately embrace the Interests of your Family; and that though they should
not do it, this Consideration is too weak to divert them from so important a
matter. In a word, my Lord, the matter in dispute, is, so to secure the
Establishment of your House, that it may not be shaken, or fall into Contempt
or Ruiune.

The matter in dispute, is, Either to leave Christendom in Confusion, or to put
yourself in a Capacity effectually to promote its Peace, instead of being
contented with insignificant Wishes for so good Ends: The matter in dispute,
is, Either to abandon the Church of God, or to recover, and confirm at the same
time, its Renown and Grandeur. Whereas now, those who envy your Happiness, from
their Height look down upon you: This Promotion will be no sooner made, but
they will be compelled to lift up their Eyes, to see you in a Condition very
different from your former; whereas many judge by Appearances, which often
deceive, that there is Blindness or Weakness in your Conduct: Blindness, if you
do not see the Condition you are in, and Weakness and an abandoning of
yourself, if you will not make use of those Remedies which you have in your
Power: Some will commend your Prudence, others will admire your Power, and you
will be esteemed by all Men for your Ability in securing your Fortune, and the
Interests of the Church, which are much dearer to you than your own. If any one
blame me, because I think I see a-far off, which they think your Eminence does
not judge to be so nigh; give me leave to say, That the Public and your
Interests are always so present, and so much affect me, that Paris is not so
far from Rome, but I can see clearly what Matters of Importance happen in both
places. I know very well, that his Holiness's Chair is the Seat of Wisdom,
principally in the Life of so great a Pope. But as it is with Men in that which
most concerns them, as with those who cannot see, because they are dazzled with
the Light which is too nigh them, I am sure your Eminence will pardon me, if I
presume in this thing to be so clear-sighted, as to conjure you to prefer my
Sentiments, before those which you esteem to have had hitherto. I conjure you,
by the Care which you ought to have, that the succeeding Actions of his
Holiness answer the Luster of those that are past; so that it is with the
Judgments of the World, as with those of God, who judges Men by their last
Actions: Men would not esteem the Life of so great a Pope, being destitute of
Wisdom; because this Virtue would seem not to have been the Motive of his last
Thoughts. Finally, I conjure you, by the Desire you have to prolong the Pope's
Days, whose Life probably will be the more assured, the greater cause of
Contentment it shall have; which I wish him so heartily, that I beg of God an
ample Effusion of his Blessings upon his whole House, and upon your Person, to
whom I am, etc.

LETTER CCLII. To Cardinal Barberini.
My LORD,
TAking the boldness to write to our holy Father, upon the account of Marshall
D'Estre, the interest that I know you have with his Holiness, makes me take Pen
in hand to conjure you, to consider the Merit of this Affair, and the
Consequences which it may produce; and, upon this consideration, to manage it
with his Beatitude, so as may satisfy the King's desires: And, though I do not
doubt but his Holiness, approving of the Reasons which I make bold to represent
to him in my Letter, will pass by those which have hitherto hindered him to give
him this satisfaction; I promise myself, that he will the more easily agree to
it, when he shall be fortified by your good Offices, which I beseech you to
contribute, upon this occasion, in which not only the interest of his Holiness
is concerned, but that of his whole House, of which the King will always have
as great care, as of his own; the particular knowledge that I have of this
truth, makes me give you a firm assurance of it: Be pleased therefore firmly to
believe it, since the Proofs that his Majesty will give in all Occurrences to
the advantage of his Holiness and his Relations, will better confirm the
certainty of it, than my words, which I only make use of at present, to conjure
you to believe, that I am, etc.

LETTER CCLIII. To Victor Amedeus, Duke of Savoy.
SIR,
THe Sieur de St. Michael will give your Highness a particular Account of what
passed at the taking of Privas, which, on the eighth day after the Trenches
were opened, was carried on so briskly, that they were forced to surrender upon
discretion. I thought it my Duty to inform you, That, during the Siege, we
surprised some Letters, which Clausel, who is with your Highness, writ to
Monsieur de Rehen, to desire him to do Miracles against the King, because of
the great hopes he has of Assistance from your Parts. You may, Sir, very well
imagine, that we desire, that the good Understanding betwixt the King and you
may be continued, that those Negotiations may not be at your Court by Persons
who are in your power. His Majesty has, at present, one of the Brothers of the
said Clausel in his hands; he was taken in Privas. He has been so kind to him,
that, as yet, he is not punished according to his Merits. As to what remains, I
promise my self, that the Affection which you have for Madam, will influence
you to give her satisfaction about the Affair of Pomeuse, as I have formerly
desired your Highness, and do yet repeat my Desires, by these Lines, conjuring
you to believe, that, as to my particular, I will have such Sentiments of it,
as you may expect from, etc.

LETTER CCLIV. To the Same.
SIR,
I Am particularly obliged to your Highness for the favor you were pleased to
do me, in sending Count Scarnasis to give me a Visit, and to assure me of your
Good Will. I always promised myself, that I should find in you that dispotion
which you testify you have in the King's satisfaction, and that you will show
him the Effects of it upon the present Occasion. So I desired you to believe,
that you may be assured of his Majesty's Affections, and of all those of his
House: And, as to my particular, I will serve you to my utmost. I have
particularly made known to the said Count Scarnasis, my earnest Desires of the
Peace, not only of Italy, but of all Christendom: To which I will gladly
contribute all that may reasonably be expected from a Person, who really is,
etc.

LETTER CCLV. To Victor Amedeus, Duke of Savoy.
SIR,
I Was very glad to hear News of your Highness, by the Sieur d'Inchamp, who
assuring me of your good Health, confirmed in me the belief of your Affection
to the King's Service: And, as an Answer to what you were pleased to write, I
tell you, that the sincerity of the King's Intentions is such, that, as yet, it
has had no other design in the Affairs of Italy, than to deliver the Duke of
Mantua from his Persecutions, in a mild and loving way: He has long hoped for
this happiness; but the Delays of Spain, and the several Puttings-off which
happened in all the Passages of this Affair, having given him great reason to
believe, that the Enemies of the Duke of Mantua were pleased to speak of an
Agreement and Peace with a design to do neither, he is resolved to send me into
Italy, as the forerunner of himself, with a considerable Army; and he has
given me such precise Orders, that I have not the liberty of changing them: The
first is, To lose no time. Which makes me desire you, quickly, to open the
Magazines of Savoy, according to the Promise you made to Marshall Crequi, that
the King's Army may begin to pass the 25th of this Month. His Majesty will be
obliged by it; and I, in particular, who am, and ever will be, etc.

LETTER CCLVI. To the Princess of Piedmont.
MADAM,
YOur Highness honors me a thousand times more than I deserve, in vouchsafing
to send me a Visit by the Sieur Morguenay, to testify your Joy at my arrival
in those Parts. I want fit words to be able to express my sense of this Favor,
which I acknowledge I only owe to your Goodness; I do not doubt but you will
honor me with the continuation of your Good Will, your Candor being so great,
that I look upon all your Words as infallible. You will also believe, I am
certain, that I will forget nothing which may merit so great an Honor, which I
esteem according to its quality; having understood, by the Letters which it
pleased your Highness to write to me, by the Sieur de l'Isle, and afterward by
Marshall Crequi, that you are pleased, that I should have the honor of seeing
you; and that you would communicate to me some Particulars, which you do not
think convenient to trust in Writing: Now, that I may satisfy your Will, and
my Desire and Duty altogether, I will not fail to send to you, by the Marshall
de Crequi, or the Sieur de l'Isle, the means which I think proper to attain to
this end. In the mean time, I desire you to be assured, that no Man is more
faithful to you than myself, who will always give you such clear Proofs of this
truth, that you will have reason to confess me to be sincerely that which I am,
etc.

LETTER CCLVII. To the Same, from Pignerol.
MADAM,
ALl manner of Respect and Duty obliges me to seek an occasion by these Lines,
to give your Highness new Testimonies of the Passion which I always will have
for your Service, and of my Obedience; and also to inform you, that I am
departing hence to meet the King at Lions, where he commands me to wait upon
him. I think it also my Duty to tell you, Ma^am, That I understand, that his
Majesty's intentions are not foreign to a Peace; which may be concluded, if it
be desired, upon reasonable Terms: And, if it be, his Majesty desires, that
your Highness would send him the Approbation of the House of Savoy. The Zeal
that I know you have to promote this Affair, will make me gladly contribute
toward it, according to my small ability, by the performance of those things
which his Majesty desires for your satisfaction and advantage. I will assure
the King, and the Queen Mother, of the tender Affection your Highness has for
their Persons, and of your Displeasure of all those Passages; in which I
beseech God to be your Comfort, who often suffers Afflictions for a good end. I
will never have any other, but to show you, by all manner of Proofs, that I am,
and ever will be, etc.

LETTER CCLVIII. To the Princess of Piedmont.
MADAM,
I Have received the Letter which your Highness was pleased to honor me with,
about the Death of the Duke of Savoy, and the desire that you have of a lasting
Peace in Italy. I desire you to believe that the King has no less mind to it,
but he desires it may be firm, reasonable, and honorable, in which the
Queen Mother, and all their Majesty's Servants have the like Sentiments. As to
my particular, I would contribute my utmost to this end, but those with whom we
have to do, are so far from it at present, that they have deprived us of all
hopes of it; but let what will happen, I will always honor your Highness, as
it is my duty, and will testify to you that I am more concerned for your
Interest than mine own, having no greater passion than that to serve you, and
to let you know by real effects that I am as much as can be, etc.

LETTER CCLIX. To the Same.
MADAM,
I Will not omit this opportunity of assuring your Highness of the continuation
of my most humble Service, of which I shall always think myself happy to be
able to give you proofs upon all occasions: I do not write to you my
unhappiness, by incurring the Queen-Mother's displeasure; because you may have
learned it some other way. I only beseech you to believe, that that shall not
hinder me from preserving the memory of your Obligations as long as I live, and
that I will serve you upon all occasions with all the fidelity that you may
expect from a Creature wholly devoted to your Interest. As to what concerns
your Highness, Madam, you may be certain that I will honor you, and will
always have as great a care of your advantage, as can be desired from, etc.

LETTER CCLX. To the Duchess of Savoy.
MADAM,
I Cannot express to your Highness my extreme joy at the accommodation of
Affairs in Italy, for the general good of Christendom, and particularly, to
your own and the Duke of Savoy's satisfaction. It is long since I earnestly
desired to see things in the condition they are now in, for which I praise God
with all my heart; and though I do not at all doubt, but that things were managed
by his Inclination, as you are pleased to write; it is also certain, that your
Persuasions were very efficacious to this purpose: which is the reason, that by
the consent of the whole world, you merit more Glory, than my Pen is able to
express: He will reap this advantage by it, That renewing a sincere and good
understanding with the King, he will receive all the testimonies of affection
which he may expect of his Majesty; and you, Madam, all the marks of that
singular esteem which he has for your Person, and of that tender love he has
had for you many years. As for my particular, I beseech you to believe, that I
will always advance at his Court your Highness's Interest as much as you can
desire, and will give you, upon all occasions, such clear proofs of the passion
with which I honor you, and desire to serve you, that you shall have no reason
to doubt of it: In the mean time, be pleased to give me leave to tell you, that
Mr. d' Hemery having informed me, that the Duke of Savoy has assured, that he
will be satisfied as to matters relating to his house. I will diligently
endeavor that the King shall give him all possible instances which may tend to
his satisfaction, desiring to show you upon this occasion, as in all others,
that that which concerns you, shall be equally regarded as my own life; all my
actions shall confirm this truth, and that which I now declare in subscribing,
etc.

LETTER CCLXI. To the Same.
MADAM,
IF I were able to express the passion which I have, and will have as long as I
live for your Highness, I do not at all doubt, but you would believe it as
sincere as you can desire it, of that Man who honors and respects you to the
highest degree imaginable; and till time, and my actions shall make this truth
appear, give me leave to tell you, that if that which Mr. Mazarin, and the
Count de Druent have told me, of the Duke of Savoy's Affection to the King, be
real, as I do not at all doubt; I dare boldly assure him, that he will be very
well satisfied with his Highness, promising him, that I will forget nothing
which may depend upon me to serve him with all possible diligence, in things
which may be the most useful to him: I always have had a particular esteem for
the Duke of Savoy, and believed, that by appyling himself altogether to France,
he may do miracles, being a Man of resolution in all his undertakings. I am yet
possessed with the same thought to that degree, that I do not at all despair of
many good Events, if his Highness be no more so unresolved, as I have observed
him to be, before he engages in any Design, and if he will despise small
Interests, to which he applys himself to that degree, that we cannot procure
him great ones as we desire. I am assured your Highness will pardon me that I
speak so freely, because I do it to serve you, seeing plainly, that now is the
time to have a good Union betwixt the King and the Duke of Savoy, or else we
must never expect it; and I think I do my duty, in informing you what may be
done, in contributing my utmost to satisfy your desires. The King has most
expressly commanded the Marshall d' Effiat, to give you good Bills of
Assignment for your Pension; as also to the Cardinal of Savoy, whom I will
serve the more willingly, because I see, by one of your Letters, that you are
very well satisfied with him, desiring to make it appear in every thing; that
concerns you, or wherein I may please you, that I am, and ever will be, etc.

LETTER CCLXII. To the Same.
MADAM,
I Have received the Letter with which your Highness was pleased to honor me
by Mr. Mazarin, and was particularly informed by him, what your Highness
thought good he should impart to me; I have not words fit to express my
Gratitude and Obligations to you, for that Favor that you are pleased to give
a testimony of your Confidence in me, assuring you, that you can have it in no
body who will more endeavor to deserve it. In the mean time, give me leave, if
you please, to tell you, That you had very good reason to judge that I would
have no great pity of the Evil that troubles you; because, if it ends, as I
earnestly desire, to your satisfaction, it may prove an unspeakable Blessing:
The Passion which I have for all your Concerns, makes me hope a Happy Success;
yet if I were deceived in my belief, I will not be so in that which I have,
that being always like yourself, you will bear this Accident with the same
Constancy, as you have done that other Affliction upon the same Occasion, with
the hopes of being one day most happy: I promise myself so much from God's
goodness, that he will not only defend you from real Evils, but from the very
fear of them: I beg it of him with all my heart, desiring your Highness to
believe, that I will have no greater Satisfaction in the World, than when I can
demonstrate to you more and more by my Services, that no body is equal to me in
the Passion with which I am, and ever will be, etc.

LETTER CCLXIII. To the Same.
MADAM,
HAving seen by a Letter, which it pleased your Highness to honor me with, the
belief that some body has done you some bad Offices in our Parts, I take my Pen
in hand to desire you not to be concerned on that account; because nothing can
be spoken of any thing relating to you, but what must really turn to your
advantage: Therefore pray let your Mind be at ease as to that matter, and think
only of what may afford you satisfaction, being certain that you shall be
seconded by France according to your desire, and particularly by me, who will
always esteem your Interest more than my own, since I am, and ever will be, etc.

LETTER CCLXIV. To the Same.
MADAM,
THE Sieur Bernet has given me the Letter with which your Highness was pleased
to honor me, and has communicated to me your belief, which is of no small
consideration; I cannot be sufficiently amazed at the evil disposition of the
Princess of Carignan, and at the scandalous Discourse which is reported she
makes use of to your Prejudice: I will not conceal that some Noise of it has
reached the King's Ears. I omitted nothing of my Duty to let him know the
Falsehood of such Calumnies, which have no bad impression upon his mind. I
confess, Madam, That those who will be glad to advantage themselves by
blemishing your Virtue, strive to color their Calumnies with so many
circumstances, that they have no foundation; yet they have some false
appearance in their malice, and I should not be your Highness's Servant to that
degree that I pretend to be, if by my Obedience to what you are pleased to
command, to write to you what I think proper for your Service. I did not tell
you, that the first and principal thing you ought to do, in my Opinion, is, so
to deport yourself, that your Enemies may not be able to misinterpret any of
your Actions: It will be, Madam, a very easy thing, and by that means, you
will prevent that at any time none do you any bad Office with the Duke of
Savoy; and this Proceeding will be no small help to the King, in the Design
which he has always had to assist you upon all Occasions. This being done,
Madam, as I do not at all doubt of it, because it wholly depends upon you, your
Highness need be afraid of nothing, let the Endeavors of your Enemies against
you be never so powerful.

I am of your Highness's mind, That the Designs of those who would blemish your
Virtues by their railings, have a further tendancy than at first sight they
seem to have; but I hope God will preserve your Husband longer than those Men;
and I can assure you, that if ever Spain, by any ones Instigation howsoever,
undertake any thing against him, your Highness, and the Children that it has
pleased God to give you both, that the King will protect you so powerfully,
that she shall receive nothing but shame by her Enterprise. It is in this,
Madam, that I am Obliged to serve you as I am in Duty bound, assuring you, that
I should think it a great Honor to pass the Mountains once more, to give you a
Testimony of the Passion I always had for yours, and the Duke of Savoy's
Service; who, I am certain, will be unmindful of nothing which may be expected
from his good Conduct, to invite his Majesty to give him his Protection, and
the other Effects of his Benevolence. I will not conceal from your Highness,
that many have thought that the Retreat of Prince Thomas into the King of
Spain's Dominions was concerted with him; but I can assure you, that the King
never believed it, neither did it enter into any of their thoughts, who have
the Honor to Serve him. I do not at all doubt, but that there will be a better
Understanding betwixt his Majesty, and your Highness's, than ever: It is that
which I desire with all my heart, and the means to make it appear that I am,
and ever will be, etc.

LETTER CCLXV. To the Duke of Savoy.
SIR,
I Have received the Letter which your Highness was pleased to Write by Count
Lumiane, upon a Subject of which I have nothing to say, but that I contributed
something to Monsieur's return into this Kingdom, as you esteem him. I have
done nothing in this but according to the King's Inclinations, who is so well
disposed to those who concern him, that it is impossible to express it. I give
a thousand thanks to your Highness, for the Testimonial you were pleased to
give me upon this Subject, beseeching you to believe; that you shall be
sensible by my Affection and Service upon all Occasions, that I am, etc.

LETTER CCLXVI. To the Same.
SIR,
IT would be a Crime in me, to defer any longer to testify my extraordinary
satisfaction at the Glory which you have acquired by the Victory, with which it
pleased God to bless your Arms in those Parts.

I do not represent to you the King's sense of it, because you may better
discover it by a Letter which his Majesty has writ upon that Subject, than I
can express it in these Lines. I will satisfy myself only to tell you, that he
promises himself, that your Highness will so advantageously manage all
Opportunities, which you shall esteem Profitable for the common Cause, that you
will advance your Affairs to the highest Degree that may be expected from your
Valor and Prudence together; this, Sir, as to my particular, I passionately
desire, both for his Majesty's and your own Reputation. I am, etc.

LETTER CCLXVII. To the Duchess of Savoy.
MADAM,
THE King, making no distinction betwixt your Highness's and his own Servants,
commanded me to send to your Highness two Briefs of Marechax de Camp in his
Army, and two others of Pensions for the Count de Verrue, and the Marquess de
Ville, that they may receive them by your hands. I also send you by his
Majesty's Order, two blank Briefs for Pensions, which you may fill up with
their Names whom you judge most worthy, and whom you know to be best affected
to his Majesty, and your Highness. In this, as in all other things, you may see
the esteem that the King has for your Person, and the desire I have according
to his Intentions, to manifest to you what Zeal I have for what concerns the
Advantage of your Highness, to whom I am, etc.

LETTER CCLXVIII. To the Duke of Savoy.
SIR,
IT is needless to represent to your Highness the concerns I have for the
mascarriage of the Siege of Valence, and that which followed, because you may
easily conceive it both by my Passion for the welfare of the King's and your
Highness's Affairs, and by the desire I always had to see his Majesty's Arms
profi^er under your Conduct. I will only tell you, that the King is so well
satisfied with your Proceedings in this Juncture, and has such an entire
Confidence in your Affection and Sincerity, that nothing can be more. His
Majesty sends express Orders to Marshall Crequi not only to have a deference
for your Sentiments, but entirely to follow your Intentions and Resolutions, so
I do not doubt but that things for the future being thus managed, you will
re-establish the Affairs of Italy as well as ever, and by consequence, your
Prudence and Courage will produce Effects very advantageous for the common
good. I earnestly desire it, Sir, not only for the King's Service, but for the
particular Glory of your Highness. I am, etc.

LETTER CCLXIX. To the Duchess of Savoy.
MADAM,
IT is not necessary that I represent to your Highness my extreme Satisfaction,
at the Advantage which the Arms, commanded by the Duke of Savoy in Italy, have
gained over the Enemies in the last Battle, which happened at the Post of
Thesim, because it will be easy for you to conceive it by the Passion I have,
and always will have, for the King's and your Highness's Service; Neither do I
take Pen in hand for this purpose, but only to let you know the ineffable Joy
his Majesty received thereby, which proceeds not so much from the Reputation
which this Action gives to his Affairs, as from the Honor, and the Glory,
which his Highness has acquired upon this occasion; in which, truly, he has
omitted nothing which might be expected from his Prudence, his Valor, and
Courage. A Fortnight ago I took the Boldness to write to your Highness, that
considering the Duke of Savoy might have need of some Supply, for the Expense
he is obliged to, I would endeavor to obtain him one of the King, the first
time I should have the Honor to see him; now, that I might keep my Promise,
and satisfy my Desire together, I laid hold upon the Opportunity of the good
News of the Success in Italy, to make the Proposal to his Majesty, who,
notwithstanding the great Affairs he has now in hand, has cheerfully granted
him three hundred thousand Livres, of which I shall give to our Ambassador
good Bills of Assignment, all payable within the Year. I will be very diligent
in this matter, desiring to give your Highness a Testimony, that not only upon
this occasion, but upon any other, wherein your Interest and Satisfaction are
concerned, you are more dear to me than my Life, and that I am, and ever will
be, etc.

LETTER CCLXX. To the Duchess of Savoy.
MADAM,
I Cannot express to you my Resentment of the Injury the Cardinal of Savoy has
done himself, by running counter to his Duty, and your Intentions, without any
Reason. It is true, that his Levity and Inconstancy will be blamed by the whole
World. But that which vexes me most, is, the mischievous Design that he and
Prince Thomas may have for your Prejudice; the King has so much tenderness to
your Highness, that he can never promise you any Assistance, but he is better
than his Word. I can assure you, that upon all Occasions, and at all times, I
will forget nothing that may depend upon me, not truly for your own Service,
but for all theirs who belong to you; beseeching you to believe, that though I
have always hitherto been your Servant as much as may be, I am now doubly so:
The King is very much assured of the Fidelity of the Duke of Savoy. I will
gladly be his Caution upon this, or any other Article. The Count of St. Morice
has spoke to me about an Honor, which your Highness designs to bestow upon me,
of which I think myself so unworthy, that I dare not so much as think of it.
Those are Proofs of your excessive Bounty, which oblige me more and more to be
what I am, etc.

LETTER CCLXXI. To the Same.
MADAM,
I Cannot sufficiently praise God for the happy Deliverance of your Highness
from the Pains and Perils of Childbirth, and for the new Blessing which he is
pleased to add to your Family, nor testify to you my particular Joy for it. I
make no Answer to that which concerns the Design that your Highness is pleased
to have upon this occasion relating to me; because it is so much above me, that
I can but commend your Bounty from whence it proceeds; and desire to be so
happy, as to be able to declare my Sense of it, words being not capable to
express it. I will endeavor to supply that Defect by the best Services I am
able to do you, to let you see, that no body is equally yours, as is, etc.

LETTER CCLXXII. To the Same.
MADAM,
I Think it needless to declare to your Highness my Grief for the Duke of
Savoy's Sickness, and that your Knowledge of the Zeal and Passion I have always
had for both your Persons, is sufficient to make you conceive to what degree it
is. I will only tell you, Madam, that the King was sensibly affected with the
News; and the same Hour he heard it, he dispatched this Gentleman to let you
know his Concerns for it, and to bring back the Conditions of his Health, for
which he is in much Pain. I do not tell you, Madam, the Tenderness and
Affection, which it pleases his Majesty to declare to me he has for you upon
account of this Sickness; because, besides that the Ambassador will not fail
to make it known to you; as also, what we esteem proper for your Highness's
Service in this Juncture. I am sure you do not doubt, but they are such as you
desire. I will only assure you by these Lines, That if the Duke of Savoy should
unfortunately dye, which I hope God of his Mercy will prevent, the King will
omit nothing that may depend upon his Power and Authority to protect your
Highness, and to hinder that those, who are Enemies of your Peace, and have
always envied your Virtue, be not able to do you any Harm. As to my particular,
Madam, I beseech your Highness to believe, That I will always esteem myself
extremely happy, to employ the Remainder of my Life, to second his Majesty's
Intentions for your Advantage; and to let you know, by my Actions and Services,
that no body does, and will honor you with more Sincerity than myself; nor is
more truly what I always will be, etc.

LETTER CCLXXIII. To the Duchess of Savoy.
MADAM,
AS our Affliction is unparalleled, so my Sorrow is ineffable. I confess I was
so surprised with this Misfortune, which has happened not only to your
Highness, but to all Christendom, that nothing but God can give me any Comfort.
It is from his Hand, Madam, that I expect your Highness will receive
Consolation, and from him alone; so great a Distemper must have no less a
Physician. The King, who will always look upon your Interests as his own, is
extremely afflicted with this Accident. You will receive whatever you may
expect from his Benificence, assuring you, Madam, that he will, upon this
occasion, do more for your Highness than for himself. As for me, Madam; be
pleased to put me at the Head of all your most zealous Servants, who always
take most Care of your Concerns, and who will omit nothing which they think may
contribute to your Prosperity, etc.

LETTER CCLXXIV. To the Same.
MADAM,
THe more your Enemies strive to publish their mischievous Designs against your
Person, the more does the Zeal which I have always had for your Highness's
Service augment; and I hope I shall be happy enough to find out some
opportunity to give you new Proofs of it, and by the same means discover to
you, the Designs of those who do not love your Highness, and who desire to
disturb your Peace, are disappointed; yet this matter depends upon your
Highness's Conduct, and the stout and good Resolutions which you shall take at
your Entrance upon the Government, to maintain your Authority, and to prevent
the Mischiefs which your Enemies would do you. I pray your Highness to believe,
that the King will prevent it with all his Power; and that, as to my
particular, I honor you, and will not omit my utmost to second his Majesty's
Sentiments to your Advantage; and to let you know at the same time, that as
your Highness has no Subject, over whom you have a more absolute Power than
myself, so you have none, who more really is, and will be, etc.

LETTER CCLXXV. To the Same.
MADAM,
I Cannot sufficiently commend the Care which Monsieur d'Hemery writes your
Highness will have of your Affairs, and that Prudence by which you distinguish
betwixt good and bad Servants. I could never have believed that which you were
pleased to discover of him, of the Intentions of Father Monod. I do not much
value his mischievous Designs, which your Highness acknowledges he has against
France, and those who have the Honor to serve the King: But I am so concerned
at that, which his Behavior made your Highness take notice of, that he has
against your Person, and your Children, that it is impossible to express it. I
am under a perpetual Apprehension of the continual Danger your Highness is
exposed to, having such a turbulent Spirit nigh you, and the Mischief he may do
you, which may happen in an instant, without any possibility of a Remedy, if it
be not prevented. I confess I cannot be at Ease, till I know your Highness has
put in Execution the good Resolutions that Monsieur d'Hemery tells me you have
taken, to secure your Estate, your Person, and your Children; the King desiring
nothing so much, as to give you a Testimony of the extraordinary Passion he has
for you, cannot be more afflicted, than to see you in a Condition of receiving
no Advantage by his Protection. Beside, the Letter which he has wrote to your
Highness, he has particularly commanded me to declare his Sentiments upon this
occasion. I have so enlarged to Monsieur d'Hemery, that it is superfluous to
say any more. Your Highness will be pleased to believe what he shall say upon
this Subject; and also, that no Man honors you more than I, who desire your
Welfare, your Grandeur, and the Advantage of your Children, as much as
yourself; all my Actions shall confirm this Truth, and that I am, etc.

LETTER CCLXXVI. To the Same.
MADAM,
THE Extremity of your Affairs makes me take Pen in Hand, to tell you in a few
Words, That you can take no other Method for your Safety, than what the King's
Ambassadors have proposed to you, concerning the depositing some Places in
Piedmont: As a Man must be extraordinary wicked, to desire to reap any other
Advantage thereby, than yours and your Son's Safery, and the Re-establishment
of your States; so, unless you be blind, you cannot but see, that this is the
only Remedy. There is no other that can preserve you from Ruin.

Your Highness will give me leave to tell you, That the bad State of your
Affairs do not suffer you to be unresolved at a Juncture, wherein every Moment
is inestimable; and Necessity and Reason so agree together, that the first
commands what the other advises. If you despise the Counsel that I give you,
you will know the Profit of it, when you cannot enjoy the Effects of it; and
if, by following it, your Highness do not find it good, I agree that you cry me
down in the World, and make me pass for what I am not. It is your part, Madam,
to have a care not to be amused by the Spaniards; as sick Men, who in the
Intermissions of a Fever, think they are absolutely cured. But to imitate the
Physicians, who make use of that time to prevent succeeding Fits, the Wisdom
which God has given your Highness will so plainly manifest to you, that your
Interest is the only Motive which makes me speak after this manner; and not
doubting of the good Resolution you will take, nothing remains, but to assure
you, that I will never change that of being, etc.

LETTER CCLXXVII. To the Same.
MADAM,
THE Count of Cameran, who is returning to your Highness, will particularly
tell you the Passion with which I will serve you upon the present occasion. I
conjured him to beseech you, by the Consideration of your own Interest, not to
suffer yourself to be ensnared by the Artifices of the Spaniards, who have no
other Design, than to delude all those with whom they treat with fair
Appearance. I always apprehended that which I now perceive from their Malice,
and have often represented it to those who belonged to your Highness. I hope
their wicked Designs will not have the intended Effect; at least, I can assure
you, Madam, that the King will omit nothing, which may depend upon his Power,
to defeat them; and that, if the Zeal which I always had for your Highness's
Service were capable of Augmentation, it should now be redoubled, to show you,
upon this occasion, as upon all others, I really am, etc.

LETTER CCLXXVIII. To the Same.
MADAM,
THis Letter is only to tell your Highness, that Experience having informed
you, that the Advice which you have hitherto taken, was the best that could be
to advance your Enemies Affairs, and to ruin your own. Nothing now remains to
be done to save yourself, but quickly to take away contrary to what you have
hitherto taken: If the Advice I give you, may be any way prejudicial to you, I
myself desire you not to f^llow it: But if it be the only remaining Means to
preserve you from utter Ruin, which your Enemies will endeavor to make
shameful, you must be deprived of that Wisdom God has given you, if you do not
embrace those Overtures made to you by the King's Ambassadors. It is not time
for Deliberation; nothing now remains, but to execute a good Resolution, which
alone can defend your Life, and the remainder of your Son the Duke of Savoy's
States, and your Liberty altogether. I beseech you to behave yourself so, that
I may be found a better Physician than a Prophet. I have been one of them but
too much, in your Highness's Concerns, to my great Sorrow. I dare take upon me,
though your Distemper be very dangerous, to be the other, if you are willing, as
I conjure you, for your own sake, who am, etc.

LETTER CCLXXIX. To the Same.
MADAM,
AS I have no greater Passion, than to make known to your Highness that which I
have for your Service, I can receive no greater Joy, than to understand, by the
Letters with which you are pleased to honor me, that the Testimonies which I
endeavor to give you of it, are agreeable and satisfactory; beseeching you to
believe, that as to my particular, I shall always be so, when I can be
serviceable in any thing; and that, as your Interests are as dear to me as the
King's, I will omit no Opportunity of managing them according as you yourself
can desire, as I have particularly declared to your Ambassador. I do not
represent to you my Joy for the taking of Coni, because, you being sensible of
my Zeal for the Prosperity and the Advantage of the King's, and your Highness's
Affairs, which are conjoined, you will judge what it was: I will only tell you,
that I hope, by God's Goodness, that this good Success will make way for
others, which will be no less advantageous to you. I wish it with all my Heart,
and your Highness to believe, that I ever will be, etc.

LETTER CCLXXX. To the Same.
MADAM,
I Do not doubt, but your Highness, in what concerns me, has taken that part
which you were pleased to testify, both by the Letters with which you have
honored me, and by your Ambassador; for which Reason, I give you all the
Thanks which your Goodness requires. I do not send to you for what Reasons the
King secured the Person of Monsieur Bouillon, because you will particularly
have them some other way. I will only tell you, that it being confidently
reported to us, that he thought to prevail with your Highness to favor his
mischievous Designs. I should think myself extremely obliged to you, if you
would do me the Favor to impart the Discourse he had with you upon that
Subject, and how far you could penetrate into his Intentions. While I expect
News from your Highness, I will tell you, that though there is much Fault to be
found with the Treaty of Accommodation made with your Brothers-in-law, yet the
Desire the King has always had to procure the Tranquillity of your Son's States,
by teaching those Princes their Duty, is the Reason that his Majesty, in my
Opinion, will pass by that Consideration, to testify more and more, that there
is nothing that he will not do for your Sake. As to my particular, Madam, I
beseech your Highness to believe, that I will always contribute to your
Advantage, all that you can expect from a Man that honors you, and is with the
greatest Passion. etc.

LETTER CCLXXXI. To Monsieur d' Hemery.
SIR,
I Was so surpised and afflicted with the Duke of Savoy's sickness, that I
cannot declare it to you, both by reason of the exigency of Affairs, and for
her Highness's sake, whom I love and honor much. I hope God will preserve him
for Madam, and the greatest evil that will happen to us upon her account, will
be the apprehension of bad Success. If this misfortune should happen, nothing
is to be done but what you propose, to wit, to make Madam Guardian of her
Children, to make those who are in place, trusty and faithful to her, and
absolutely to hinder the Cardinal of Savoy from returning, to have a care of
his and Prince Thomas's Cabals, and to take care that Madam have a good, wise,
and courageous Council, well affected to her Interest, and consequently to
France, from whence all her Peace must be derived; here you have in a few words
the Plan, according to which you must act. I take you to be so wise and
discreet, that I do not doubt, but that if you have judged that the Duke of
Savoy's sickness will not end well, you have already made some Application that
way, as far as in prudence you might, that his Highness in his Will may appoint
Madam, Guardian of her Children, and give an express Commandment to his
Officers and Servants to acknowledge her in that Quality.

LETTER CCLXXXII. To Monsieur d' Hemery, upon the death of the Duke of Savoy.
SIR,
I Am so afflicted at the Duke of Savoy's death, that it is impossible for me
to express it. This accident has so much the more affected me, because it has
surprised us when we thought least of it: I have nothing to add to that which I
wrote two days ago, upon the subject of his Highness's sickness, only, that as
I believe, that Madam ought to make it her principal Aim, to hinder her
Brothers-in-law from entering into her States; I think also she ought to relux
that great and just Rigor, which the Duke of Savoy had in depriving them of
their Possessions. Upon this ground, I think, she may let the Cardinal of Savoy
know, that she will suffer him to enjoy what belongs to him, and mildly dispose
him to live at Rome, without pretending to return into Piedmont.

It is thought that Madam may restore him Masserati, whom the Duke of Savoy has
put in Prison, and that this Man carrying him this news to Rome, may dispose
him, of his own accord, to do what Madam desires. Whether it be by this way, or
any other, it is altogether necessary to stand upon these Terms. We find
ourselves much troubled to nominate the Persons Madam ought to make use of; you
know Father Monod, it is hard to pass him by in the conditions he is in; it is
also difficult to have any confidence in him.

The Marquess of St. Morice is a very good Man, he is altogether joined to
Father Monod, he was as you know, Master of the Horse to Prince Thomas. I fear
that Father Monod endeavors to make Count Philippes persuade Madam that it
signifies nothing to her, whether or no the Cardinal of Savoy return into her
States. I do not tell you this without reason, having seen some Men who have
already perceived that the Sentiments of some of that State tend that way: and
the desire of such Men can be no other but to strengthen and fortify
themselves against Madam upon all occasions, when she does not Act according to
their desires, and by this means to weaken her Authority. You must, above all
things, have a care of such Council, by which, neither Madam's nor her
Childrens life will be secure. Whatever Council her Highness is pleased to
take, it is reasonable she should impart it to the King, and so, that those who
are chosen, may know it was by his Majesty's Approbation. We will send you by
the first, after what manner Henry the Second governed himself upon the like
Occasion, upon the death of the Duke of Savoy's Grandfather.

LETTER CCLXXXIII. To Monsieur d' Hemery.
SIR,
THE Duke of Savoy having shown the strength of his Judgment, even to his
death, in making Madam Guardian of his Children, she is obliged, by Honor and
Conscience, to do her utmost to demonstrate to her State, and all Christendom,
That she knows how to make use of that Power which his deceased Highness has
bequeathed her.

When she has taken the Oath of Fidelity from all the Chief Officers of her
State, and has well considered that there is no suspicious Person in place, she
can think of nothing more useful and necessary than to choose a good Council,
whose Reputation may add Credit to her Government.

And in order thereunto, I think that she ought to make it her principal aim to
hinder her Brothers-in-law from returning into her State, or cabaling in her
absence.

I think, that in their Correction she must use Mildness, and relax that just
Rigor the Duke of Savoy used for their Good. Upon this ground, she may let
them know her Resolution to suffer them to enjoy their Possessions; and let
them be desired, at the same time, not to pretend to enjoy them in any place
but where they are.

It is thought, that if Madam set at liberty the Cardinal of Savoy's Domestic,
which his late Highness had Imprisoned, and send him to carry this News, it
will be a double Obligation to make him comply with Madam's desires.

It is a thing of Importance, that Madam give some ease to her Subjects: But
if, this be impossible during the War, it is necessary that she declare, that
she only expects a Peace, to give them a Testimony of the Clemency of her
Conduct.

Madam's great Forefight makes me believe that she will not suffer herself to
be excelled by any other of her Sex who have had the Administration of a State.
Yet, after she has declared her Goodness, as she ought, to all her Subjects, it
is altogether necessary that she use Force and Vigor against those who shall
contradict her Will, and are guilty of Crimes against the State.

For Instance, If any of her Brothers-in-law should presume to enter into her
States, she must shut the Gates in all places, and absolutely deny them
entrance, the Security of Madam and her Children, the Peace and Tranquillity of
her State depends so absolutely upon this Point, that if she neglect to observe
it, upon any pretense whatsoever, we can foresee nothing but mischievous
Consequences from such a Neglect. If any of the Governors or principal
Officers be known to be Adherents to those Gentlemen, they must be changed,
without giving them time to put their wicked Designs in execution: and if any
one fail, he must be severely punished.

In a word, By how much the more Madam's Sex is esteemed to be weak, she ought
to govern with so much the more Force and Vigor, that a good Discipline may be
kept in her Government.

I do not speak of the Deference which Madam ought to have to the King's
Advice, because she is too wise, not to know, that under God, all her Safety
depends upon him. As she must have a particular care to regulate herself by the
Counsels that are given her by a Person so concerned for her welfare: those, of
his Majesty's Friends, who are about her, must think of nothing but to govern
themselves with Modesty, that all her Highness's States may know, that the only
Design of his Majesty is purely to Assist Madam, for her own sake, without any
other Pretense than her Advantage, and the Security of her Childrens States.

This Circumpection is altogether necessary to take away all Pretense from
those who, being Adherents of Spain, would make seeming, that the proper
Interest of Madam and her Children should oblige her to seek for a Counterpoise
from thence, to oppose the Pretense that France may have to her Prejudice. I do
not take notice of the care you must have to please Madam, because it is a
thing so well known, that no body who is employed at her Court can fail of that
Duty.

Since nothing more a^enates Men's minds than Violence, it is wholly necessary
that the King's Servants, who shall be at her Highness's Court, act with so
much Modesty, that instead of provoking their Spirits, with whom they have to
do, they must win them by Gentleness.

LETTER CCLXXXIV. To the Same.
SIR,
MAdam may be assured, that if the Cardinal of Savoy be in Piedmont, there is
no safety for her, or her Children. Let Men say what they please, she ought to
suspect every body, who says the contrary. If the said Cardinal has had the
Impudence to speak to the prejudice of Madam's Reputation, while the Duke of
Savoy lived, what is it he will not do now?

It is not doubted but at first he will say the quite contrary, and tell Madam
that he only comes to serve her: but this is his way to get Footing, and to
strike the Blow afterward.

It is much to be feared, as you represent, that Father Monod corresponds with
him: and if so, if he have any influence over Madam, he will do her a great
deal of mischief. He is a Man full of Artifice, who will watch his opportunity,
and change his Mind so many ways, that at last he will make her fall into some
Snare; and without doubt, he will, in the end, ruin Count Philippes, if he
have not a care of him.

We fear from this moment, either Poison or Daggers; and besides, Madam's loss
in losing her Creatures, it will rebound upon her, and afterward infallibly
cause her Ruin.

If Madam's Government be weak in the beginning, it will end in ruin; if it be
strong, all things may be remedied.

Her Strength must appear, by opposing the Cardinal of Savoy's coming, and so
effectuly opposing it, that if he enter into the State, Madam must consent that
the King order him to be arrested and brought into France, where he shall be
treated as a Person of Quality. After such an Action, it is Madam's Duty to see
those who are reasonably suspected to her: and if God give her the Grace to
continue the Suspicion, which you write she has had of Father Monod, it will be
a particular saving Grace for her: For, to tell you the truth, as you are very
sensible, to nourish him at Court, is to nourish a Serpent; and Count Philippes
is very blind, if he do not see that he will be his Ruin, and let his
Pretenses be never so specious, he only watches an Opportunity.

He is a Man who knows very well that he shall never govern Madam, both because
of Count Philippes and France.

He knows also, that he will dispose of the Cardinal of Savoy as he pleases,
and it is easy to see the Consequence.

If Count Philippes will consider those things, the way to remove this Man will
be easy.

First of all, It is not the business of a Religious Man to meddle with Affairs
of State; if Madam Command him to follow his Vocation, she will be commended by
every body.

Besides, Madam may send him into France; where, if she pleases, he may be
detained with Gentleness, and, by the consent of his Superiors, may be
interdicted from returning into Piedmont, but when Madam pleases.

As this Affair is important, Monsieur d' Hemery must have a care not to Hazard
it, but he must so order it, that Madam, or Count Philippes may endeavor to
bring about this Design so necessary to their Preservation.

The Cardinal of Savoy may take two other Resolutions, beside coming to Turin
to Madam's Court:

The one is, to go into some place in Piedmont, who may open him the Gates: and
if that should happen, nothing must be omitted to drive him out immediately, by
one way or other, in this weak Condition of the Spaniards.

The other is, to stay in the State of Milan nigh Piedmont; in which case he
declares himself an Enemy of Madam, and her Children. In this case, you cannot
do better, than to do as you write to send to offer him his Goods if he will
live at Rome, and to deny them if he continue with the Spaniards; you must by
consequence forbid all the Cities from receiving him, and in effect, you must
take such care, and place such faithful Men in them, that he may be denied
entrance.

If after all, Marshall Crequi could, under his Nose, give a Defeat to the
Spaniards, it would be very well. You must have a firm Foot, and a good Eye
upon those Occasions, both Resolution and Courage. We think we ought to
Advertise you, that though Count St. Morice be a very brave Gentleman, yet he is
altogether joined to Father Monod, of which you shall seem to have no notice
from us. I do not at all doubt but being separated from this good Director, he
will be a very good Man for Madam.

In this Exigency of the Affairs of Mantua, the only way to hinder the Duchess
of Mantua from losing her Son's States, is so absolutely to secure Cazal, that
there be nothing to be feared on that side: In order to that, I think, you must
take all those who are suspected, not only out of the Citadel, but the City,
and all Persons who may be contrary to the French Interest, allied to the
Little Prince.

You must make known the King's good Intentions to the Sieurs Guiscardi,
Mercurin, Prat, and all others, who shall be capable, to whom the King permits
you to give Pensions, as you shall see convenient, which shall be paid here
upon sight.

As this Affair must be done with Magnanimity, so it must be managed with
Prudence, giving to the Princess the least occasion of Complaint that can be;
but it is better that by giving us occasion, as she does, by declaring herself
for the Spanish Interest, she may have some unreasonable occasion, rather than
satisfy her Desires at the Expense of her Son, and France together.

LETTER CCLXXV. To the Same.
SIR,
THE Answer that Monsieur de Chavigny has given to your Letters is so
particular, that I do not think it necessary to add any thing. I take my Pen in
hand only to tell you, that having seen it, I think you cannot do better than
to observe it punctually: You are so judicious and discreet, that you know I am
certain, how to make use of the Contents for the King's Service, as Affairs in
all Courts may change in a moment. If any important or considerable thing
happen, in that in which you are, it will be the part of your Prudence to do
what is proper, and after having conferred with Marshall Crequi and Madam's
Servants, whom you know to be well affected to France, and by Consequence to
the Advantage of her Highness's Affairs, to take the best Resolutions that may
be.

LETTER CCLXXXVI. To Marshall Crequi.
SIR,
YOU will see, by the Express sent to Monsieur d' Hemery, and which he has
Order to Communicate to you, that which we think ought to be done in the places
where you are, for the King's and Madam's Service, and the Advantage of their
Affairs; it will be your part, Gentlemen, to see, and diligently to examine the
most proper and most certain Means to make the King's Intentions succeed: In
the Execution of which, I am assured, you will want neither Prudence,
Affection, nor Courage. You may also believe, that I will lose no opportunity
to make your Actions and Services be valued as you can desire, of a Person who
Esteems you, and really is, etc.

LETTER CCLXXXVII. To Monsieur d' Hemery.
SIR,
I Cannot sufficiently commend the Goodness with which Madam has discovered to
you the Malice which a certain Person, of whom you write, has made use of to
her Prejudice, persuading her, that her Creatures ought to be jealous of the
King, and that I had told him something of this nature, is so manifest an
Imposture, that a Man must be a Devil to invent it; and it is to be feared,
that a Spirit capable of so diabolical an Artifice, may commit far greater
Villainies. I confess, that since I have known this Discovery, that Madam's
Generosity has made, I am more afraid for her than I can speak; but I hope,
that her Interest, which has begun to give her a glimmering, will wholly open
her Eyes. The different Attempts that this good Man has made to persuade Madam
to be dissatisfied with France, although without Reason, upon the Account of the
Solemnities which the King performed at the Duke of Savoy's Obsequies, who were
greater than any that were ever made in France for any but Kings, sufficiently
demonstrate his good Intentions. But although we discover an extreme Malice in
this, that which appears in his Endeavors, to make the Cardinal of Savoy
return into Piedmont, and to introduce the Abbot Soldati, as he has done once,
and would again, is far greater, because it directly tends to Madam's Ruin. We
have seen Letters which report, that this good Apostle cried down Madam's good
Intentions; if it be so, it is easy to determine, that if her Highness do not
take care of herself, and remove so wicked a Spirit, she will find herself
prevented, and unable to do it. I confess to you, that the King is in Pain, all
Men in those parts are concerned in it; but above all, Madam's particular
Creatures, being certain, that they are the first whom he will endeavor to
Subdue, that he may the more easily Ruin Madam afterward: If Madam be not
sensible of her own Interests, she ought to consider that of her Children;
having before her Eyes, that, in such Affairs, wicked Men have no bounds. Make
her, in God's Name, set a Watch over her Mouth; and, after having by Reason
informed her what may be useful, take this Court for an Example, which could
never free itself from Trouble, and secure its Peace, as long it endured
Factious Spirits in its Bowels.

I think, that the Expedient proposed, to send the Person in dispute into this
Court, is very good, provided you can make him consent to it.

You may let him know, that Madam's Protection depends chiefly upon the King;
there is no probability that her Highness will make use of him in her Affairs;
because, in his last Journey, he left France not very well satisfied with his
Proceedings: And, for this reason, it is necessary for him to return, to be
reconciled to his Majesty and his chief Minsters. If he readily condescend to
this Proposal, you will gain Time by this Journey, and penetrate more and more
into his Mind.

If he refuse this Overture, it must be with a worse design than what can be
foreseen, and Madam will have more opportunity to provide for herself another
way: And, in effect, I do not see how she can make any difficulty of it,
knowing that the Duke of Savoy resolved, before his death, to use this Remedy,
from which she alone diverted him. If he apprehended such a mischievous Spirit,
she ought to double her Fears, and imagine that he will practice so much the
more boldly against her; because those who ought to revenge those Crimes, may
be those who shall recompense them: Upon such occasions you must fear every
thing, and imagine, that all preventing Remedies are ever gentle, in respect of
those which must be used when the Distemper rages: There are also many Evils in
Affairs of State, which are no sooner begun but they are incurable.

LETTER CCLXXXVIII. To Monsieur d' Hemery.
SIR,
AFter having discoursed Monsieur de Palluau, about the Passages of his Voyage,
and seen your Letter which he brought, I cannot but tell you, that I am
extremely amazed at the little Esteem which Madam has hitherto testified of the
good Advice, which the King and his most faithful Servants have given her,
since they have no other end, but her Peace and ^vanta^e, and the Establishment
of her Authority and Grandeur. Her Inconstancy, concerning the removal of
Father Monod, has been a manifest proof of it; which surprised me the more,
because she knows the best of any, the mortal Hatred he has against her and her
Children, and his inseparable Union with the Cardinal of Savoy, and Prince
Thomas, her Enemies. His Majesty thinks it very strange, that Madam having
declared to all his Ministers, that she did not desire that he should have any
thing to do in her Affairs, yet she still continues to employ him; he firmly
believes, that she only retains him, because she knows, that he is an Enemy to
her and her State, that she may make the whole World believe, that her Highness
fears France more than her Brothers-in-law; which may produce very mischievous
Effects, Madam being not ignorant of the extraordinary Passion that the said
Father makes appear, upon all occasions, for the Interest of those Gentlemen,
and the Ill Will which he has always bore her and hers, must be assured, if she
continue him in the Authority, into which his Artifice and Malice has screwed
him at her Court, having such a turbulent Spirit, being an open Accomplice of
the Cardinal, knowing the Humor of the People, and Madam's Weakness, the first
Sickness that shall happen to her, without expecting the Extremity or the
Event, he will send for the said Prince Cardinal into Piedmont, from whence she
will not be able afterward to expel him, and the Life of her, her Children and
Creatures will not be secure.

She may very well judge, that his Majesty is not concerned what Ministers she
imploys, provided they love her and her Children; but it concerns him very
much, that she do not employ those who give her bad Counsel, and endeavor to
persuade her to her own Ruin, or to procure it unknown to her, because, in this
case, his Majesty knows not how to remedy it.

These Considerations afflict his Majesty more than I can express, because he
foresees that such Proceedings will either make him unable to protect a Person
so dear to him as Madam, or will compel him, against his desire, to discharge
himself of her Protection, that he may not be the Promoter of an Evil which she
may avoid.

You may believe, that his Majesty, loving Madam as himself, will not come to
this extremity; but yet he cannot endure to see, that her Highness will ruin
herself, against all Reason, his Advice and Counsel, and notwithstanding any
Assistance that he can give her.

His Majesty can have no confidence in Madam in her Affairs, while she shall
have a Minister, who is a sworn Enemy to France, to his Majesty, and his
particular Servants; who is the Cardinal of Savoy's intimate Friend, and Ally
of the Spaniards, who, by his means, will be informed of all the Undertaking,
and Resolutions; it is a thing altogether unpossible. And I confess to you
freely, that the open Protection that Madam gives to Father Monod, since the
Resolution she took to remove him, afflicts the King extremely, and makes him
judge, and not without reason, that her Mind is not only wavering, but also
distrustful of France; which they expressly endeavor to make her, that they may
more easily procure her and her Childrens ruin; which is, as it were,
inevitable, if she continue in her jealousy and diffidence. Though this good
Father testify, that he imparts to you alone, the Resolution that was taken to
send him into France, yet, for all this, he is not ignorant, that it was with
Madam's and Count Philippes's participation; and so, seeing himself offended by
both, he will infallibly seek an opportunity to revenge himself; which he will
do the more boldly, because he will believe, that he owes his Re-establishment
to his own Industry and Artifice, and not to Madam's Goodness, whom he will
never forgive.

As to what remains, Madam having obliged you to declare against him, she is
too just to desire you, and France to have any confidence in him; he is a
Serpent which she cannot keep in her Bosom, without receiving suddenly a mortal
Sting. The Duke of Savoy knew him so well, that he was resolved, as Madam
declared to you, to remove him from Court.

You know the Advice he gave us of the Intelligence this good Father had with
Father Caussin, the good Designs of the one, which were at last discovered,
obliged the King to banish him from Court. Madam may well judge what those of
the other oblige her to do, because he has as much Wit and Malice, as Father
Caussin has Simplicity and Ignorance.

Before Madam had acquainted Father Monod, that she knew his mischi^vous
Designs, it was free for her to endure him; but now, that he knows that she has
a mind to be rid of him, and that he only expects the moment of the execution
of such a Project, she may very well believe, that he thinks of nothing more
than to prevent her, and yet necessity obliges her to accomplish her intended
Design, if she will not expose herself to a certain Ruin.

It is your part faithfully to represent all these things to Madam, to whom you
may show this Letter, and to importune her, for her own Childrens sake, to
remove that Man as soon as she can, having no time to lose upon such occasions;
her Fore^ight, by the help of your Advice, will give her an Expedient how to
execute this Design.

As for my part, I think the shortest way will be, to take him in the Evening,
when the Streets are clear, and put him in a Coach with Six Horses, and drive
him all the Night to Pignerol, with what Guard you shall think necessary. I
confess to you, I tremble for fear, for Madam, till that is done; and tell you
further, that the King is mightily displeased to see, that Madam dallies in an
Affair in which her safety is concerned; and that, if her Highness will help
herself, he will double his Assistance; whereas, if she has a mind to ruin
herself, he will be gl^d, that the World knows, that he has omitted nothing to
hinder her. I hope that will never happen, and that her Highness will show,
that she has a Masculine Heart. I shall have the same Passion for her Interest,
as for the King's, and shall rejoice if I can be serviceable to her.

She has done me the honor to write to me two Letters, by which she declares
her Desires of a General or Particular Suspension. I pray you represent to her,
That as a General Peace, or Suspension, would be the Safety of Christendom, so
a Particular one would be its Ruin: The Peace, which it may be she should have
a Year sooner than otherwise she would, giving opportunity to the Spaniards
better to manage their Affairs against us, weakening that on which alone her
Protection depends, would, in the end, ruin her; whereas, by making a good War
this Year on every side, by God's assistance, at the end of the following
Campagn, we shall see the Establishment of a General Peace. Let Madam secure
the inward Parts of her State, and never trouble herself about the rest. We
send to her Highness the Sieur de Vignolles, whom she desired: Reconcile him
with Count Philippes. I have particularly charged him to make use of him in
Madam's Service, as he will do faithfully.

You judge very well, that the King can never think of an Accommodation with
the Cardinal of Savoy, if he think of re-entring into the Protection of France;
which his Majesty will certainly keep for Cardinal Anthony. It is very
probable, that whatsoever Accommodation the said Cardinal will make, it is only
to deceive better, and that it will be by the consent of the Spaniards. Yet his
Majesty would run that hazard, if the Matter in dispute were to restore him the
Pension of Anche and the Abbey of St. John of the Vineyards, provided that he
depart from the Protection of France, and oblige himself to live at Rome. But
methinks, that this seeming that he makes, is only to amuze Madam, and when he
shall conclude such a Treaty, it will only be to impose upon her.

I forgot to write to you one of the principal things to which you must
presently apply yourself; which is, to send the Project which you and Marshall
Crequi shall make of that which ought to be done, to carry on the offensive War
the next Campagn, it being a certain thing, that there must be a War. You must
inform us How, in what Place, and what Troops you must have, and what Recruits,
what we must give for this purpose, at what Time we must send them, and the
Fund that you will need for that Affair. I pray you send me a very large State
of these things, that we may immediately apply ourselves to provide what is
necessary. As it is necessary that nothing be omitted in this State which is
useful, I beseech you to let nothing be superfluous, that the difficulty of
supplying you with those things which may be let alone, may not hinder us from
satisfying you with Necessaries.

I do not recommend to you, to keep your Designs of War very secret, till Madam
has taken care of the Affair of Father Monod, because he would inform the
Enemies of them, since also I presuppose that Affair to be done; for otherwise
the King will be rather obliged to recall his Troops out of Piedmont, than to
send others thither.

Since the writing of this Letter, the Marquess of St. Morice came to see me,
who told me, that he was charged by Madam, to ask my Opinion of Father Monod,
and in what esteem he is with the King. To which I answered him conformably to
your desires; letting him know, that his Majesty could have no confidence in a
Person, who so openly favored those who acted against Madam: I tell you in two
words what I represented to him at large.

FINIS.
The Christian Belief: Wherein is Asserted and Proved, That as there is Nothing
in the Gospel Contrary to Reason, yet there are some Doctrines in it Above
Reason; and these being necessarily enjoined Us to Believe, are properly called
Mysteries; in Answer to a Book, Intitul'd, Christianity not Mysterious, etc.

Cardinal Richlieu's LETTERS. VOL. II.
The First Letter. To Monsieur d' Hemecy.
THOUGH I am not ignorant that M. Bouthillier has long since acquainted ye
with the King's dislike of the Sieur de Lize, the Duke of Savoy's Resident in
England's Conduct, and how his Proceeding in that Court, and his ill will
toward France are prejudicial to his Majesty's Affairs, as also to those of his
Highness, I cannot however forbear writing to you, to give you notice of it;
that so by your Prudence you may apply such a Remedy to it, as you shall think
most proper. In my Opinion, it would be for the service of Monsieur of Savoy to
recall that Person as soon as might be, unless his Highness would have his
Majesty believe that he Acts by his Orders, and that he connives at the ill
Offices done to his Majesty, since his Agent has been in England. You may speak
of it if you please to the D. of Savoy, as of a thing which the King is so much
the more deeply sensible of, because there is no body who hears the said Lize
talk, who does not think it strange, that a Minister of one of the principal
Allies of France, and who is engaged with her in a War against her Enemies,
should maintain Discourses so disadvantagious to her Affairs, instead of
upholding her Interests, and rejoicing at her Successes.

Moreover I am obliged to let you know, that the said Lize is a Man so weak in
his Intellectuals, and of a Judgment so feeble, that he takes whatever is
reported to him for truth without distinction, never examining whether there be
any foundation, or only the appearance of truth in what is told him. Which is
the Reason, that many times taking the Shadow for the substance, instead of
serving his Master, while he thinks to advance 'em, he does a manifest
prejudice to his Interests. In a word, seeing that his Residence in England
cannot but prove very prejudicial to the King, it must be our Business to
persuade Monsieur of Savoy to re-call him home, which I conjure you to make
your Business with your wonted Dexterity. Which not doubting but that you will
effectually labor, I shall urge ye no farther; having no more at this time,
then only to assure ye, that

I am, etc.

LETTER II. To the same Person.
SOme of M. de Crequi's friends having informed me that several Persons in
Italy, either out of Hatred or Envy, talk very much to his Disadvantage, and
endeavored by their Discourses to persuade the World, that the King, and his
principal Servants, are dissatisfied with his Carriage and his Actions, on
purpose utterly to disgrace him, and thereby deprive him of the means to serve
his Majesty so effectually as he desires. I have therefore written to ye, to
let you understand how much I am displeased with such Proceedings as these; and
to conjure ye, by your prudence to put a stop to their farther Progresses,
with the same diligence, undeceiving those who may have given credit to such
Reports, and giving 'em assurance of the falsehood of 'em. In short, I can
ascertain ye, that as the King has had no cause at all, that I know of, to be
dissatisfied with M. de Crequi, so he never testified the least sign of his
Displeasure. As for my particular, you will do me an extraordinary kindness to
let him know the Esteem which I have of his Person, of his Affection, and his
Courage; the Desire which I have, and shall always have, to serve him; and that
you will declare the same thing to the Officers of the Army.

LETTER III. To the same Person.
I Have desired my Lords, the Secretaries of State, to acquaint you from time
to time with what passes on this side, well knowing, by Experience, that it is
no small trouble to those who are far remote from the Court, as you are, when
they want Intelligence, and are not duly informed of the State of Affairs, and
how the World goes. They have promised me, not to omit any opportunity.

LETTER IV. To the Prince of Orange, after the Raising of the Siege of Louvaine.
THere are not any Great Affairs that are not attended with great Difficulties;
nor had this at the beginning those progresses which we could have desired;
since it is the end that crowns the work.

Monsieur Charnace has represented to the King the Obstacles which you met with
in your Enterprise, and your Endeavors to surmount 'em. His Majesty is very
well convinced of the care you took for the subsistence of his Army, in the
midst of those necessities which surrounded it. He returns you Thanks, and
promises himself that you will make so good a use of the remainder of the
Summer, that the time which has been lost shall be repaired with Advantage, in
the Judgment of all Men.

I passionately desire it for the Interest of his Majesty, and of my Lords, the
States, and for your own, which shall be always dear to me: Conjuring you to
believe, that whatever the issue may be, it shall never cancel the Esteem which
I have for your Person, nor the Affection which I bear you. Assure your self,
Sir, that his Majesty will leave nothing omitted that lies in his power to
favor the Enterprise, which was only undertaken between him and my Lords, the
States, for the Good and Repose of Christendom, and that no ill success shall
discourage him. For my part, knowing that perseverance is that which crowns
affairs with a prosperous Issue, I shall omit nothing that is required for me
to do, for the advancement of those Affairs, the Success of which depends upon
your Conduct, in which the King reposes a great Confidence. Of this you may be
assured, Sir; as also, that

I am, etc.

LETTER V. From the King to the States of Holland, upon Occasion of the Title
of Highness given to the Prince of Orange.
MOst Dear, Great Friends, Allies and Confederates, the particular Esteem which
We have, and always had, for our most dear and well beloved Cousin, the Prince
of Orange, not only by reason of his Birth and Family, the Grandeur of which is
sufficiently known, but also for his Great and conspicuous Qualities, and his
Noble performances in the Conduct and Command of Armies, whereby he has
acquired so high a Reputation, that there are no Marks of Honor which may not
be justly attributed to him, have engaged us to give him new proofs of it, by
Honoring him with one more Title then hitherto has been Addressed to him,
concerning which we have sent express Orders to the Sieur Charnace, Our
Ambassador.

LETTER VI. From Cardinal Richlieu to the Prince of Orange.
THe King's Letter which will be delivered to your hands by M. de Charnace, and
what he has in charge to say to ye in his Majesty's Name, will give you so
particularly to understand the Affection which he has for your Person, and the
singular Esteem which he pays to your Virtue and your Merit, that it would be
superfluous to repeat it in these Lines. And therefore I shall only testify to
ye my own particular and extraordinary Joy, for the new Title wherewith his
Majesty has been pleased to honor your whole Family: now then, that I may
conform my self to his Will, and follow my own Inclination, be pleased that I
may begin the change, and that I may assure your Highness, that honoring ye
as I do, it will be a greater favor then I can possibly express to serve your
Highness, and all yours, upon all occasions; and to let you know by the
Effects, that there is no person in the World, that can be with a greater
Passion or more Sincerity, then my self, etc.

LETTER VII. To the Princess of Orange.
I Have not Written these Lines to let you understand the particular Affection
which the King has for the Person of Monsieur the Prince of Orange, and for
yours, and the singular esteem which he has for both, by reason the Testimonies
which his Majesty has given you in the Letter which his Majesty has Written to
ye, and what M. Charnace has to say to ye in his Majesty's Name, are such, in
my Opinion, as will not permit you to doubt of it; but only to acquaint you
with my extraordinary Joy, for the honor which it has pleased his Majesty to
confer upon your whole Family, by the new Title wherewith it is his pleasure
that you shall be treated from this time forward; I beseech ye to believe,
that no Content or Felicity that befalls his Highness can be so great, but that
I still wish him more; and that there is no person who Honors his Virtue and
his Merit so highly as I do, or who is more sincerely then

I am, etc.

LETTER VIII. To the Princess of Orange, with a present of Diamond Pendants, in
the King's Name.
THe King's Command engages me to take Pen in Hand, to entreat you in his Name
to accept a Present no otherwise worthy of you, then as it receives its value
from the person that sends it. The common Enemies of this Kingdom, and the
United Provinces not being able to do us any mischief but through the Ears, his
Majesty made choice of this Present, such as it is, on purpose, not only to
signify to ye, that he will never hearken to any thing that shall be to the
Prejudice of the Common Good; but also to let you know that he assures himself,
that your Highness and Monsieur the Prince of Orange will do the same on your
parts. For my part, Madam, I shall account my self extremely happy, if I can
but meet with ways and means equal to the Passion I have, to let you know by
the effects, that

I am sincerely, etc.

LETTER IX. Cardinal Richlieu to the Queen, upon the Birth of Monseigneur the
Dauphin.
EXcessive Joys are generally mute: This is the reason that I cannot express to
your Majesty my Joy for your happy Delivery, and the Birth of the Dauphin. I
desire, and am willing to belive that God has bestowed him upon Christendom, to
appease the Troubles that disorder it, and to restore to it the Blessing of
Peace. This has been my Prayer to Heaven since his Birth, which I make with the
same passionate Zeal as I have always had for the King and your Majesty, to whom

I am, and Eternally shall be, etc.

LETTER X. To the Queen, who had sent the Dauphin 's Portraiture to his
Eminency.
I Cannot render those Returns of thanks which are due to your Majesty for the
favor you have been pleased to do me, in sending me the Portraiture of
Monseigneur the Dauphin, whose Image I Reverence, as I shall his Person, as
long as I live. I pray to God, that they who shall come after me, may serve him
as faithfully, as I have always endeavored to serve the King, his Father, and
your Majesty, to whom

I shall ever be, etc.

LETTER XI. To the Archbishop of Bourdeaux.
YOu will do me an Injury, to believe that any Alliance is capable to hinder me
from assisting and serving ye, when you have a^ occasion for it. My Humor is
so far from any such manner of proceeding, that I believe that such a thought
can never enter into the mind of any person whatsoever. I most earnestly desire
to see a good Correspondence between M. d' Espernon and you; I dare promise it
between my Lords his Sons. And though I am not ignorant, that it is a difficult
thing for them that are hardened in their Humor by Age to alter it, yet I am
not out of hopes to see a good issue of what I desire. I beg of you to
contribute toward it what lies in your power, assuring you that whoever shall
have most Reason and Justice on his side, in the Differences which after this
time may happen between ye, shall be the person whom I will serve most
heartily. I believe that my assistance will not be very necessary to any body,
but I find my self obliged to offer it to him that has the better cause. Assure
your self of my Friendship for ever; and be convinced that nothing can alter
the Quality of, etc.

LETTER XII. To the same Person.
I Am extremely glad that M. d' Espernon has made Restitution to the Church of
what is her due, in order to repair the Injury which she received in your
Person, and that it is now known to all the World, that there is no
consideration that can hinder me from favoring so just a Cause as yours was,
according to the intentions of a King so Pious, as his Majesty is known to be.
The Abbot of Coursan acquainted me with every particular that past in that
Affair; if that be true (of which I have not had the leisure yet to ascertain
my self) that you have not pursued his Holiness's intentions, signified to you
by his Briefs, I must needs tell you, that you would have done better, had you
done otherwise. In the Name of God, regulate your Actions and your Words in
such a manner, that there may be no objection to be made against your
Behavior. You know how many times I have admonished you to be careful of the
quickness of your Wit, and the nimbleness of your Tongue. As it was always my
fear, that those two Enemies were the greatest you had, I must confess that I
am more afraid of 'em now then ever, and conjure ye to be more reserved for
the love of your self, assuring you, that I give so little heed to what the
said Abbot informed me, of your being transported in your passion to reflect
upon me, that it is no consideration of my self which enclines me to give you
this Advice. The Justice that has been done you in your Business makes the
King's Piety so clearly manifest, and the assistance of my Friends, that he
must have lost his Judgment, who thinks there can be any bad impression made
either of the one or the other. Never were Sentences more Authentic then those
which his Holiness and the King's Council pronounced upon this Difference, and
he cannot be master of himself, who says, that they were ever changed.
Therefore, seeing such Discourses would but do you an Injury, many others which
you are said to give out sometimes would bring a Reproach upon your Gratitude;
which, in my Opinion, ought not to permit you to complain of Fortune, who has
done for you, from your early Youth, what she does not usually do for others,
till after long Time spent in tedious Services. Were I not really your Friend,
I would not talk to you in this manner: But being desirous to continue the same
as I have always been, I find my self obliged to what I do, because that
several Persons not knowing ye so well as I do, will not so easily excuse what
I believe proceeds from Vanity, rather then from any other evil Cause. I
promise my self therefore, that your Carriage will be such as your Friends
ought to desire it, and as I particularly wish it may be;

As being, etc.

LETTER XIII. To the same Person.
YOU will know more News by the Abbot of Coursa^, then I can write to ye: He
brings ye all the Satisfaction you can desire. M. d'Espernon will receive
Absolution at your hands, will visit ye, will give ye the Right Hand at his
own House, when you repay him his Visits: He will engage himself to build the
Chapel within the Time limited by Cardinal Bichi: You shall have your Decree
which you have so earnestly desired, as a Mark of the Satisfaction which the
King has ordered to be given ye: So that there is nothing more in Reason for
ye to desire. I am willing to believe that M. d'Espernon will very honestly
perform whatever is requisite upon this Occasion: But though he should not, I
desire ye so to demean your self, that the World may be convinced there is no
Fault on your part. I conjure ye also, for the future, to take such Care of
your Actions, that whatever happens, the Wrong may not be laid at your Door;
assuring you, provided that Equity and Right be on your side, that you shall
have no less Assistance from me, then hitherto you have had. Of this you may be
convinced, and that

I shall always be unalterably, etc.

LETTER XIV. To the same Person.
I know not how to testify my Sorrow to you, for that there is nothing as yet
done in order to the Attack which ought to have been made upon the Islands,
after the Waste of so much Time and Money. The Mischief is, that they who have
no Kindness for you, lay the greatest part of the Blame upon your self; which
afflicts me beyond what I am able to express, as well in respect of the
Interest of the King's Service, as for the Share which I take in all your
Concerns. For this Reason, as your Friend, I cannot forbear telling you, that
as Relapses render Sicknesses more grievous, so if, after having failed to
attack the Islands, you neglect the Relief of Parma; now that that there is no
body who is able, as you pretend, to obstruct your Enterprise, all your Friends
together will not be able to defend you from the Blame that will be imputed to
you upon this second Default. For this Reason it is, that I conjure you, as
much as in me lies, to attempt Impossibilities upon this Occasion, to the end
you may repair what has been done amiss; assuring you, that I will make the
best of this Action to the King, as much as you can desire from a Person who is
really as

I am, etc.

LETTER XV. To the Bishop of Marscilles.
HAving understood the Trouble to which your Grand Vicar puts the Carmelites of
the Convent of the City of Marseilles in reference to their Privileges, and his
Rigor toward the Prioress governing the said Nuns, I have sent you this
Letter to entreat you to put a Stop to the Vicar's Proceedings, and hinder him
from dealing with 'em so severely: which I do with so much the more Affection,
because that Order having been under my Protection over since the Death of
Cardinal Berule, it would be a hard Case that I should suffer those good Souls
to be vexed and turmoil'd with undeserved everities. I make no question but you
will apply all requisite Moderation, as well for the Glory of God, as for the
Repose of the said Nuns, who desire to live under the same Laws and Rules with
those of the Convent of Paris, and other places; and also to enjoy the same
Privileges. I promise my self, that you will carefully lend your helping hand
in this Affair. Confident of this, I shall conclude this Letter; assuring you,
that

I am, etc.

LETTER XVI. To the Bishop of St. Papoul.
THE King having cast his Eyes upon your Person, in Consideration of the many
good Qualities which he observes there met together, with a Design to gratify
you with the Bishopric of St. Papoul, which has been vacant for some time, I
could no longer delay to give you notice of it; and at the same time to let you
know, as I do by these Lines, my own particular Satisfaction to see your Merits
acknowledged by so great an Honor. I assure my self, that your Demeanor in
this Charge wherewith it has pleased His Majesty to honor you, will give him
an Occasion to make a diligent Search through all the Corners of his Provinces
for other Persons, whose Reputation may equal yours. In the mean time, I
beseech ye to be cocvinc'd that I shall always most sincerely wish your
Content, as being really as much as you can desire, etc.

LETTER XVII. To the Bishop of Sens.
THE Esteem which the King has of your Person is such, that His Majesty knowing
the Bishopric which you have hitherto held, is much below your Merit, has been
pleased to give you Proofs of his good Will, by Translating you to that of
Cahors, which you know to be much better then yours that you must surrender
into his hands. I was extremely glad to have the Opportunity, in giving you
notice of this Favor in His Majesty's Name, to let you know at the same time
my own particular Joy for the Favor which it has pleased His Majesty to confer
upon ye; and to assure ye, that you can never have more Content, or greater
Preferment then I wish you,

As being really, etc.

LETTER XVIII. To the Bishop of Nismes.
I Was very glad to hear News of ye, by the Letter which you wrote me; and by
the Abbot of St. Mars, to understand the Beginning of the happy Progress you
are making in the place where you are, for the Good of Religion. I always
believed that you would effectually answer the Choice which His Majesty made of
your Person; and fulfill your Promises, not to let the Talents that God has
given you lie idle, but to employ 'em upon all Occasions for the Advantage of
his Worship. I cannot express my Joy for so good a Beginning; nevertheless, you
may conceive it by the singular Affection which I bear you. Only, I must
conjure ye to reside continually in your Diocese, as hitherto you have done;
and to believe that you can do nothing either more agreeable to His Majesty, or
more to my Content; as it will be always my greatest Satisfaction to serve you
upon all Occasions; and to let you know how much

I am, etc.

LETTER XIX. To the Archbishop of Rouan.
HAving seen the Letter and the Papers which you sent me, I must tell ye, that
in regard the Affair in Controversy is the general Question between the
Bishops and the exempt Monks, which cannot be decided so speedily, it is my
Opinion, that until they fall upon the Debate of it, you may continue your
Visits in all the exempt Monasteries of your Diocese, whenever you think
convenient; at what time it behooves the Monks to receive you with all the
Honor and Respect that may be; contenting your self only to visit the
Churches, the holy Sacraments, and the Buildings, without making the Scrutiny:
Which being only an Enquiry into the Miscarriages of the Monks, and the Defects
of their Regular Discipline, methinks they should not be taken Cognizance of,
nor punished, but only by the Superior Regulars. You may also, when you would
go to the Monasteries, celebrate Mass therein Pontifically, and fulfill the
Orders; and if any public Scandal have happened in the City, through the Fault
of the Monks, you may likewise take Cognizance of it. I am much troubled that
the ill Behavior of the Monks of St. Vaudrille has constrained ye to proceed
against 'em as you have done. I have written to 'em, to make 'em acknowledge
their Fault; and have exhorted 'em to Amendment, which I hope they will readily
submit to, by rendering to your Lordship what is your Due. In the mean time, I
beseech ye to pardon 'em for my sake, revoke the Sentence you have given
against 'em, and settle Things in the same Condition as they were, when you go
to visit their Church. In so doing, you will oblige me in particular to
testify upon all Occasions that shall present themselves, that

I am, etc.

LETTER XX. To a Friend of the Archbishop of Rouan 's.
THE Business of my writing, is, to entreat you, by a soft and gentle Converse
with Monsieur the Archbishop of Rouan, to try what may be done, to the end his
Demeanor may be as edifying in his advanced Age as it was in his younger
Years; and he himself avoid the ill Opinion that may be conceived of it. I do
not believe him to be one of those Persons, who fly the Surgeon's Hand, though it
be for their own Good. Kings having the Power to put the Canons in Execution,
and it being their Duty to take a particular Care of the Discipline of the
Church, I assure my self that he will be right in his Opinion, that it does not
only concern His Majesty's Piety, but his Office, to admonish him of the bad
Reports that are spread abroad concerning him. And having always had my self a
particular Honor for him, I cannot but desire his Content, and his Welfare, as
my own; and consequently, I cannot but endeavor to serve him. Nor will it be a
small Satisfaction to me, when in serving you also, it shall be in my power to
let you see that no body is more then

I am, etc.

LETTER XXI. To the Bishop of Montauban.
IT having been reported to the King, that there is hardly any Episcopal
Function officiated in your Diocese, His Majesty has c^mmanded me to give you
notice of it, to the end that upon a due Consideration of your Duty in the
Charge which God has committed to your Care, you may acquit your self with so
much Diligence and Fervency for the future, that your Actions may make amends
for past Defaults. I promise my self that you will make a profitable Use of the
Admonition which I give you; because that if you neglect it, His Majesty, out
of his singular Piety, will think himself obliged to provide for the Good of
your Diocese, by Ways which his Prudence shall judge most suitable for that
purpose. In the mean time,

I remain, etc.

LETTER XXII. To the Bishop of N --
THE King being informed that great Disorders are committed in your Diocese,
even to the public Selling of Benefices, I cannot permit the Departure of the
Dispatch which His Majesty sends expressly to Monsieur the Bishop of Xaintes, to
repair to ye in his Name, upon this Occasion, without entreating you by these
Lines, that you will contribute all that lies in your Power toward the
suppressing such Abuses as speedily as may be; and so to demean your self, that
your Actions may appear for the future contrary to what we have just Reason
hitherto to suspect. Besides, that your Conscience and your Honor oblige ye
to it, His Majesty's Resolution by Canonical Ways to hinder such Disorders in
his Kingdom, ought to incline ye to it. I promise my self, that you will
govern your self in such sort upon this Occasion, that besides the Satisfaction
which His Majesty shall receive in your Actions, the People committed to your
Charge may have so good an Example set before 'em, that the universal Pursuit
of it may be your Justification for the future. The ancient Friendship which I
have had for ye, makes me earnestly desire it,

As being, etc.

LETTER XXIII. The King's Letter to the Bishops, about Residence.
I Behold with infinite Sorrow, that though all People are eagerly desirous of
Peace, that the Prayers and Sighs of all Christendom have no other End, and
that I leave no Means omitted which I think proper to attain it, whether by
Force of Arms, as every body knows, or by condescending, together with my
Allies, to the Overtures that have been made us for a reasonable Accommodation,
particularly, by our Holy Father the Pope, yet still it looks as if Divine
Justice were not satisfied; and that he who can only give Peace to Man, and who
pours down upon the Waters, when he pleases, his Benedictions in abundance,
requires at our hands, that with a common and profound Acknowledgment of our
Duty, we should have recourse to his Omnipotence, to the end we may obtain so
great and so much desired a Blessing. For this Reason it is, that well knowing
that the Conversion and Amendment of Souls, the Prayers and Tears of good
People, are the true Means that can procure us what the Impiety and Hardness of
our Hearts have hitherto denied us, it is my Desire that all the Bishops of my
Kingdom cause such public and private Prayers as they deem convenient, to be
duly said, together with the joint Performance of all those good Works that are
most probable to obtain from Heavenly Compassion the Repose of Christendom. Now
in regard there is nothing that can more effectually invite the People, whom
God has submitted to your Care, to such pious Purposes, then your Examples. My
Intention is, that they who shall be absent themselves from their Flocks, fail
not to repair to their several Diocesses, to the end they may apply themselves
in particular to the Performance of those things which I demand at their hands;
and in general, to all the Duties of their Functions that require their
Presence. Knowing therefore that there are some so sedulous in their Charges,
that if they absent themselves from 'em, it is only for a little time, and for
the Dispatch of Affairs that concern their Functions, it is sufficient for me to
exhort 'em to make the soonest End they can of their Business, and to repair
home again; expressly enjoining and commanding all those who have not hitherto
minded so much the Importance of Residing within their Diocesses, to hasten
thither within Eight Days after the Receipt of these Presents, to the end they
may thereby make Amends for their past Defaults. I assure my self, that they
will be so much the more religiously observant of their Submission to my Will
and Pleasure in this Particular, because there is not one among 'em who can be
ignorant that the Canons of the Church, and the Ordinances of the Kingdom,
oblige 'em to an Actual Residence; upon which the good Order and Discipline of
their Diocesses chiefly depend. Not doubting therefore, but that all and every
of 'em will punctually correspond with my Desires, I shall say no more, but
only pray to God, etc.

LETTER XXIV. From Cardinal Richlieu, to Father Berthin, General of the Priests
of the Oratory.
IT IS impossible for me to express my Sorrow for the Death of Cardinal Berule,
who could never question the sincere Friendship which I always bore him. I am
extremely troubled at the Calumnies spread abroad, both at Rome, and in France:
I do all I can to dissipate 'em, by declaring to all the World, that the great
Virtues of the Deceased, and the manner of Living which we always observed
together, take away all Occasion of believing those false Reports that are
dispersed abroad with so little probability of Truth. I honor the Memory of
the Deceased, and shall always take a particular Care of his Concerns; but more
especially, of the Society that took its Birth under his Conduct and
Protection. I return you a Thousand Thanks for what you write me word,
concerning what His Holiness has already granted you in my behalf; Vivae vocis
Oraculo. I desire ye to prosecute the Concession of it by a Writing of His
Holiness, whether under his own, or the Hand of his Chaplain; and that in the
proper Terms of the Supplication, which the deceased Cardinal de Berule sent
you. I passionately desire this Dispatch, which His Holiness will make no
scruple to expedite, since he has already granted it by Word of Mouth, It Is
also necessary for me, that His Holiness will be pleased, that his Forbearance
to publish the Favor which he grants me, may not oblige me to keep it
concealed from all the World; to the end, that they who are best acquainted
with the Burden of Affairs which I undergo, may not think that I neglect to
discharge an Obligation, such as that of the Office, without having a License.

LETTER XXV. To the Superior of the Jesuits.
I Have been no less concerned for the ill Conduct of Father Caussin, then you
your self appear to be. All those of the Society, who have given themselves the
trouble to visit me since the King removed him from his Person, are as faithful
Witnesses of this Truth, as of the little Reason the said Father Caussin had to
behave himself as he has done* The Fault which his Imprudence caused him to
commit, being a Thing that no way touches the General of your Order, but his
own particular Only, I can assure ye, has no way lessened the good Will which
the King has always had for your Society. For my part, having all the reason in
the world to speak well of it, I shall ever take a singular delight in serving
it, and meeting all Opportunities to procure its Advantages, no less glad of
the Occasion to let you know, that no Man has a greater Esteem for ye, nor is
more sincerely then

I am, etc.

LETTER XXVI. To Father Joseph.
HAving sent four or five times to Paris, that I might hear News of your
Health, yet not being able to know any thing of Certainty, the Trouble I am in
by reason of your Distemper, and my Desire to understand exactly what Condition
you are in, has occasioned my sending once more to ye, to the same End. If you
will take my Counsel, you shall quit the Convent to which you are retired, as
not being proper for the Recovery of your Health, and come to this place; where
the Air being much better, will contribute to your Recovery in a short time. If
you will follow my Advice in this, I will send you my Litter, wherein you will
ride much more at ease. And so, expecting either the Happiness of seeing ye,
or at least of hearing from ye such News as I desire, I must assure ye, there
is no Man who is more then

I am, etc.

LETTER XXVII. To Father Monod, a Jesuit.
THE King being desirous to bestow some Mark of his Good Will upon those who
are more particularly devoted to the Service of Monsieur and Madam of Savoy,
has commanded me to cause an Oratory to be built for ye; Notice of which you
will receive by a Letter from the Hands of Madam, whom His Majesty looks upon,
not only as a Person so nearly related to him, but as one in whom he has a most
entire Confidence. I could wish, for my own part, that I had some better
Occasion to let you know the singular Esteem which I have always had of your
Merit, and how affectionately

I am, etc.

LETTER XXVIII. To the General of the Jacobins.
BEing informed that there had been some Disorders committed in the great
Convent of the Jacobins in Paris, as well in reference to Piety, as relating to
their Studies; and that it was most necessary to put a Stop to the farther
Progress of 'em, I took such Care at the same time, that there can happen no
farther Inconvenience; having provided a very good Prior, able Readers in
Theology, and learned Preachers. I hope in a little time we shall see this
House restored to its former Luster; and that it will be a great Satisfaction
to ye, to have at present three Monks of the same House, that preach in Paris
with great Esteem and Reputation. My Desire that every thing should be done in
Order, and with that Obedience that is your due, produced these Lines, to
inform you of the Condition of the said House; to the end, that if, in
pursuance of what has been done for the Repose of it, you think that there
remains any thing more to do, I may be contributary thereto, for the Glory of
God, the Service of the King, and your Satisfaction, as much as in me lies: And
which I shall always study to do with the same Affection, as I bear your Order
in general, and to your Person in particular, etc.

LETTER XXIX. To the General of the Augustins.
THE Bishops of Chartres and A^xerces, who have great Experience in Matters
that concern the Regular Discipline, as must be acknowledged by the good Order
they have shown in the Reformation of the Convents of the Carmelites in Paris;
having, by virtue of the Commission which we formerly gave 'em, to take
Cognizance of the Disorders of the grand Convent of Austin-Friars in the said
City; and by the Advice of the Sieurs du Val, and (...), the King's Professors
in Theology, and the Fathers Binet and Rabardeau, Jesuits, with Father Ans^lm
Fucillant, all Persons of great Probity, and good Government; having deemed it
requisite for the reducing the said Convent, to give the Government and Conduct
of it to the Fathers of the Province of St. Guillaume, which the rest of the
Reformed Societies in France, assembled in the said City of Paris for that
purpose, had requested; and to that end, having made Choice, according to the
usual Forms in such Elections, of a Prior and Officers of the said Province of
St. Guillaume, as the sole and only Means to bring this Affair to a desired
Conclusion, for the general Good of the Order, I thought it my Duty to give ye
notice of it; and at the same time to tell ye, that the King, who is
particularly acquainted with the Care which the said Bishops have taken, will
be very glad, not only of your confirming the said Election, and what has been
done farther to the Advantage of the said House; but will also be well pleased
to hear that you no more permit any Monks to be admitted, unless he observes
the Regularity of the Order settled in the Convent, according to the Reformation
of the said Province of St. Guillaume; for the Establishment of which, His
Majesty will do whatever you shall think more proper upon this Occasion. His
Majesty desires also, that you would forbid Father Andrew Massif, who is now at
Rome, to return to the Convent in Paris, to manage any Affairs in the name of
it; nor to undertake any thing whatever against, or to the prejudice of the
forementioned Regulations. Which being a thing so advantageous to the said
House in Paris, and to all the Orders in general, I make no question but you
will readily submit to give His Majesty that Satisfaction which he desires in
this Particular. So that I will urge ye no farther, and only take the liberty
to assure ye, that, besides that it will be a thing acceptable to the King, I
shall think my self particularly obliged; as you will find upon all Occasions
that will give me an Opportunity to serve you, and to let you know how
affectionately

I am, etc.

LETTER XXX. To the General of the Gallican Congregation of St. Benedict.
Reverend Father,
MY Desire to contribute my utmost to the Progress of good Observance in the
Abbey of Chelles, makes me desire you to send thither, as speedily as may be,
three or four of your Monks, to administer the Sacraments there, and to
exercise Spiritual Functions, with the Authority of Monsieur of Paris; to whom
it will be very acceptable. And as to what you have so earnestly remonstrated
to me, that your Constitutions enjoin ye not to take any Charge of Nuns, I
assure my self, that you make no question of my entire Affection to support
your Congregation in all things that serve to its Advancement; of which, I
think, I have given you assured Marks. But you will do well to consider, that
there is no Rule so strict, but that Prudence and Charity may permit some
Exception to it; and which you cannot transgress upon a juster Occasion, for
the sake of a Person who loves ye so much as I do, and who may reasonably
promise himself so much from the Effects of your good Will. So that you have no
Cause, upon this Occasion, to be afraid of future Consequences, considering
this Employment will not last any longer then it shall be necessary for the
Establishment of Union and Concord in that place. I shall not fail
contributing, to the utmost of my Power, toward your Assistance in so pious a
Work; desiring you to let those worthy Nuns be sensible of the Esteem which I
have of their Virtue; and that I shall take Care to let 'em know by my Actions,
how acceptable their Friendship and Submission to their Abbess, my Kinswoman,
is to me; whom I particularly recommend to your Assistance, etc.

LETTER XXXI. To M --
MY Desire to purge all my Abbeys from the Disorders and Libertinism crept in
among 'em, and nourished by Length of Time, causes me to seek out for the most
proper Means to effect it; and deeming none more gentle and useful for the
Discharge of my Conscience, and the Salvation of the Monks under my Charge,
then to settle Reformed Fathers in those places, who by their good Example,
will induce the rest to follow their good Manners, and the Observance of their
Rules, which have been for some time neglected by 'em; this has given me an
Occasion, as the first Step to so pious a Work, to forbid in all Monasteries
under my Jurisdiction, the Giving or Receiving the Habit to or by Novices, in
order to making their Professions, but in the Form practiced by those of the
said Reformation; and I understand that the greatest part of the Monks desire
it; acknowledging how much they are dis-satisfied with living in that
Confusion, contrary to their Vows. I make no question but you are of the same
Opinion; and that you only seek the most gentle and proper Means, as I do, to
introduce a Reformation, and such Fathers as make Profession of it, into your
Monastery. For this Reason I desire, that you would all assemble in your
Chapter, and there set this Affair on foot, to the end you may come to some
Result. And to the end that this may be so much the more maturely done, and
also that every one of you may contribute toward the Accomplishment of so good
a Work, I desire that there may be an Act drawn up containing whatever shall
pass in the said Chapter, and particularly the Sentiments of all the Monks that
shall be there present; which shall be signed, and then sent to me, to the end
I may understand their Intentions, and who are well affected to the Good which
I am willing to procure 'em, that so they may be restored to that Order and
Method which true Monks ought to follow. This is that which I most
affectionately desire of you; assuring ye, that in satisfying my Demands, you
will more and more oblige me to remain, etc.

LETTER XXXII. To the Gentlemen of the Sorbonne.
MY Desire that there may be nothing done in the Sorbonne, which may be liable
to ill Interpretation, has obliged me some days since, upon Information brought
me, that the Theses of M. Corstantin had made a noise in P^ris, because they
were ambiguous, to send to the said Sieur Constantin, and desire him to explain
his Meaning to me, upon that Subject: I cannot but testify how much I was
pleased with his submissive Answer, and the sound Explanation of his Theses;
which you will see by his Declaration which I send you herewith. Not doubting
therefore but you will receive therein all the Satisfaction you can desire, I
assure my self that you will not think it proper or pertinent to speak any more
of this Affair. In the mean time, be confident that you shall find me upon all
Occasions, etc.

LETTER XXXIII. To M --
IT IS very requisite that you should acknowledge in your Letters, that the King
has vouchsafed to honor the Order of the Capuchins, by advancing one of their
Society to the Bishopric of St. Maloes; and that it was his Pleasure, by this
Act, to let the World know, that he had a Kindness for those who are bred in so
good a School. But His Majeesty had a more especial regard to the Condition of
the Church in his Kingdom; for the Good of which, he believes he can do nothing
more beneficial, or more acceptable to God, then to be greatly careful to
provide good Bishops, and to take 'em wherever he can be assured to sind 'em;
such as are most probable to labor success fully in the Church. He never
thought that the Order of the Capu^ns could thereby receive any Prejudice;
whether it be because there is nothing in it contrary to their Rules and
Constitutions, or because they can desire nothing more conformable to their
Institutions and the Vocation of the Glorious St. Franei^, called by God to
restore his Church, then to supply it with good Prelates that may be
serviceable to so good an Intention, especially in this Kingdom, where Heresies
have made so great a Ravage upon Religion and good Manners, that it is a great
Office of Piety to contribute toward so good a work by all the ways imaginable.
Now though there is no fear in this Kingdom, but that this Example will have
many good Effects, yet I can better then any body be answerable for that which
presents it self, because I was the first who inclined the Father of this Monk
to this Thought, contrary to his own Inclination: I proposed his Son to the
King and the Queen Mother; and though I have a great Friendship for the Father,
yet I had never done it without great Assurances of the Virrue and sufficiency
of his Son; so that I had more regard to the great Service I did the Church,
then the good Offices which the Persons I speak of could receive from me;
wherein I am deeply confirmed by the good Testimonies which the Capuchin
Fathers give of him. For this reason, I beseech ye, as much as in you lies, to
favor his Majesty's good Intentions, and the Succor of the Church in this
Kingdom, which surpasses all other Considerations, to which I shall add the
more particular Obligation you will lay upon me,

As being, etc.

LETTER XXXIV. To Madam de Chesseuse.
I Cannot but give you an account of Monsieur de Lorrain's Journey hither, to
which place he came Yesterday in the Evening, with a Resolution to perform what
he had proposed, after he had consulted with all his Kindred.

He delivers up Marsal in to the King's Hands, and has himself desired to
resign that place rather then anyof the rest. They tell us of several Projects
fraim'd at Nancy, of great Combats, wherein the Bravery of Monsieur de Elboeuf,
and M. de Bellegards Aged Years were highly signalized. For this time there
will be no Bloodshed, thanks be to God. I could wish the disturbances in
Germany might be as luckily determined, as Monsieur has pacified those among
the Champions that attend him. So would the Emperor be satisfied, the contrary
party would have no occasion to complain, and they who have no need of the cold
Winter, like my self, would be glad to spend the Spring in the Neighborhood of
Paris. For my part, I shall be always well pleased when it is in my power to
let you know, that

I am, etc.

LETTER XXXV. To the Abbot of Dorat.
THE last Letter which I received from Madam de Chevreuse, being rather a
Reproach for my not serving her according to her good liking, then an
Approbation of what I have been able to do for her satisfaction, at the same
time that the Civility which is due to Ladies, hinders me from returning her an
Answer, for fear of displeasing her, her Interest makes me take Pen in hand, to
let you know what I think fitting to be represented to her, for her advantage.

She thinks it strange, that she should be obliged to make some acknowledgment
of her having Negotiated with Foreigners. There was never any sick person yet
known, that would and could be cured of a Distemper, that he would not have the
World so much as think he ever had upon him, But in regard it is necessary for
the Physicians to know the Distemper, their Discretion is such, that they know
how to conceal it from others. You know better then any Body, that as to what
concerns Madam de Chov^cuse, I have kept the Secret, both like a Confessor and
a Physician, in diverse things of high Importance to her, and of which I have
sufficient proof in my hands. I dare also presume to say, that since the affair
of Mr. Chasteau Neuf, there is fallen into my hands some other proof, of which
I never told ye the Particulars, though I have spoken in General of some new
Cipher discovered I have not less Discretion now, thanks be to God, then
formerly I had; and I shall certainly take as much care for the future, as I
did before, in what shall concern Madam de Chevreuse.

Whatever Passion she may have for what concerns her, she is too just to desire
that I should thwart the King's Sentiments, or to be displeased with my serving
the State in serving her; especially in what is no way prejudicial to her.
However to comply with her, I have obtained of the King a plain and simple Act
of Grace, as she desires, which M. de Chauvigny will send her. She seems
moreover to be greatly astonished, that she is not permitted to go and reside
in any place of France that she shall think convenient, though the King and Queen
be not actually there

Before she took the Ramble which she has taken for this year together, Tours
was the place of her Residence: If since that time she has done any thing that
merits a better Condition, I do her wrong not to labor that she may obtain it;
but if her Actions have not been of that nature, methinks she has no reason to
desire, contrary to all the Rules of good Policy, that favors should be heaped
upon multiplied Miscarriages; time and good demeanor may procure her all the
satisfaction she desires. But my Power is not so great, to exert it in
Opposition to Reason, nor my will so irregular to desire things no less
prejudicial to the State, then unavailable to her service, though they may be
pleasing to her Humor. You may assure her that I will serve her with a sincere
Affection, in what may be to her advantage, and desire her not to take it ill,
if while she continues in the Humor she is in, we measure what may be
eneficial to her, rather by the judgment of those who are her Servants and
Friends, among whom you are not the least affectionate, then by her own; to
whose will I shall always submit in all things, where Passion prevails not to
her prejudice.

LETTER XXXVI. To the Countess of Soissons.
HAD Monsieur the Count's Distemper terminated any otherwise then it has done,
I should never have taken the Boldness to Write these Lines to your Ladyship,
in hopes of affording you any Consolation, because I should not have been
capable of receiving any my self. But since it has pleased God to hear the
Prayers of all France for his Health, I cannot but testify my own particular
and extraordinary Joy. I had acquitted my self of this Duty, in hopes my Letter
would have found you in Paris; but understanding you were come into these
Quarters, I resumed my Pen, that I might repeat the same Expressions in these
Lines Beseeching you to believe, that Honoring your Ladyship, as I do, I shall
always challenge a considerable share in your Sorrows and your Contentments, as
a Person who professes to be really, etc.

LETTER XXXVII. To Mademoiselle de Seneterre.
THough I have already had the Honor to felicitate your Ladyship, when I
thought you at Paris, for the Health which God has been pleased to restore to
Monsieur the Count, knowing how dear it is to ye, yet I cannot but repeat the
same Congratulations, understansting that you are come into these Quarters.
Should I go about to lay before ye my Sorrow for his Sickness, I should be
afraid of renewing that Grief which could not choose but then disturb ye, and
trouble by that means your present Joy, to see him in that Condition which the
Wishes of all France and his Servants in particular desire. I shall only take
the liberty to assure your Ladyship, that M. de Seneterre, and the young
Gentlemen his Sons, were so helpful to him upon this occasion, which besides
the Passion, that in so doing, they testified for his person, they merit in the
Judgment of every one, those Commendations which are beyond Expression. But my
Discretion forbidding me to say any more upon this Subject, I restrain my Pen,
and conclude this Letter, with that assurance which I give your Ladyship of
always being sincerely, etc.

LETTER XXXVIII. To Marshall Schomberg 's Lady.
I Write to your Ladyship, to let you understand my Joy, and the advantage
which your Husband has obtained over the King's Enemies in a Battle fought
between him and them, to the end you may the more easily conceive the Affection
which I bear you, and the share I take in the Mareschal's concerns. I shall
only tell you, that his Majesty has received the News with unspeakable
satisfaction, as well for the benefit which thereby redounds to his Affairs, as
for the esteem which he has for the Marshal. I do not send you the particulars
of the Fight, nor how it happened, but only that it ended with taking M. de
Montemorency Prisoner, and that the Counts of Morez, de Rieux, and a great
number of persons of Quality were slain upon the place. I hope, through the
goodness of God, that he will continue his Blessings upon the King's designs,
and that so good a Beginning will be attended with answerable Successes. I
heartily beg both Him and You, Madam, to believe, that there is no Man who
Honors you more, or who is more then

I am, etc.

LETTER XXXIX. To the Baroness of Alais.
I Cannot but signify to your Ladyship my extraordinary Contentment, for that
your Son has acknowledged the Truth of our Religion, has abjured his Errors,
and is returned to the Bosom of the Church. In regard I was present at the
Ceremony, I was desirous to give you an account of it, and at the same time to
assure ye, that when I shall have an opportunity to show my Affection, both to
your self and him, you shall both find that

I am, etc.

LETTER XL. To the Abbess of Ronceray.
THE knowledge which, for a long time, you have had of my Neice de Breze, who
is with you, and her Inclination always to remain in your House, causes me to
Write you these Lines, wherein I desire ye, that you would be pleased to let
her take the Habit, so soon as you shall judge it convenient, not doubting, but
that as she grows in Years, she will be capable of the Profession to which God
has called her. I forbear recommending her to the Continuance of your Care,
promising my self that you will show her all the Marks that she can expect,
both of the natural Goodness of your Disposition, and of the particular
Affection You have for Her; so that you may rest assured of mine, and that no
opportunity shall offer it self for giving you proof of it, either as to your
own person, or the advantage of your House, wherein I shall not let you know
how much

I am, etc.

LETTER XLI. To the Duchess of Bouillon.
ALL the Answer I can give to the Letter which you sent me, concerning your
Husband, is to let you know, that if he be innocent of what he is accused, as
you seem to believe, he is in a palce and in a condition to be seen by the
King, who is too much a Lover of Justice, to deny him the utmost benefit of it.
As I have done all that lies in my power to serve him, when I thought his
Intentions upright, you will have the same Opinion of mine, if I do not now
what the new Act of Infidelity which he has committed obliges me to. Truth not
permitting me to speak otherwise, you must excuse me, Madam, for making use of
these Expressions, which however do not hinder me from giving you, upon all
just Opportunities that shall present themselves, assured Testimonies that

I am, etc.

LETTER LXII. To the Duchess Dowager of Bouillon.
WHile I thought Monsieur your Son a grateful acknowledger of the Favors done
him by the King, and full of Affection and Fidelity to his Service, I omitted
nothing that lay in my power wherein I might be useful to him, and procure his
Advantages at his Majesty's Hands. But now that he has rendered himself unworthy
by a new Act of Infidelity, committed against the King and the Realm, at the
same time that he had the means put into his hands to make amends for past
Miscarriages, by serving both the one and the other, you would blame me, Madam,
should I not contribute to the Discovery of his ill Conduct, and the prevention
of the ill Consequences of it. As for your particular, Madam, you shall always
find me full of desire to testify by real proofs the esteem which I have of
your person, and how sincerely

I am, etc.

LETTER XLIII. To Madam d'Essiat.
IF your Son were only guilty of no more then the many Designs which he has
laid to ruin me, I could willingly forget my self, to assist him, according to
your Desire. But being, beyond Imagination, unfaithful to the King; and engaged
in a Party which he has united to trouble the Prosperity of his Reign, in
favor of the Kingdom's Enemies, I cannot in any manner whatever intercede for
him, according to your Desire. I beseech God to comfort ye; and beg of you to
believe, that

I am, etc.

LETTER XLIV. To Madam de Blerancourt.
THE Letter which you have been pleased to write me by this Gentleman has
filled me with so much the greater Joy, because it gives me to understand that
you are not displeased with my long Stay at Blerancourt, no more then with the
Liberty I took to encourage ye to sinish it. So fair a Beginning deserves to
receive its Perfection from your Hands: And if I desire that there may be
nothing to repair in your House, I beg of God, that the Condition of your
Health may be the same; which I wish you the same, and durable,

As being, etc.

LETTER XLV. To the Prioress of the Carmelites of St. Denis.
I Could not make a more worthy choice then of your House to be the place of
Retirement for Madam d' Anguien, my Neice, in the absence of her Husband, as
well for the good Qualities that enrich your Person, and with which I have been
long acquainted, as for the Piety of those Souls whom God has committed to your
care. I cannot return you sufficient thanks for receiving her with so much joy,
as also for the easiness which you observed in her, to follow the Sentiments of
those who desire her good as much as her self, and the Prudence you take notice
of in in a Person, who has a particular care of her Demeanor. I make no
question, but that in following those Examples which you and your Nuns set
every day before her Eyes, she will in time become a Disciple, such a one as we
have reason to hope. Conjuring you therefore, that you will contribute to that
End, all that I can promise my self from your Charity, and your particular
Affection; and to believe I shall not sail of any acknowledgement that you can
expect from him, who begging the succor of your Prayers and of those of your
Society, is really, etc.

LETTER XLVI. To M. d' Iveteaux.
YOUR Merit is such, that I cannot but have a particular value for your
Affection, and the Esteem which you testify for my Person. If God had endowed
me with those Qualities which you imagine to be in me, I should congratulate my
self as much for the Honor which it has pleased the King to do me, as I
receive it with Humility and Distrust of my self. Not but that I must
acknowledge my self to have some strength of Wit and Courage, proper to serve
his Majesty upon occasions and Opportunities that may present themselves; but
so many Conditions are requisite, that I cannot but be afraid of wanting some
one, the defect of which renders my services much inferior to my desires. You
are so experienced in the Navigations of this World, that I received what you
sent me concerning 'em, as from a Person who can certainly judge of the future
by what is past. Whatever happens, I shall do my duty in Serving, as I have
done in Obeying. And I hope God will bless my Zeal, in seeking all occasions to
render to the King and the advantage of his Realm, whatever he can expect from
a true Subject; and to the augmentation of the Glory of his Person, what a most
obliged Creature owes him. If with this design I have any opportunity to serve
you, as I desire, I shall think my self a great gainer, in letting you see by
that means, that among several mean Qualities which are in me, I have one at
least more eminent then all the rest, which is to esteem Persons of your Merit,
which you will underdand by my Actions, and which will testify more then my
Words, that I am, etc.

LETTER XLVII. To Monsieur de Balzac.
I Have received the Letter which you Wrote me, and the beginning of the
Treatise that you sent me; I thought to have detained your Lacqueys till I had
read it. But the variety of Business which takes me up, and my desire to view
it at leisure, and several times, made me alter my design. I send it you
therefore back, to testify how sensible I am of your Affection, and to let you
know what I judge of the Lion by his Paw. I have always looked upon whatever
came from you with great Contentment, and all those who are capable of
relishing good things, could never receive 'em otherwise: But I must confess to
ye, that this last piece has so far satisfied my Intellect, that I must needs
tell ye, you have outdone your self. In loring your Style, you have raised
it; and in writing more after the vulgar strain, you are so separated from your
self, that though many fain would imitate ye, few in my Opinion, can do it.
When I have read the remainder of your Piece, I will write more particularly to
ye; now, I shall only testify thus much, that if my Affection for ye, be
capable of increasing, it increases with your Merits, which causes me to desire
all Opportunities to let you see, that I am really, etc.

LETTER XLVIII. To Monsieur de Nogent-Bautru.
THIS day I leave this City, where with a more then ordinary joy the people as
loudly resounded the King's Name, as he is exaalted above all the King's of the
Earth, and where they showed as much Obedience and Submission to His Majesty's
Arms, as they had signalized themselves till then in Disobedience and
Obstinacy. I shall not tell ye what Testimonies of Honor I then received,
because it was to the Authority which it has pleased His Majesty to entrust me
with, to whom they are due, and not to me, who am, etc.

LETTER XLIX. To Monsieur d' Argencourt.
I will not conceal it from ye, that I was not a little surpised at first,
when I understood you were Married, not believing ye to have been of a Humor
to submit your self to such a troublesome Yoke, as many times that of Marriage
is. But I was so far from finding any thing to object against the Resolution
you had taken, that on the other side I believe you have done very well, and I
commend ye for having made so good a Choice as that of Mademoiselle de
Berricheres, for whose Conversion I am infinitely glad. I beseech ye to assure
her of my Affection, and for your own part to be confident that I am, etc.

LETTER L. To Monsieur Bowart.
I Write ye these Lines to conjure ye to tell the King frankly when you think
it proper for him to take Physic, and not to conceal from him what you think
requisite for his Health. He is a Prince so Gracious and so Judicious, that
though your proceeding displease him at first, he will be glad of the effects
of it. It Is better in this particular, to displease him a little for his good,
then to comply with him to his prejudice. If thou think the alleging my
thoughts will incline His Majesty to believe you, and to make use of those
Remedies you shall prescribe him, you may produce my Letters, and show 'em to
him; it being certain that he will readily pardon the Counsel which I give you
to press him for his own Health, of which I shall always have a more singular
care then of my own life. In the mean time you will do me an unspeakable
Kindness to send me continually the state of his Body, and to believe that I am
really, etc.

LETTER LI. To the same Person.
THE Letter I received from you would have been a great Affliction to me, to
find therein the King's indisposition, if at the same time you had not assured
me, that it is only an Ebullition of the Blood. I must confess, that in regard
His Majesty's Health is so necessary for France, and so dear to his Servants,
the least attack of Sickness upon it disturbs me beyond Expression. I send this
Gentleman to bring me back an account of the King's Condition, which I
passionately wish, may be such, as he himself could desire. I make no doubt but
you will contribute what lies in your Power, toward his perfect Recovery, that
so his Health may restore to his Servants that Joy which his Indisposition has
deprived 'em of. To this end I send up all my Prayers to Heaven, and in hopes
that the News I shall receive from you, will bring a Confirmation of the
contentment I received by your first Letters, I beseech ye to believe that I
am assuredly, etc.

LETTER LII. To Monsieur d^ Auriac.
THE King being informed at my Return, after what manner you have continued to
serve him in his Army in Italy, has been pleased of his own motion to make you
sensible of his acknowledgment of your Services, as you will find by the Letter
which his Majesty has Written to you, as also by the Patent which he has
commanded me to send you. You need not put your self to any, trouble in
soliciting the payment of it, for that I shall take care my self that every
thing shall be done to your full Satisfaction; desiring to let you see, not
only upon this Occasion, but upon all others wherein your interest is
concerned, the value which I have for ye, and how affectionately I am, etc.

LETTER LIII. To the King.
THE Sentiments which Your Majesty had of my Distemper, and your gracious
manner of writing to me, are of greater value then all the Services I ever did,
or ever shall do Your Majesty. I feel my self so extraordinary touched and
obliged, that it is impossible for me to represent it to your Majesty. The
Series of my Actions shall return Your Majesty perpetual Thanks; seeing Your
Goodness is so extraordinary in my behalf, my Passion for your Service never
was, nor ever shall be equaled by any man what ever, that served so great a
Prince. It Is about ten days ago that my Ague left me; but still it makes me
many times sensible of the visit it gave me. However these Inconveniences have
not hindr'd me from coming to this place, near to Montauban, for the
determining several Difficulties started every day by Persons breathing only
Sedition. There have been some Commotions in the City, but thanks be to God,
things are reduced to that point, that if I am not deceived in my measures, I
hope within three days, to make my entrance into it, with that Dignity which
becomes Your Majesty. From thence I shall set forward to attend Your Majesty,
intending to stay two days only in Montauban, in order to dispatch those
dismissions which Your Majesty has commanded me. I must not forget to send Your
Majesty word, that though the Gentlemen of the Parliament of T^oulouse have
always made some Scruples upon the Edicts of the Peace, and the favors you
have shown to those of the pretended Reformed Religion, yet they have purely
and simply verified this, with great Applause of Your Majesty's Goodness,
Piety, Strength, and Prudence. Though never any Prince acquired so much Glory
as Your Majesty has now done, yet I hope, if God permits me to live some Years,
to see you wearing many other Crowns, which only your Virtue and the blessing
of God will acquire Your Majesty. This is that which I desire with the greatest
Passion in the World, promising Your Majesty that my life shall never be of any
value to me in respect of your Grandeur, your prosperity and particular
contentment, which I shall Eternally wish for in the Quality of, etc.

LETTER LIVE. To the King.
THE Letter Your Majesty was pleased to honor me withal, obliges me in such a
manner, that I have not Expressions sufficiently worthy to testify my Gratitude
to your Majesty. I wish that for the Supply of this defect, I might be so happy
as to be able to pay Your Majesty as many faithful services as I have had, and
as long as I live shall have a cheerful will to perform. I am extremely
troubled that Your Majesty is not pleased with your stay at Paris, and
therefore have taken a Resolution, for your ease, to go into Champaign, so soon
as your Brother shall depart from Nancy. The share which Your Majesty was
pleased to allow me in your Prayers during the Jubilee, was so great a favor,
that wanting words to return my due thanks to Your Majesty, I have no more to
say upon that Subject, but that your Majesty shows your Goodness equal to your
Piety. I could passionately wish that I might be near Your Majesty, as Your
Majesty desires, but my sorrow to see my self removed so far from your
presence, is in some measure allayed, when I consider it is for the Interest of
your service, which is the only thing that I regard. I am now setting forward
from hence in Order to cross the Mountains, and hasten into Italy, where I
shall serve Your Majesty with that Zeal and Vigilance which becomes, etc.

LETTER LV. To the King.
I Have received a new dispatch from Monsieur the Marshal de Crequi, who
assures me a second time, that he will not Sign the Suspension. He sends me
word more over, that the News of the Motion of your Army has caused the
Imperialists to raise the siege of Mantua, from whence the Germans are
retreated in so much disorder, that 'twas the Duke of Mantua's fault they were
not utterly defeated. However he cut some of 'em to pieces in retaking
Montenara and Courtentone, which were two Posts distant from Mantua about five
miles, which the Enemy had a mind to have kept.

He believes that as soon as your Army arrives at Suza, the Republic of Venice
will resolve to do something to good purpose. Provided the Duke of Savoy's
delays, do not retard the Passage of your Army, I hope your Majesty will have
no reason to complain. Courrier is dispatched after Courrier to press the Duke
of Savoy, to whom I have also this day written Your Majesty's Express command
to me, not to lose any time; which obliges me to conjure him that he would give
Speedy Passage to your Army. I expect to hear from him within these few days.
Your Majesty may be confident of being as punctually informed as it is
possible, of all that happens, and that I desire not so much to preserve my
Life, as to please Your Majesty, and to testify by real Effects, That I am, and
ever will be, etc.

LETTER LVI. To the King.
HAving Yesterday given Your Majesty an Account of the Reducing the Citadel of
Pignerol, under your Obedience, I now resume my Pen to let your Majesty know,
that it is impossible for me to express the Vigilance and Passion for your
Service of the Marshalls ^requi, la Force and Schomberg, and of all the
Officers of your Army, upon this Occasion. And here I hope your Majesty will
not take it amiss, if I take the Liberty to tell you my Opinion, that you
cannot gratify any Person with the Government of the City and Citadel of
Pignerol, who better deserves it then Monsieur Crequi, as well for the rare
Qualities with which he is endowed, and with which your Majesty is so well
acquainted, as for that those Places are contiguous to the Dauphinate, where
his Employment obliges him chiefly to reside, and be near at hand to provide
for the Preservation of 'em. Besides these Considerations, I must not conceal
from your Majesty, that he has given me to understand that he should be
infinitely engaged to your Majesty, if you would but be pleased to honor him
with the Grant of his Request. He also desires that you would be pleased to
honor M. de Canaples with the Collar of your Order, the next time you make any
Knights. This would be a means, by new Obligations, to engage both Father and
Son to your Service, to which I am so inseparably devoted, that I shall always
be to the last gasp of my Breath, etc.

LETTER LVII. To the King.
MOnsieur Marshal de Crequi having desired me to write to your Majesty, that
you would be pleased to confer upon the Sieur Aubery, the Employment of the
Queen's Chancellor, I take that Liberty so much the more willingly to the same
end; because your Majesty knowing the Affection which the said Marshal has for
that Family, will readily consider, that while he serves your Majesty as he
does, I could not deny him the kind Office of such a Letter your, Majesty knows
better then any person in the World, how to supply that place with such a
Person as you shall deem most Capable. In the mean time, I beseech your Majesty
to believe that I am, and shall be as long as I live, etc.

LETTER LVIII. To the King.
I Send this Courrier in have to your Majesty at the heels of the Sieur de
Folaine, to deliver you the particular Relation of what the Gentlemen who
command your Armies in Italy sent me, concerning what happened at the Attacque
of Pont Carignan. I praise God with all my heart for the good success wherewith
he is pleased to bless your Victorious Arms from day to day. And I most
fervently beseech him to continue the same, and render you the most glorious of
all the Princes of the Earth, as he has exalted you to be the most Illustrious
in Birth, and for those. Virtues which all the World admires in your Person. In
the mean time I cannot sufficiently set forth in Terms becoming my Gratitude,
how sensible I am of the good Offices, which, as M. Bouthillier sends me Word,
your Majesty vouchsafes to do me with the Queen, your Mother. Which is a Proof
of the Goodness of the Best Master in the World, in favor of his Creature,
which I shall endeavor to acknowledge, by all the Services that shall ever be
within the Power of a Servant to do your Majesty; which as I hope will cause
your Majesty to acknowledge, that never any Person was, is, or will be, equally
as I am, etc.

LETTER LIX. To the King.
IT IS impossible for me to tarry any longer without manifesting to Your
Majesty, my joy for the news which the Sieur de Raire has brought, concerning
what has happened at Cazal. For though it be not confirmed by any Courrier with
particular Dispatches, if it be true, as he assures me, that he was present at
the Action, there is no reason to question it. Which being granted, I cannot
but give God thanks for it with all my heart, as being one of the most
glorious, that your Majesty could desire for your own, and the Reputation of
your Arms, and which heaps both Gladness and Contentment upon all your most
zealous Servants. Among whom I can assure your Majesty, that there is not any
one who more fervently desires the Continuance of your successful Progresses,
then he who is and ever will be, etc.

LETTER LX. To the King.
YEsterday in the Evening I sent a Gentleman to Mr. le Premier, to desire him
to put your Majesty in mind, that your fasting to day according to your
intention, may be prejudicial to your health. I wrote to the same Effect, to
Father Maillan, but understanding that he was at St. Germans, I take the
boldness to address my self to your Majesty, and lay before you, that you will
do better to follow that Counsel which is given you, to dispense with the
performance of your intended Penance, then to observe it actually to the
prejudice of your health, so necessary for the Good of your Realm, and the
welfare of the Church.

They who have not Bodies of Iron have need of preventing the Inconveniency
that may befall 'em: And you may be pleased to remember, that your Majesty and
your Creatures are in the same Condition. Which makes me believe that you will
so much the more willingly follow the advice which is given you, by him who has
the greatest Interest and Zeal for what concerns your Majesty. To whom I am,
and ever shall be, etc.

LETTER LXI. To the King
Though I should live a hunderd years, I should never be able sufficiently to
acknowledge, according to the Merit of it, the Honor which you are pleased to
do me. I confess it is the only thing which, next to the Grace of God, is able
to support me in the perpetual Inconveniences of my unhappy Indisposition. My
Rhumatism runs every day from one side to the other, but lightly; now I have it
under my jaws: I keep it off, as well as I can, by little remedies, In the
prescribing of which I have a good share with my little Physician, whom you
know to be de Poictiers. But the best of all those remedies that do me any
good, is the continuance of the Honor of your Gracious Favors, which is the
only thing in the World on which I most rely, and your good Health, which I
wish for a hundred times more then my own life; being able to averr with as
much Truth as is due to the Solemnity of the day, that I never had, nor ever
shall have, a Passion equal to that which I have, and ever shall have, as long
as I live, for the Contentment and satisfaction of the greatest King in the
world, to whom I am Eternally, etc.

LETTER LXII. To the King.
MY Cousin de la Meilleray will testify to Your Majesty one true thing, which
is, that Your Majesty confers both upon him and me, many more favors then we
can ever merit. Had he not had a particular care all his life long, not only to
obey your will, but to prevent your Intentions when he could dive into 'em, I
should disown him, and heartily renounce him, without ever thinking my self in
a fault, since it would be the least Punishment he could deserve; and for that
having shown him this Letter, he consents to it, and acknowledges that he
should deserve more.

I praise God for Your Majesty's Good Health; and I beseech him with all my
heart, to preserve it as entire, and as long as he desires it, who wishes it
more then the preservation of his own, which he desires for no other end, then
to employ it in Your Majesty's Service, to whom I shall ever be while I have
Breath, etc.

LETTER LXIII. To the King.
THE Honor which it pleases Your Majesty to do me, is more then sufficient to
remove from me all my Greivances, though they were greater then they are. I do
not believe the Inconvenience of which I spoke to Your Majesty Yesterday, will
come to any thing, nor do I think the Advice which they have given Your Majesty
is a real truth, but only that they had a design to pass away the time, as you
are pleased to write me word; of which I shall not open my Lips to any person
living. I saw Monsieur Puy-Laurence this morning, who told me that Monsieur is
not as not as yet so well converted upon the point of his Marriage, as he
desired; but that by pursuing what he should say to Father Joseph, and M.
Bouthillier in that particular, they would find a way to bring it to pass, I
am, etc.

LETTER LXIV. To the King.
IT IS impossble to forbear manifesting to Your Majesty the extreme satisfaction
I received from the sight of you. Your Sentiments are full of Generosity, and
so much the more to be highly valued, because you submit 'em to reason, and the
just considerations of the Good and Welfare of your Realm. I beseech you never
to be afraid of Communicating 'em to your Creatures, and to be persuaded that
they will make it their sole study to bring 'em to pass to your Content and
Advantage. I wish your Glory more then ever any Servant wished the Prosperity
of his Master; nor shall I leave any thing omitted that lies in my power to
contribute toward it. The singular Testimonies of your Grace and Favor which
you showed me Yesterday, have pierced my heart: I find my self obliged in such
an extraordinary Measure, that I cannot express it. I beseech your Majesty, for
God's sake, not to do your self any prejudice, by giving way to Melancholy,
and by that means, I hope, that through the Goodness of God, you will enjoy
your full content. For my part, I shall never have any, but in giving Your
Majesty to understand from time to time, that I am the most faithful Servant,
the most passionate Subject, and the most zealous Servant that ever King and
Master had in this World. I will live and conclude in this condition, as being
a hundred times more devoted to Your Majesty, then mindful of my own concerns,
etc.

LETTER LXV. To the King.
I should not have given credit to what M. Bouthillier related to me, had I not
understood it from Your Majesty's Lips. I thought that the long time I have
served Your Majesty, under the Blessing which God has been pleased to bestow
upon your Virtue, had made you too well accquainted with the passionate Zeal
which I have always had, and ever shall have for your Service, to question my
Sincerity. That which comforts me in this Misfortunes is, that I am certain of
never having failed so much as in thought of my duty to Your Majesty, and that
I hope Your Majesty will soon be of the same mind.

I am so far from being unwilling to abandon all things for the love of you,
that I should be ready to abandon my self, when ever you should think it for
your Benefit, or that I thought you would receive any Contentment by it. I
never was otherwise inclined, and I will rather dye a thousand Deaths then
alter my mind. I am beholding for an infinite number of favors to Your
Majesty, which I shall always acknowledge as long as I live. Among 'em all, the
greatest, and of which I am most sensible, is the Confidence which you have
always been pleased to repose in my Fidelity, and the sincere opening of your
heart to my Advice. My Health which was better then now it is, afforded me the
means of frequently receiving that Honor: Now that my unfortunate
Indispositions render me more unweildy then I could wish to be, I am afraid
least my absence depriving me of that singular Favor, should create me other
mischiefs, which it is impossble, for me to foresee. But in what place soever I
am, I shall think more upon Your Majesty then upon my self, and upon your
Interest more then upon the preservation of my own life. I confess, my heart is
so sensibly touched, that I can say no more to Your Majesty. The Bearer in whom
I have a full Confidence, will give you a more particular account of it, but he
can tell Your Majesty nothing more certain, then the Truth with which I shall
conclude this Letter, protesting to Your Majesty, that I shall never cease to
be, etc.

LETTER LXVI. To the King.
IN sending this Bearer, to know the state of Your Health, the freedom
wherewith Your Majesty is pleased that your Creatures should converse with you,
is the reason that I am unwilling to lose the opportunity of letting Your
Majesty know, who is the most Zealous of all Your Majesty's Creatures. I have,
and shall have, as long as I live, more confidence in Your Majesty then in my
self, a greater Passion for you, then Your Majesty has for your Self, and
assuredly my tenderness also equals my Fidelity. I will not deny but that
Jealousy comes in for a share, but I am sure Your Majesty will not take it a
miss, since Your Majesty does not a little caress that Lady, that she should be
kindly entertained by a Creature, who shall always Glory in imitating Your
Majesty, and in being, till my Descent into the Grace, etc.

LETTER LXVII. To the King.
NOT deserving the least of these Testimonies which you are pleased to give me,
of the satisfaction you have received in my Services, I have received 'em as
pure Effects of your Goodness. I shall never aspire to any other Honor then to
live under the Shadow of your Glory, serving you all the while as faithfully as
ever Servant served a Master. God, who knows the hearts of Men, is my Witness
of this Truth, and that there is nothing in this World that can more content
me, then to fulfill your Will and Pleasure, and see the Prosperity of your
Affairs. I cannot sufficiently declare to Your Majesty my joy, to find that
they begin to change their Countenance.

The taking of Corbie, and the raising the Siege of St. John de Laune, besieged
by all the Forces of the Empire, are two pieces of great Importance.

Your Majesty will see the Memoire which M. d' Angoulesme and my self drew up,
before we knew of Galasse's Retreat and another, which contains what your
Servants think fit to be done, now he is retired. The whole is submitted to
your Judgment, to do what Your Majesty pleases.

I am overjoyed, that Your Majesty is in so good a Humor, and I pray to God
that he will grant me the Favor to serve you as successfully, as I shall do it
faithfully, as being Eternally, etc.

LETTER LXVIII. To the King.
IN the midst of my Sorrows for the loss of those who Commanded those Troops of
Horse, which Your Majesty was pleased to give me, it is no small Consolation to
me, that they have ended their days in your Service, and that the Cardinal de
la Valetta has won a considerable Advantage over the Enemy. I question not, but
Your Majesty's presence will regulate all things that were out of Order in your
Absence. The Resistance of the Enemy in St. Mitchel, serves only to augment
Your Majesty's Honor, who may make your Advantage of it, by making use of that
Right which their Obstinacy will deserve, and without which they will be both
able and willing to renew their Disobedience. I am extremely glad, that my
Cousin de Meilleray is so Fortunate as to serve Your Majesty to your good
liking. For there is nothing which I desire more Ardently, then that my self
and all that belong to me may spend their lives in the Service of the best
Master in the World, to whom I am, and ever shall be, till Death, etc.

LETTER LXIX. To the King.
BUT for the Miscarriage which is not to be excused of M. d' Ango^lesme, there
is no qustion but that Your Majesty had accomplished what you had so prudently
designed. However Your Majesty is happy in this satisfaction, that the Faults
of another, not your own, were the Obstacles that prevented your making the
best of so glorious a Contrivance. But as there is now no reason for Your
Majesty to advance, so it will not be convenient for Your Majesty to remove any
farther, till you have repaired the disorder of your Affairs occasioned by M.
d' A^goulesms Retreat; and I am persuaded a few days will produce that good
Effect. In the mean time I beseech Your Majesty not to afflict your self, but
to consider, that if Kings could always do whatever they pleased, they would be
equal to God, who reserves that Prerogative to himself alone. Your Majesty has
proved successful in so many great Actions, that it is no wonder if now and then
you meet with some Mortification This is farther to be said, That since it has
pleased the Divine Goodness to establish you King over a Nation that runs to
the End of the World in search of Dangers, and has much a-do to stay for the
Opportunity of meeting with 'em, you ought not to think it strange that Your
Majesty, far surpassing in the good Qualities which Nature has bestowed upon
your Subjects, should be altogether exempt from their Defaults. I am overjoyed
to hear that Your Majesty resigns your self up to the Will of God; and for the
Honor you are pleased to do me, by declaring how much you confide in my
faithful Counsels. I know not which way to answer this Obligation, but by
assuring Your Majesty, that I willingly sacrifice my Life to God, that so he
may be pleased to render my Counsels as profitable to your Service, as it is
possible for him to desire 'em, who resolves to be ever, etc.

LETTER LXX. To the KING.
THE Birth of Monsieur the Dauphin ravishes me with Joy. I hope, that as he is
a Theodosius, that is to say, a Gift which God has bestowed upon Your Majesty,
he will answer the great Qualities of the Emperors that bore that Name. It Is my
hearty Prayer to God that it may be so; and that he will vouchsafe to heap upon
Your Majesty as many Blessings as it is possible for him to desire, who is
Eternally, etc.

LETTER LXXI. To the KING.
I Am overjoyed for Your Majesty's good Health; but extremely troubled there
has been so much Want of good Management in the Execution of Your Majesty's so
often re-iterated Orders.

Your Majesty is too gracious, and too just, to make me responsible for the
Faults of others; and too greatly experienced, not to consider, that in great
Affairs, the Effects never answer exactly to all the Orders that are issued
forth. This is only in the Power of God to bring to pass; whose Goodness is
such, that leaving Men to act according to their Infirmities, he suffers the
Difference between their Performances, and his Will.

Your Majesty knows that I have always complained of the Delays of the
Treasurers and Providers of the Ammunition; and that I have openly spoke it in
your Councils, that it was in vain to raise Armies, if Care were not taken to
pay 'em in time, and that they were not as carefully furnished with Provision.
And though in these sort of Affairs, I suppose my self to have done my Duty,
when I have admonished, solicited, and importuned those who are entrusted with
making those Provisions, I dare presume to say, that I have done more; it being
certain, that if I had not taken upon me to send M, de Hussay into Champaigne
to buy Corn, and borrowed Six Score Thousand Crowns for Raising of Men, Your
Majesty had been disappointed of your Preparations for your just and great
Designs. I will not fail to solicit M. de Bullion again, to send Money to
Your Majesty. But because that which passes by the Order of the Officers of the
Finance cannot be done without great Delays, I have just now sent away Six
Thousand Pistoles by the Post, being the Remainder of what I borrowed. To which
I must add, that the Honors, the Favors, the Benefits which Your Majesty has
conferred upon me, and the Opinion you have of my Fidelity, give me Credit
sufficient for another Twenty Thousand Pistoles, if Your Majesty commands me in
four Lines under your Hand.

I conclude with my Prayers to God, that all the rest of Your Majesty's
Servants may equal me in Diligence; and that he will be pleased to assuage your
Disquiets, which I believe no less necessary, as well for the Preservation of
your Health, as for the Good of your Affairs, etc.

LETTER LXXII. To the KING.
I did not speak yesterday to M. de Bullion, of the Dispatch which I sent
yesterday to Your Majesty, because I would not hinder the Digestion of a young
Partridge he had eaten. This Morning I easily persuaded him to send Money to
Your Majesty, because he had voluntarily resolved to send away a Hundred and
Fifty Thousand Livres, to the end Your Majesty might be supplied for your
pressing Exigencies.

Besides this, he affirms, and has sent you a convincing Proof of it, that he
has provided for the Funds that are requisite for all your Troops. It Is so
necessary to execute Justice upon some of these Commissaries that are in fault,
that it would not be the worst Mark of Monsieur the Chancellor's Diligence, if
he caused some of 'em to be proceeded against in common Form.

I beseech, and in all my Dispatches shall beseech Your Majesty, that you would
be pleased to consider, that though there is some certain Care necessary for
the right Management of Business, to the end it may be attended with Success;
yet there are some Cares that can produce no other Effect, then an Alteration
of your Health, and so much Grief to all your Servants, that the Trouble of
their Minds may render 'em less able to act with that Vigor which your Service
requires.

LETTER LXXIII. To the KING.
IN regard no Joy can happen to Your Majesty, wherein I do not presume to claim
that Share which it behooves me, I am apt to believe, it is the Will of God, to
make me sensible, that no Accident can befall Your Majesty, but that some one
of the same nature follows my self. I thought to have been this day at Ruel,
that I might be nearer Your Majesty; but by reason of a slight Fit of an Ague,
that took me Yesterday in the Evening, the Physicians ordered me to be Let
Blood. Let it not trouble Your Majesty, I beseech ye, since my Fit was so
short, that it held me no longer then from Five in the Evening, till Ten at
Night. Perhaps this Fit, happening after a Diarrhea, will not be attended by
any ill Effects; or, at worst, as the Physicians judge, 'twill be only a Single
Tertian Ague; which will not hinder me from paying Your Majesty those Services
which I desire, etc.

LETTER LXXIV. To the KING.
UNderstanding that Father Causin, for almost these two Years together, has
declared to several Persons, that Your Majesty looked upon my Services as
troublesome, rather then useful to Your Majesty, I expected with great
Impatience the Settlement of a good Peace; as well for that it is the only End
which you always proposed by a War, as for that it was the true Time wherein,
by offering to Your Majesty the making my self miserable, to procure your
Contentment, I might be able to give you the last, and most assured Proof, that
a Subject can give his Prince, of the Excess of his Passion. Since Your Majusty
did me the Honor, of your own good Will, to allow me ^hare in the
Administration of your Affairs. I have always made a full Account to dye at
your Feet, and never had any Design to absent my self from your Person. And if
that good Father be no better acquainted with Your Majesty's Mind, then he has
been observant of the good Example of his Order, during his Abode at Court. I
still preserve the same Resolutions. But if he has better dived into Your
Majesty's Intentions then my self, I should think my self too blame, if I did
not seek to render my Absence agreeable, when my Presence could no longer be to
your Benefit. I beseech Your Majesty, in that particular, to do your self
Justice, and to make use of your Goodness in my behalf; it being no less just
that you should satisfy your self, then it would be an Effect of your
Goodness, to let him take his Rest, who could never think himself at ease, but
when he was certainly convinced that his Pains procured Your Majesty's Repose.

LETTER LXXV. To the KING.
YOur Majesty will pardon me, if I take the Boldness to return Your Majesty
Thanks for the Honor you have been pleased to do me, in conferring upon my
Nephew an Abbey, the Air and Situation of which being near to Paris, may be of
great Advantage to promote his Studies. I can assure Your Majesty, he has a
very authentic Dispensation from Rome; and that, in Acknowledgment of the
Favor you have been pleased to do him, I shall heartily pray to God, that he
will be pleased to heap upon Your Majesty his Blessings in abundance, and make
me able to manifest to Your Majesty, how much I am, etc.

LETTER LXXVI. From Cardinal Richlieu, to the QUEEN.
IT was impossible for me to represent to Your Majesty my Affliction, when I
understood by the Letter with which you were pleased to honor me, that God has
not as yet bestowed that Blessing on your Nuptials, which we promised our
selves from his Goodness. I can assure Your Majesty, that the King is no less
grieved for your sake, then for his own, and the Misfortune of his Kingdom.

However, I beseech ye not to afflict your self; it being certain, that what
God is not pleased to send at one time, may come to pass at another: And that
he has hitherto manifested so particular a Care of France, that he will,
doubtless, crown the Blessings he has in Store for us, with that which he knows
to be the only one that can complete our Happiness. I fervently pray for it;
and beseech Your Majesty to believe, that there is no Man who desires it with
more Passion then I do; who am, and ever will be, to my Life's End, etc.

LETTER LXXVII. To the QUEEN.
IF, through the Fault of another, I have failed Your Majesty, by assuring you
of a thing that has not come to pass so soon as I expected, I hope Your Majesty
will not think me too blame; but rather condemn the Inconstancy of those who
have not fulfilled what they were obliged to by a Treaty. Though there was no
Fault committed by me, in giving Your Majesty Advice of the Entry which the
King was to have made into Nancy, yet I must confess I was so sorry I had
relied so much upon the Faith of another, that I never durst have re-issum'd
the Boldness to have writ to Your Majesty, had not Time repaired the Mistake I
fell into. I assure Your Majesty, that it shall never be my Misfortune again to
build upon that, which not depending upon my self, shall not be as absolutely
certain as my Fidelity to Your Majesty, which is, and shall be ever, etc.

LETTER LXXVIII. From Card. Richlieu, to the Count of Soissons.
I Told the Sieur Campion, the Bearer hereof, what I thought would be for your
Good, which terminates in this, That you will always receive the Effects of the
King's Goodness, provided you will be pleased to put your self into a Condition
to merit 'em. It will not be Prudence, Sir, in you to juggle with His Majesty
in certain things, to which the Pretension aloneis odious, so long as it tends
to the Diminution of his Honor and Authority. I beseech ye so to demean your
self, as may be for your own Good; and to be confident that I shall desire all
Opportunities to serve you: And you shall find by the Effects, that I am
sincerely, etc.

LETTER LXXIX. From the KING, to the same Person.
I have received your Letter, wherein you assure me of your Innocence; which
being willing to believe, I have nothing farther to say to ye, but that I will
always refer the Causes of such of my Subjects that fail in what they owe to my
Person, and my Realm, to the Judges, whose Susiness it is to take Cognizance of
their Actions. I promi^ my (...) that your Conduct will ever be such as I
desire it should be: And upon that Consideration, I will assure ye of my
Affection, and pray to God to have ye in his ho^y Keeping, etc.

LETTER LXXX. From Card. Richlieu, to the Duke of Vendosme.
I Have received the Letter you were pleased to write me concerning your Sons,
whom I will serve to the uttermost of my Power, in reference to the Journey
it is your Pleasure they should take. I dare be confident, they are so well
born, and govern themselves with so much Conduct at Court, that we cannot speak
so well of 'em as they deserve. I shall esteem my self happy, If I may be able
to testify my Affection to Them, and to your self, that I am, etc.

LETTER LXXXI. To the Count of Soissons.
I Leave M. de Mazieres to let you know by Word of Mouth the King's
extraordinary Joy upon the News you sent him of the Queen's being with Child,
to the end I may tell you my self, that for my own Particular, I make no doubt
of the Truth of what you are pleased to acquaint me with in the Letter, which
you were pleased to write me upon that Subject; knowing, as I do, how
passionately you desire the Settlement of the Realm, and Their Majesty's
Contentment. I beseech you to believe, that a greater Felicity could not befall
me, then to meet some Opportunity, wherein I might give you real Proofs of my
sincere Affection; as being, and desiring to be ever, etc.

LETTER LXXXII. To the Count d' Harcourt.
THE Sieur Faret comes to wait upon you with the reasons which ought to
persuade you to live in Amity with Monsieur the Archbishop of Bourdeaux, whose
Interests I cannot by any means relinquish. It Is for the King's Service, your
Honor, and my particular satisfaction. These considerations persuade me, that
you will demean your self upon this Occasion, as his Majesty expects you
should, as you ought your self to do, and as I most certainly promise my self.
I have written to the Sieur de Bordeaux, that he shall correspond on his part,
as far as you can desire. And I am confident he will not fail to contribute
what lies in his Power toward so good a purpose; which without question will be
very advantageous to the King's Affairs, and honorable to both sides, whereas
the continuance of that coldness which has been between you, will produce the
contrary Effects.

LETTER LXXXIII. To the Duke of Bouillon.
I Make no question but that in the Places where you are, you contribute toward
the King's Service, whatever His Majesty can expect from your Zeal and
Affection for his Affairs. M. de Noyers will give you such a particular
account, of what M. de Thou remonstrated to him on your behalf, that having
nothing farther to add, I shall say no more then only this, that His Majesty's
desire to see the Count in that Condition that becomes him near his Person, has
inclined him to send M. de Bautru to him, in order to give him all the
satisfaction he can desire. I promise my self that this News will please you so
much the more, because I am confidently assured, that there is nothing that
lies in your power, which you would not contribute toward so good an End. For
my own part, such is the esteem I have for ye, that it will be no small
Satisfaction to me, to have an Opportunity to let you see by real Effects, that
no body has more Sincerity then my self, etc.

LETTER LXXXIV. To M. de Bethune, during the Siege of Pignerol, by Father
Joseph.
I Have delayed to let you hear from us, as being desirous to give you certain
Information of what Resolutions are to be taken upon the Uncertainties
wherewith the Duke of Savoy still amnses us. For though his Carriage in these
present Affairs gave us Cause enough to believe what now we see, I thought it
convenient however that we should shut our Eyes, and practice Patience in
several things, that we might not omit any Means to close with the King's just
Intentions for the Defense of the Duke of Mantua's Territories, as he is
obliged by the Treaty of Suza; wherein every body knows that His Majesty had no
other Aim, than the Repose of Italy, and the Preservation of the public
Liberty. But at last the said Duke made it so manifestly appear, that there was
no Reason to rely upon what might be reasonably expected from him, that all
those Persons who, together with my self, were entrusted with the Conduct of
that Army, were of Opinion, that the King's Service, the Reputation of his
Arms, and the Welfare of his Confederates, required, that we should seek for
more certain Assurances then Words from the said Duke. Instead of furnishing us
with Provisions, as he had solemnly promised the King; and causing Twenty
Thousand Sacks of Corn to be delivered on this side, for the like Quantity
which the King had put into Nice; after he had delivered us a small Quantity,
and reduced us to Necessity, he, by a general Prohibition, forbade all his
Subjects to assist us any manner of way; showed all the Marks of Jealousy, and
exercised all the Acts of Hostility, that a declared Enemy could have done. For
when we came to Veillana, though there were a River between him and us, he put
all his Men into that place, and caused 'em to advance as we marched: He seized
upon all the Passes, through which Provisions could come to us; and at length
declared, that he would not stand to what he had promised by the Treaty of
Suza; which was, to join with France to procure the Duke of Mantua the
peaceable Enjoyment of his Territories, and pacify the Troubles of Italy, if
the King would not assure him to lay down Arms, till after the Conquest of
Milanois and Genoua. By this it is easy to judge, whether the said Duke's
Designs could be conformable to His Majesty's, who had not been persuaded to
this War, but only to succor his Confederates, and settle the Repose of
Christendom. These new Propositions of the Duke of Savoy, and the Extremities
which the King's Army suffered in Cazeletta, where he seemed to have lodged us
on purpose, caused us to quit that place, and march to Rivola, where we arrived
the 18th of this Month. But before we set forward, I sent a Gentleman to the
Duke, who was then at Rivola, to desire him that we might have a little more
Room for the Convenience of the Army, which could not pass forward without
being more certain of his Intentions: But the Duke being gone before Day, he
could not meet with him. The next Day I sent to him the Sieur Servien, to let
him understand the same Reasons; and to give the Nuncio Pancirollo an Account
of 'em: But the Duke would neither see the said Sieur Servien, nor permit him
to speak with the Nuncio; nor with Signior Sorenze, the Venetian Ambassador;
who were both at that time in Turin. The same day I dispatched away the Sieur
de L'Isles, that, at least, he might pay his Respect to Monsieur, and Madam,
the Princess of Piemont; and declare to them, how great a Grief it would be to
me, that the Duke of Savoy should give the King any Cause, by his ill Conduct,
to complain of him, and to seek Assurances otherwhere then in his Promises: Put
the Gates of Turin being shut against that Gentleman, he returned without being
able to deliver his Message. Upon which, the Mareschals of France, and other
Principal Officers of the Army, prudently judged, that he was resolved no
longer to hearken to any thing on the King's Behalf; that he was extremely
averse from the King's Intentions; and that he rather chose to have a War in
his own Country, then to quit his Design of engaging the King in a continual
War against the King of Spain, and the Genoneses; and caused em, together with
my self, to conclude upon this Extremity; That we were to make use of that
Force which His Majesty had put into our Hands, to do what was most
advantageous for the Good of his Service. We all agreed to march to Pignerol,
because it afforded us a more easy Passage of Provisions from France, which
the Duke of Savoy denied us. We arrived there the 21th of this Month; and this
Day the Town surrendered, with great probability that the Citadel will do the
like in few Days. Perousa, and the Fort adjoining to it, which His Highness
built about a Year ago, to give a Jealousy to the Inhabitants of Pragelas, who
adhere to the King, made no Resistance against our Men: So that from this place
where we now are, there is a free Passage into France. I cannot express the
People's Joy, in the midst of the Calamities of the War, to find that the King
is now their Sovereign; such is their Veneration for his Justice and Clemency.
You may be pleased to acquaint His Holiness of this Success, and to let him
know the Reasons of our Proceedings; which I make no question but he will
approve, and judge 'em to be of great Importance and Benefit, to put a stop, in
some measure, to the Oppressions and Violences that afflict, or threaten to
afflict all Italy; to which all the Remedies applied by the Care and
Admonitions of His Holiness have been hitherto fruitless. If he will be pleased
to favor His Majesty's good Intentions, there is great Reason to hope that he
may obtain those Ends which he has always proposed to himself, for the common
Good. My Assurance that you will leave nothing omitted that depends upon your
Prudence and Care to persuade him to, obliges me to say no more, but that I am,
etc.

A Memoir sent to M. de Berhune, after the taking of the Citadel of Pignerol.
MOnsieur Bethune will see by the Answers of Monsieurs Spinola and Colalto to
the Proposals contained in the Rough Draught of the Peace, which Monsieur the
Cardinal has sent to M. Pancirollo, how unreasonable the said Answer is, and
the little Likelihood that we can be satisfied with it, in order to the
procuring a solid Peace; to the end that after he has considered it, he may
take his time to inform the Pope of it.

Which done, he shall beseech His Holiness to let the Spanish Ambassador know
his Sentiments upon it; which, according to Equity, cannot be otherwise then
conformable to His Majesty's; to the end that the Spaniards being out of hopes
of concealing any longer their Artifices from His Holiness, may be constrained
to agree in things that are just; and which may as well for the present, as for
the future, remove all Occasions of any farther Troubles.

The said Sieur de Bethune shall represent to His Holiness, That one of the
principal Reasons why the King sent his Forces into Italy, having been the
often re-iterated Instances of His Holiness, it would be an extreme Grief to
him, should His Holiness testify any Coldness to favor a Design, to which he
was induced with so much the more Zeal, because His Holiness approved the
Justice of it; and rightly apprehended how much the Success of it would conduce
to the Liberty of Italy, to establish the Dignity of the Holy See, and to the
Security of the Pope's Person; which were the most forcible Arguments that
could move His Majesty.

That although His Holiness is desirous to preserve the Name and Effect of
Common Father, that ought not to hinder him, but oblige him rather, to make use
of his Authority to chastise those who trouble the Family; and reduce 'em to
their Duty, instead of assisting 'em in the Execution of their wicked
Intentions.

And this was apparently done by His Holiness's Ministers in the State of
Ferrara, where they relieved the Germans with Corn; when all Italy knows, that
without that Relief, they could not have subsisted; though they made use of it,
only to commit, with more Leisure and Convevenience, the greatest Prophanations
of holy Things, and the most horrid Cruelties upon all sorts of Persons, that
are not to be imagined.

Moreover, the said Corn was set at so high a Rate, that we have Reason to
think it was done on purpose to scare the Venetians from buying it; which the
Germans were willing to do, considering the Extremity they were in, and not
wanting Money, after they had plundered the State of Mantua, and all the
neighboring Princes; for which they may thank the Pope's Officers.

M. de Bethune is also to complain of His Holiness's granting Passage several
times to the Troops, in their March from Naples into Milanols; and so desire
him to let the French have the same Privilege, when they shall have an Occasion
to march through his Fortresses, to aid the Venetians, and the Duke of Mantua.

The said Sieur de Bethune shall tell him, The King cannot believe (though he
be well assured of it) that His Holiness, or his Nephew, the Legate, have
within this little while been very importunate with the Duke of Mantua to agree
these Differences, without giving any notice of it to the King: As also, to beg
the Emperor's Pardon; which would suppose, that he and his Confederates had
been too blame in upholding a Cause so just, and of which His Holiness all
along declared his Approbation.

M. de Bethune must have received a Letter which the Cardinal wrote him about
Fifteen Days ago, wherein he sends him word, that the King would be extremely
pleased, if His Holiness would but lay his Commands upon Bagni to reside in his
Army in Italy, that so he might be a Testimony of His Majesty's good
Intentions, and his just proceeding upon this Occasion: And that he would do
well to be very importunate with His Holiness, in the very Terms of the Letter.
But if the Letter be not come to his hands, and he finds the Pope is not
inclined to what is desired, M. de Bethune shall renew his Instances in that
Particular, and use such Arguments as he shall think most proper to persuade
His Holiness to condescend to His Majesty's Desire; considering that he knows
the Prudence, the Probity, and Affection of the said Cardinal to His Holiness,
and the common Good. Nevertheless, avoiding to give the Pope any Occasion to
believe that this proceeds from any Distrust of those whom he employs; or that
the King seeks after a Peace, but only because the said Cardinal Bagni, having
been a long time versed in this Affair, can be no Prejudice to His Holiness's
Design for the public Repose; more especially, seeing the Decease of Don
Carlo, his Brother, may render the Presence of the said Cardinal most useful in
those Quarters.

LETTER LXXXVI. From Card. Richlieu, to the said Sieur de Bethune.
I Send you the Memoir annexed, which I desire you carefully to peruse, and
then to acquaint His Holiness with it. I promise my self that you will omit
nothing that depends upon your Care and Prudence, to make the Pope clearly
sensible, that all the Proposals of these Gentlemen tend to no other End, then
to complete the Ruin of the Duke of Mantua, and to deprive Italy of that little
Liberty she has left her, by the Words of a Peace, under which they hatch the
Seeds of a perpetual War, if the Authority of His Holiness, and the Princes of
Italy, who are principally concerned therein, being assisted by His Majesty's
good Intentions and Puissance, do not apply a speedy Remedy. This is all I have
to say to ye in this Letter, expecting to hear from ye.

LETTER LXXXVII. To Cardinal Lodovisio, after the Taking of Pignerol.
I am here at the Gate of Italy, with a Design to do what lies in my power,
under the King's Commands and Authority, to settle a safe and solid Peace. I
have so good an Opinion of your Judgment, that I make no question but that you
clearly see into His Majesty's good Intentions; who following the Example of
his Predecessors, has proposed to himself, as the principal End of his Actions,
to support the Honor, and settle the Security of the Holy See, and establish
the Repose of Christendom. I presume to hope from the Goodness of God, who is a
Witness of this Truth, that he will vouchsafe his Blessing upon the Care His
Majesty takes in the Defense of so just a Cause.

LETTER LXXXVIII. To M. de Bethune.
I was very glad to find by the Letter which your Son M. Bouthillier delivered
me from your self, that the Pope speaks so well of the King; that His Holiness
approves His Majesty's Actions, and all that has been done for some Months
since at his Court, ( The Queen at Compeigne.) So that you may assure your
self, that as there is no Prince in Christendom, who more sincerely honors and
respects His Holiness, then His Majesty; so there is not any one, who more
passionately desires the continuance of his Favors, then he does. For my part,
it is impossible for me to express to ye in Words my real Acknowledgment of the
Testimonies which His Beatitude vouchsafes to give of my Conduct. I beseech
ye, when Occasion offers, to let him know, and assure him, that as I am
infinitely beholding to him, so there is no Person living more affectionate to
him then I am, who will omit nothing that lies in my power, to give him certain
Proofs of this Truth, upon all Opportunities that present themselves. And be
assured also, that I will never lose any one, to let you see that I am, etc.

LETTER LXXXIX. The Draught of the King's Letter to the Provinces, upon M.
Schomberg 's Entering Savoy with his Army.
MY Cousin, the Cardinal of Richlieu, coming to attend me at Grenoble,
according to my Order, has given a particular Account of what fell out in his
Journey for Piedmont; where he has omitted nothing that I could expect from his
Fidelity, Courage and Prudence; as well in the Conduct of my Arms, as in the
Negotiations of a Peace, upon several Proposals made by His Holiness, by my
Cousin the Cardinal Antonio, his Legate, and the Nuncio's employed to that End,
as also by other Persons, who have propounded several Conditions so remote from
Reason, and with so little Security for my Cousin the Duke of Mantua's
Territories, or those of the rest of the Italian Princes, that I could not give
my Consent to 'em, without greatly prejudicing my Dignity and Reputation. They
would prescribe the Duke of Mantua Laws altogether new; and deprive him of the
Liberty of making use of such Persons or Nations as he shall judge convenient
for the ordinary Guard of his Strong Holds; and yet they will not so much as
assure him neither of the Investiture of his Dutchies, but only as a thing
which he may hope for, after he has sent to demand it of the Emperor, which he
has done formerly several times, by his Son; which would be to expose the
Success of an unjust thing to the Inconveniences of delayed Resolutions, which
are frequently subject to remarkable Changes. They would also oblige me to
deliver up Suza and Pignerol, and other Places which I hold in Piedmont, only
restoring the Passes of the Grisons; and yet not oblige 'em to surrender the
Valtolin^, according to the Treaties and Agreements formerly made between us;
the Performance of which we reserved to our selves, with Power to cause the
Breaches thereof to be made good by the Parties. Besides which Conditions, the
Duke of Savoy demands, that the Annual Rent of Fifteen Thousand Crowns in Gold,
which I caused the Duke of Mantua to grant him the Payment of, for his
Pretensions in Montferrat, should be paid him in old Rents and Duties; which he
made to amount to three time, more then I promised him, to the end he might
swallow up the best part of Montferrat by his excessive D^mands. Therefore
seeing things so far remote from Reason and Peace on the part of the Authors of
this War, who affect Scruples and Niceties to justify themselves in their
unjust Usurpations and Enterprises; (...) the Answers which my Cousin of
Richlieu returned 'em (...) Command, having sufficiently made known to 'em
(...) of my Intentions, and my Desire of the public Peace and Tranquillity; and
that the Duke of (...), who, by a ^reaty made between him and me the last Year,
was obliged to join his Arms with mine, and allow 'em a safe and free Passage
through his Dominions, and furnish 'em with necessary Ammunition and Provisions
in their March into (...), for the Defense of the said Duke of M^n^un, never
minded the Performance of the said Obligation, as he was several times
requested by my said Cousin: I have therefore been constrained to make use of
the Means that God has put into my hands, and to enter by Force of Arms into
the Countries and Territories of Savoy, in order to open a Passage into Italy,
for the Succor of the Duke of Mantua, and to maintain the rest of the Princes,
my Confederates, in their ancient Liberty. And in regard my principal Aim is,
to procure 'em an assured Peace and Repose, and not to usurp upon my
Neighbors, I shall not neglect any Means to obtain it, whether by Force of
Arms, or by a Treaty of Peace, provided it may de made, as I desire, upon sure
and reasonable Conditions, for the Repose and Liberty of Italy; correspondent
to the Dignity of my Crown, and the Authority of my Mediation, etc.

LETTER XC. From Cardinal Richlieu, to M. d'Avaux.
JUdging it to be altogether requisite that the Republic of Venice should
satisfy the Pope, in reference to his Nomination of Cardinal Cornaro to be
Bishop of Padua, as well for the Respect they owe His Holiness, as in
Consideration of the present Conjuncture of Affairs, I write you these Lines,
to desire ye that you would contribute all your good Offices with the Lords of
the Senate; and to let 'em understand, that the King's pressing Importunity
proceeds from his Affection for 'em, and his Consideration of their Advantage.
I promise my self, that you will leave nothing omitted that may be expected
from you, to surmount the Difficulties you may meet with in this Affair; and
accomplish it to the Satisfaction of His Holiness, and His Majesty; considering
how great a Shater he is in what concerns His Holiness. For which Reason I
shall forbear to urge you any farther, but conclude with affuring ye, that I
am, etc.

LETTER XCI. To M. de Brassac.
I Write you these Lines, to acquaint you, that it has pleased the King to
nominate Monsieur, the President Coigneux, to the Dignity of a Cardinal, as a
Person whom he deems worthy of that Honor; and to conjure ye, that you will
contribute what lies in you toward the Accomplishment of this Affair; as well
in Consideration that it is His Majesty's Desire, as for the Satisfaction it
will be to Monsieur, provided it may be effected as soon as possble. And
although I know that these are Motives so prevalent in your Mind, that all
other Persuasives would be needless, I cannot but recommend this Affair to your
Sedulity, with much more Affection then if it were for my self, who shall be
ready to testify my Acknowledgment upon all Opportunities that shall present
themselves, to let you see that I am, etc.

LETTER XCII. To the same Person.
THough I have already written to ye in behalf of Monsieur, the President
Coigneilx, concerning the Nomination which the King has been pleased to make of
his Person to the Dignity of Cardinal; yet I cannot but renew my former
Instances, that you will contribute what lies in your Power, that the said
Sieur le Coigneux may, as soon as possible, have that Satisfaction which he
promises himself, according to His Majesty's Pleasure, and Monsieur's Desire.
My Considence that you will leave nothing omitted to this End, prevents my
saying any more; but obliges me to assure ye, that I shall account my self as
much indebted in Acknowledgment of your Care, as if I were to receive the
Effects of it my self; who am, and shall be ever, etc.

LETTER XCIII. To the Ambassdors, upon Occasion of His Eminency's being out of
Favor with the Queen Mother.
THey who are remote, frequently apprehending things to be otherwise then they
are, I thought it requisite to let ye know, that the Queen Mother has
declared, she will no longer make use of my Service, nor of those that have any
Kindness for me, who had the Honor to be near her Person. And though, after a
diligent Search within my self for the Cause of this Misfortune, I find no
other then my own hard Fate; well knowing that the Pleasure of Princes ought to
be as absolute as their Power, I neither can nor ought to do any thing more,
then only religiously obey Her Majesty's Will. It is impossible for me to
express my extreme Grief for this unhappy Accident, which, however, shall not
hinder me from seeking all Opportunities to serve the Queen, to whom I am most
strictly bound for the past Testimonies of her good Will which she was pleased
to bestow upon me; which were such, that this last Act of hers is not capable
to make me lose the Remembrance of 'em. After so great a Misfortune, I thought
there was nothing more for me to do, but to retire home; but it was not the
King's Pleasure to permit me: 'Twas his Desire that I should be near his
Person, and still continue the Management of his Affairs, wherein he vouchsafes
to honor me. not only with his Protection, but with a good Will so singular,
that he can make no Addition to it. I am, in hopes to render my self so worthy
of it by my Actions, that if hither to His Majesty has shown himself so well
satisfied with 'em, they will yet more confirm him in his good Opinion. As for
your parts, I beseech ye to believe, that it will be a great Contentment to
me, to let you see upon all Occasions, that I am, etc.

LETTER XCIV. To Monsieur Brassac, Ambassador at Rome.
M. Mazarin has showed so much Address and Affection in the Negotiation of
Peace, that I write you these three Words by the King's Command, to let you
know, that you can do nothing more acceptable to His Majesty, then to acquaint
the Pope how greatly he is contented with it; and neatly, by the by, to favor
him in what you can; and assist him in obtaining the Nunciature of France, so
soon as the present Nuncio shall be recalled to Rome, for better Preferment.
And I make it my own particular Request, that you will negotiate this Affair
with Cardinal Barberini Which I do, not only, for the sake of that Affection
which I bear the said Sieur Mazarin; but because I know not any Person who can
be more serviceable to the Holy See, then he. You may be pleased to send me
word, how your good Offices in his behalf shall be received: And in the mean
time, believe that I am, etc.

LETTER XCV. To the same.
I Write you these Lines, to return you Thanks for your Care and Vigilance in
the Promotion of my Brother; and to let you know how deeply sensible I am of
it. The Manner which His Holiness observed in doing the King this (...), and
what he said of me in the Consistory, (...), obliges me. I beg of ye to make
him sensible (...); and to assure him, that there is not any (...) who serves
him more willingly then I do, (...) that present themselves. This Courier (...)
News that will by very acceptable to him; (...) him an Account that Richer is
returned to his (...) submitted his Book to the Church, and the (...)
condemning it himself, as you will see. (...) been several Attempts to reduce
him to this Point; and God has been pleased that our Endeavors have not proved
in vain. These are the Fruits of the King's Virtue; in Consideration of which,
God multiplies his Blessings upon his Reign I beseech ye to assure Mousitour
the Cardinal Barberini, that I shall passionately study all Ways to serve him;
and that my Brother going to Rome, will not be, by the Help of God, the most
unprofitable Subject that ever His Holiness advanced. The King's Desire to
manifest his Affection to all the Pope's Family, will afford him an Opportunity
to give continual Proofs of his Zeal for His Holiness's Service. For your
particular, I beg ye to believe, that you will always find me, etc.

LETTER XCVI. To Monsieur Barrault, Ambassador in Spain.
I Received two Letters which your Secretary brought me, and have considered
the Purport of what he was entrusted withal. As for the great Offers which the
Count d'Olivarez has made you, in case the King will relinquish the Hollanders,
it is done to no other end, then only to incline 'em to the Truce, by giving 'em
some Occasion to believe that the King will no longer assist 'em. Never mind
this Discourse, nor talk no more of it to him, unless he speaks of it himself:
and if he does, you shall tell him, that Ambassadors being sent to hear what
would be propounded to them, and not to talk of Things for which they have no
Commission, you can make no other Use of hearing what he has to say, then to
inform the King: Which done, you shall return him an Answer according to the
Commands which you shall receive from the King; but you shall not be obliged to
send back any thing, but what has something of Probability and Foundation in
it. And in a Word, If he makes you any extravagant Proposals, you shall tell
him, that you will not trouble your self to acquaint the King with 'em.
However, you must not fail to do it.

As to the Proposals of the Duke of Guastalla, I see little likelihood of good
Effect in 'em: However, nothing is to be neglected; and if he talks any more of
'em, you ought to know what his Intentions are, and what is the utmost he would
desire: By which Means we may negotiate the Business with his Father, if there
be any Assurance of him. And lastly, You must dive into all the Circumstances,
by which we may be able to clear up, and distinctly terminate an Affair of this
nature. Either the Spaniards are they who cause him to act this Part, or else
he would have two Strings to his Bow to get rid of the Business, in case the
French have the Advantage of the War in Italy. As to the other Business about
which your Secretary spoke to me, I communicated it to the King and Queen,
alone by themselves. They desire you would sift it a little farther, as
Opportunities offer, to the end you may not only discover the things
themselves, but who they are that give the Counsel. You know well that you are
to carry your self nicely in this Affair: So that I shall say no more, but only
that I am, etc.

LETTER XCVII. To the Sieur de Lingendes, Secretary to the Spanish Ambassador.
I Have taken a Resolution to send the Sieur de Puy to those Quarters where you
are, to buy me five and twenty Spanish Horses, if he can meet with so many to
his liking. I make no question, but that for my sake you will assist him as
much as lies in your Power; and chiefly for the obtaining such Pasports as will
be necessary for the Exportation of the said Horses. Upon which Account, I
desire you to deliver to the Count d'Olivarez the Letter, of which I send you
the Copy. And if by chance you meet with any Difficulty, or that, according to
the Spanish Custom, they go about to put ye off by delaying their Dispatches,
never trouble your self to dance Attendance after 'em, or to follow 'em with
Requests and Importunities: But tell the Count d'Olivarez, that you will send
back the said M. de Puy, to give me an Account, that he could not effect what
he came for. You are too sufficiently clear-sighted, not to give us notice of
the Movements you shall observe upon this Occasion: So that I shall add no
more, but that I am, etc.

LETTER XCVIII. To M. de Nouailles, Ambassador at Rome.
THE King having done the Marquess of Sourdis's Daughter, a Nun in the Abbey of
M^-Maitre, the Honor to appoint her Coadjutrix in the said Abbey, as deeming
her worthy of it, my affection to her Father and all his Family has induced me
to write you these lines, to beg of you, upon that consideration, to be earnest
with his Holiness and his Nephews, not only for the dispatch of the Bulls
requisite, but also for obtaining a Dispensation by reason of her Age, which is
necessary for the said Nun, so that her whole Family who are not a little glad
of this her Preferment, may have reason to know, of what weight my
Recommendation is with you, and what esteem you put upon it. Assuring you that
in all other things, wherein I shall have an occasion to testify my
acknowledgment, you shall find that I am really, etc.

LETTER XCIX. To M. de Fontenay, Ambassador at Rome.
THE King being just now going to make great preparations of Men, and
particularly of Foreigners, I thought fit by this Letter once more to renew my
request to ye, that you would be pleased to agree with Cardinal Antonio for
raising of 3000 Men, according to the proposals which he caused to be made to
the King, so that His Majesty may know the exact time when they will be ready
for his Service. And to show the Cardinal how much the King depends upon that
Levy, he desires they may be sent into France, rather then be left in Italy,
where they will be more apt to desert. They may be embarked at Civita Veechia,
and landed at Marseilles; and by that means the Pope will have no reason to
complain, seeing the King intends to make use of 'em for the Defense of his
Kingdom, and not to employ 'em against his Enemies in Italy. I beg of ye to
hasten this Affair, and to send me a speedy answer to what I have written upon
this account.

LETTER C. To M. de Marillac, Keeper of the Seals.
I Send you back the Declaration for the maimed Soldiers, with the memoir of
what Monsieur the Marshal Schomberg and my self had thought of upon that
Subject, however submitting the whole to what M. the Cardinal of Rochefoucaut,
and you shall judge more proper. And indeed, it is of great importance, just
and necessary, that care should be taken of the lives of those poor Soldiers,
who can so well contemn it, when there is an occasion, for the service of His
Majesty. I am very glad that Monsieur has succeeded so well in his Business. I
beseech God, with all my heart, that for the future he may meet with no more
Spirits of Division. I have been extremely troubled to hear that the King has
been indisposed, though it were but slightly, and more glad that he is now well
again, God be thanked, as they write me word.

LETTER CI. To the same Person.
I Received your Letter of the 4th. of this Month; in answer to which I must
tell you, I am very glad to understand there is such a good Correspondence
between you and Monsieur the Surintendant; it being a thing which I have always
desired for the good of the King's Affairs; not doubting but that it will
continue and grow more united every day then other. As for the slanders which
you mention in your Letter, you know how I have been persecuted with 'em. But
in regard they are altogether groundless, there is no heed to be given to 'em;
they exercise the Patience of those upon whom they are thrown, and redound to
the honor of those to whose disgrace and mischief they were first intended.

LETTER CII. To the same Person.
I was desirous to impart to you in this Letter the News which is come to the
King, which, in my Opinion, will not be unacceptable to you, seeing it is
advantageous to His Majesty's Affairs. The Enemy designing to hinder the
joining of the Army in Savoy, with that in Piedmont, by stopping up the
Passage, were so vigorously repulsed, that Eight Hundred were slain upon the
place, and two Hundred taken Prisoners, among which is the Brother of Prince
Doria, General of the Spanish Cavalry, with several other Officers of Note;
besides Nineteen Colors of Foot, and three Cornets of Horse taken. I promise
my self from the Goodness of God, that this happy beginning will be attended
with many successes equal to it; I pray for it with all my heart, and beg of
you to believe, etc.

LETTER CIII. To M. de Chasteau-neuf, Keeper of the Seals.
I Found M. de Leuville to be of Opinion just as you sent me word. After you
have heard M. de Castelane, I believe M. d' Toyras will submit; I send you the
Memoir which the said Sieur de Castelane sent me, with my Reflections upon it.
M. de Toiras is one of your distempered Spirits, who, as I am apt to believe,
with a little help would cure himself. I desire it for his own good, and for
the King's satisfaction, because I know he would be well pleased to see that he
has not sowed his favors in barren Ground. This day I set forward with an
intention to get to Paris, with that weakness which usually remains after great
sickness, and with a desire to let you know that I am, etc.

LETTER CIV. To the same Person.
MOnsieur de Montmorency having desired me to write to you in the behalf of M.
the Baron of Dizimieux concerning a Pardon for an Extravagance committed in St.
Marcellin, where he had a Company in Garrison, I could not refuse him this
Letter, wherein I recommend this Business to your favor, so far as you shall
judge agreeable to Justice. He desires also in case the said pardon may be
obtained, that you will do him the kindness to direct it to the intendant of
Justice in that Army, because he pretends it to be a Military Crime, within his
jurisdiction; besides, that he cannot prosecute the allowance of it before
other Judges, because he is obliged to be with his Company. The said Sieur de
Dizimieux is a Kinsman of M. de Montmorency's, who served the King with his
Company during the Commotions in Langudoc, and now actually serves him in his
Army in Italy, and therefore deserves to be considered upon this occasion, upon
which I shall enlarge my self no further, then to assure you, that I am
sincerely, etc.

LETTER CV. To M. Seguier, Chancellor.
I Was very glad to find by your Letter, that St. George received you at Pont
de Larche, with those Honors which I commanded him to pay you, to testify the
Esteem which I have of your Person, and that in all places where I have any
Credit, you shall have as much Power as my self. And though I doubt not but he
discharged his Duty the best that he could, I could have wished he had done
better for my own satisfaction. To tell ye the Truth, I am much more satisfied
then I can express to ye, with your Reception at Roven, seeing by the good
Order which you have already reduced things to, that the King's Authority is
absolutely recovered; insomuch that to restore it to that Condition wherein it
ought to be, there remains no more to do, but to put in Execution what you
wrote me word of. The Declaration which you sent to M. de Noyers is very well.
In a word, I repeat it to ye once more, I see nothing farther to be done in
Rouen and Normandy, but what you have projected. In the Prosecution of which, I
beseech ye to remember, that you cannot make too great an Example of some
Offenders upon such an Occasion. I still persist in my Belief, that the
Occasion being such at Constance, as it is represented, besides the Punishment
of particular Persons that shall be found guilty, it will be expedient to throw
down the Walls of the City, to the end the rest of the Cities in the Kingdom
may be afraid of the same Usage in case of Disobedience.

You have so well began, that I doubt not but you will crown your Circuit with
a happy Conclusion; which will regulate Normandy so well, that there will be no
reason to fear any farther Mutinies in that Province, nor in any of the rest,
which will certainly keep within the Bounds of their Obedience, for fear of the
like Punishment.

LETTER CVI. To Monsieur Bouthillier.
I Received your second Letter, upon which the King would never be induced to
make any Alteration* The Queen will tell you, when you return, that it wanted
but very little, that the second Importunities which were urged after these,
had not had the same Event which happened at Nantes. He let loose his Passion
so far, as to say, with some Commotion that reflected upon my self, that he
wished me already gone, and that you had your usual Easinesses. In a Word,
There is no more to be done. I set forward upon Wednesday, without fail, with a
Desire to be always, etc.

LETTER CVII. To the same Person.
BEing my Friend, as you are, I doubt not but that you bear a Share, as well in
my Sickness, as in my Recovery. Nevertheless, I can tell ye, they began to
sing Triumph before the Victory, there being a Rumor spread about in Paris, as
you wrote me word, of my Recovery, before it was really so effectual as I had
reason to desire it. You will understand by M. de Chauvigny the Series of my
Distemper; so that I have no more to say at present, but that the last
Aposteme, which rose after the two preceding days, broke of it self this Night,
when the Physicians and Surgeons were at a loss in what part it was proper
to lance it. Which makes me attribute this voluntary Operation of Nature to
the only Goodness of God, through which I hope a perfect Cure. I promise my
self, this News will be as much to your Content, as you were grieved at the
Growth of my Distemper, knowing how great a Sharer you are in my Concerns. I am
glad to understand by your Letter, after what manner Madam d'Angoulesme entered
into the Place where she is, which makes me hope she will continue there. For
my part, in whatever Condition I am, I shall ever be what I have always been.

LETTER CVIII. To M. de Bullion.
THE King having granted the Queen an Augmentation of Fifty Thousand Livres,
toward her Housekeeping, I desire Monsieur Bullion, by this little Note, as
having already spoke to him by Word of Mouth, that Her Majesty may enjoy the
Favor which the King has been pleased to vouchsafe her. There is so much
Reason she should be satisfied in this Particular, so necessary for the
Subsistence of her Household, that I doubt not but Monsieur Bullion will be
ready to content her. I beg of him to do it as much as in him lies, as well for
the Queen's Satisfaction, as for that I think it but a reason able Request.

LETTER CIX. To M. Chavigny.
I send away this Bearer, to let you know that the King has already had two
little Fits of a Tertian Ague, neither of which held him above three Hours,
having had the full Time of their Intermission. Be pleased to give Monsieur
notice of it, that he may send to know how His Majesty does: In the mean time,
let him not be troubled, for there is nothing of Danger. I will acquaint ye
from time to time of the Course of this Indisposition, which, in my Opinion,
will end in five Fits of a Tertian Ague. His Majesty foreseeing that
Monsieur's good Nature may induce him to make more haste then is needful, has
commanded me to write to ye, that you will do him the kindness to divert him
from a precipitate Journey; as well for that it would cause too loud an Alarm,
as also for that, as you know well, they who are sick have no need of putting
Constraints upon themselves. But the King's Civility is such, that though his
Distemper should require him to take some Medicament, of which the Operation is
as necessary, as the expressing it undecent; yet he would refrain it out of
that Respect which his own Inclination, as you know, prompts him to, even to
those that little deserve it. You are so well acquainted with the King's
Humor, that I need not tell you what a Trouble it is to him when he is
constrained to do otherwise then he desires. And therefore you cannot but judge
it convenient, that what I write you by his Command, should have the desired
Effect. Be pleased however, to assure Monsieur of my Passion to honor him, and
of my humble Service. And for your own part, believe that I am, etc.

LETTER CX. To the same.
THE Affection which I bear you, causes me to send away this Courier, purposely
to let you know, that if you find that Monsieur is got beyond Nantes, into a
place where he may be too strong for you to fetch him thence, I advise ye by
no means to go thither, but only to send him word, that you are coming to wait
upon him, to let him know, that his Journey is the Occasion of too much
Discourse; and that it would be more conducible to his Service, to remove all
Grounds of Suspicion. I thought it also my Duty to tell ye, that there are
five or six Men of War in the Port of Breast, which shall do whatever you
command 'em, to hinder, if it be possible, any single Vessel from carrying away
Monsieur, contrary to his Interest. And if they are sailed out of the Haven,
their Rendevouz is in the Island of Bas, to the end you may make use of 'em in
case of Necessity. I send you this Advice by the Inspiration of honest Huron:
But in my Opinion, if Monsieur has been pleased to act most prejudicial to his
Person, which I perfectly honor, these Remedies will be but Some
ill-pronounced Word, which I do not understand, unless he means Chimera's.
Simeres, to use the Expressions of honest Colonel Hebron. I must confess, that
I impatiently expect to hear from you.

If Monsieur has not committed the Fault which some suspect him to be guilty
of, you shall remonstrate to him, how injurious these Reports are to the King's
Service. If he has gone astray, you must not fail to go into Bretaigne, and
take such Care that all things may be every where secure. Whatever
Apprehensions come into my Head sometimes, I cannot but adhere to the first
Opinion which you and I have always had, that Monsieur could never be so
extremely blind, as to be guilty of what he is accused at this day. Time will
soon manifest what People ought to believe on this Subject; and it will
convince you more and more, that I am, etc.

LETTER CXI. To the same.
HAving seen by a Letter from M. Bouthillier, your Father, that the King has
declared to him that I went about to hinder his going to the Army; I beseech
ye to make known to His Majesty, that I am so far from that, that I desired
you to hasten away, on purpose to persuade him to the contrary. You are a
faithful Testimony, that the first time you came to Monceaux, your Journey
tended to quite another End. All the Letters which I wrote since, manifest the
same Truth. Your Journey now is to no other end, then to show the Necessity of
his going. You know very well, that I have not been the Cause of his being
retarded. The King resolved upon it himself, during your first Journey. Since,
M. de Vaubecourt sent word to His Majesty, that he ought not to go; and M.
Bouthillier sent me Letters subscribed, to the end I should take the more
notice of 'em. Upon that, I never minded sending word that they should proceed
any farther, for fear it should be thought I had not that Consideration which I
ought to have of His Majesty's Safety, which is a hundred times dearer to me
then my own Life. Not that I ever thought him to be in the least Danger: But in
such a thing as that, it is for the King to take his own Resolutions. I must
acknowledge that my Heart is sometimes pierced with Imaginations in reference
to the King, whose Safety and Prosperity are continually in my Thoughts; yet
not forgetting a particular Care to conform my self to his Humors. You may
show that Letter of the King's, if you please, and the Memoir which I drew up
the Night before I received the Dispatch from Monsieur, your Father. His
Majesty is too good, I am certain, not to comply with my Sentiments which he
shall deem just. You know that such Occasions as these ruin my Health; more
then all the Toil of Business, etc.

LETTER CXII. To the same.
I Cannot express my deep Sorrows for the Loss of the Sieurs de Movy, Cabusac
and Londigny. I am overjoyed that they valued nothing in Comparison of the
King's Service, upon an Occasion so important as that for which they laid down
their Lives. But I am of Opinion we have lost more then I can tell you: I shall
pay to their Memories all that may be done, as a Mark of their Worth. I cast my
Eyes upon the Sicur Cabusac's Brother, as fit to supply his Place. I know well
that he has been of the contrary Party, and married one of Marriliac's Neices;
but in my Opinion, his Probity is above all that. However, because I will do
nothing before I know the King's Preasure, I desire you to speak of it to His
Majesty; and to beseech him to let me understand his Will, not only as he is my
Master, but as he would do, were he a private Person, to one that he would
vouchsafe to honor with his Favors. I do not speak of the Gens-d' Arms,
because, as His Majesty knows, they ascend by degrees. I am so afflicted, that
I can say no more, etc.

LETTER CXIII. To the same.
MAdam of Savoy having been pleased to direct the Courier to me, who brings the
News of the Taking the City and Castle of Verrve by the King's Forces, to the
end that the sune Courier might assure me in her Name, that if hitherto I did
not believe Her Highness had a Kindness for me, I should be of a contrary
Belief for the future; she giving me an Assurance of it, upon the lucky Event
of this good News. It Is my Opinion, that M^de Chavigny may make use of the same
Occasion, by acquainting the King with it; to let him know, that it lies in his
Goodness to contribute toward the Health and Repose of the Mind and Bodies of
his Creatures, as he sees that others do, who seem not to have so much Interest
therein, as His Majesty has been hitherto pleased to take, out of his mere
Goodness:

LETTER CXIV. To the same.
THE Duke of Lorrain's intercepted Dispatch to the Cardinal Infanta, which you
sent me last, in order to be decypher'd, is of that Importance, that I send it
you back with the same Speed uncypher'd. By that you will see the Disorder that
reigns among our Enemies; and that if the King pursues his Design of turning
toward Burgundy after the Taking of St. Michel, and following the Duke close
at the Heels, they hold themselves for lost. I am very glad that this Dispatch
justifies, that the Counsels that were long ago given to ruin the Duke of
Lorrain, were none of the worst Advices. But I should be much more glad, if we
could but see the Effects of Toledo's Fears. It Is my Belief, that by
re-inforcing the Cardinal of Valetta with what the King resolved on, and Six
Thousand Switzers, designed for Champagne, there ought not a Minute to be lost;
but forthwith to march against the Duke of Lorrain. I recommend to ye once
more to be severe against those of St. Michel.

LETTER CXV. To M. de Bullion.
I Send you the King's Letter, which Madam de Guise has so great a Desire to
see; but you must not deliver it to her, undess she (...) ye another of her
own of a preceding Date, wherein she begs His Majesty to give M. de Guis^
Permission to go for two or three Months to Loretto and Venice, instead of
waiting on His Majesty, as (...) was pleased to command him.

LETTER CXVI. To the same.
THKing has commanded me to write ye this Letter, whose Pleasure it is, that
you wait upon Madam de Guise in his Name, and let her know, that he wonders M.
de Guise has not yet obeyed the Order which he received to attend his Person.
He is ignorant of the Cause of his Delay; which raises in him some kind of
Suspicion. Nevertheless, to show his Goodness, as to what both he and Madam
desire, that he may have Leave to travel out of the Kingdom, His Majesty is
pleased to let him know, that though he will not change his Order to attend
him, yet if his Fears continue, he gives him Permission to go to Loretto and
Venice for three Months, provided, that at the End of that Time he gives his
Attendance, and acquits himself of what is laid to his Charge, to the Prejudice
of that Affection and Fidelity which he owes him. His Majesty does not command
him to depart the Kingdom, but to wait upon him. However, complying with his
Fears, he permits him, at his Request, if that be the thing he so much desires,
to take a Journey for three Months; and at the End of that prefixed Time, to
wait upon his Person without fail.

The King has made Choice of this Expedient, to testify the Excess of his
Goodness, by complying with the Infirmities of those who have the Honor to
live under his Government.

LETTER CXVII. To the same.
HAving in your Letters read the Offer which you may make of your Purse, I
thought I should do you an Injury if I should not accept it with the same
Frankness that induces you to proser it.

Therefore I desire you to lend me Fifty Thousand Crowns. To this purpose I
have sent a Procuration to N. to make a Bond in such Form as you shall think
fit your self. I hope you will find me so good a Play Master, that the next time
you will give me sull Power to dispose of what is yours, as of my own; of which
you may always make a particular Account, seeing I am sincerely, etc.

LETTER CXVIII. To the Commander de la Port.
I Take Pen in hand to acquaint ye, that it has pleased the Queen to declare,
that it was her Pleasure no longer to make use of me, my Cousin de Meilleray,
nor my Neice de Combalet. I was willing to give you notice of it, to prevent
your Misunderstanding Things upon the common Report, which represents Things
quite otherwise then they are. I desire ye not to be troubled at it. I am
here, near the Person of the King, who does me the Honor to continue me that
of his good Will; and testifies his Sorrow for this Misfortune. In regard I am
not capable of having any other thing in my Heart, then to live and die the
Queen's Servant, I desire you to talk of me always conformably to that
Resolution. I admonish ye of it, because I know the Liberty you take, which
might happen to be transported by your Affection for me; and it would not be
just, that all my Obligations to so great a Princess should be buried in
Oblivion, for a Disgust conceived against my Person.

LETTER CXIX. To M. de Breze.
I Could no longer delay the sending you word, that since the Queen has given
me to understand that she will no longer make use either of mine, or the
Services of my Neice Combalet, or my Cousin de Meitleray, it is our Duty to obey
her Will and Pleasure. I make no question but this News will not a little
astonish ye; yet I beg of ye, as much as in me lies, by no means to lay it to
heart, since there is no other Ground for it, but our Misfortune. And I have
this to comfort me still in this unlucky Accident, that the King, near whose
Person I still remain, is pleased to testify a particular Sorrow for it. Time
will show the Queen, that whatever Usage I receive at her hands, I shall ever
publish the great Obligations she has laid upon me, which engage me to live and
die her Servant. As for your particular, I beg of ye to believe, that in what
Condition soever I am, you shall always find me with as much Affection for your
Person, as you can desire from a Person who is, etc.

LETTER CXX. To the Cardinal of Lion.
IT IS with a most bloody and unexpressible Sorrow, that I am forced to acquaint
you with the Resolution which the King has been forced to take at Compeig^, to
beg of the Queen Mother, that she would be pleased for some time to reside at
Moulins. I would have been willing to have redeemed with my Blood the Necessity
of this Counsel; and to have been separated from my Life, rather then to have
been the Witness of this Separation, though it will not be of any long
Continuance. And if God would have vouchsafed to have heard my humble Prayers,
the last of my Days had preceded that of her Removal; nor can I sind any
Comfort in the Excess of my Affliction, to see the Queen, whom I have always so
faithfully served and and honored, in a Condition of any Discontent. But
certain wicked Spirits have been so long a time contriving to trouble the
King's Affairs, that there was a Necessity of applying some Remedy to it.
During the War in Baly, they omitted nothing that lay in their power, to hinder
his good Success. Since that, they have still continued the same Practices;
and, in truth, Licentiousness was grown to that Excess, that the like was never
seen. Monsicur having withdrawn himself from the Court at such a time, the King
several times besought the Queen, his Mother, that she would be pleased, with
opened Eyes, to view these Mischiefs, and concur with him in the most
necessary Means to put a Stop to 'em. But she would not be pleased to hearken
to his Counsels, as she was wont to do; but obstinately persisted in refusing
to have any Share therein; saying, she would not have her Name made use of in
the Resolutions they went about to take. The King therefore finding her so
fixed to her own Resolves, without being able to dissuade her from 'em, judged,
that if she was unwilling her Presence should be useful to him at Court, it
could not but be to his prejudice for her to be there, seeing that her
appearing to be there in Discontent, would but embolden and give liberty to
others to come and declare themselves such as she was. I am so extremely
afflicted at these things, considering my present and eternal Passion for the
Queen's Service, and what I owe her in all manner of Respects, that I can admit
of no Comfort, though the Resolution taken upon this Occasion, was merely the
Effect of Necessity, not of Choice. I beseech God, with all my Heart, that our
Disorders may not be of long Continuance; and that I be able to testify more
and more, that I am, etc.

LETTER CXXI. To the Commander de la Port.
I Write you these Lines, to acquaint you, that the Queen, the King's Mother,
though she had declared, since her Arrival at Compeigne, that she would not
stir from thence, withdrew her self about four Days ago, and is retired into
Flanders. She thought to have gone to Aix la Chapelle; but the Sieur de Vardes,
the Father, took such good Order, that he put his Son out of the place, where
he had a Design to have received her. The King has sent away all the Governors
of Picardy, every one to their Places, to provide for their Security. He makes
Account very suddenly to take a Progress himself toward the Frontiers, by his
Presence to disperse and disappoint whatever may occasion any Trouble in his
Realm. We hope, by God's Assistance, from his Valor, and the Prosperity that
attends it, that he will bring it to pass with no less Glory, then he has
hitherto unravelled all the knotty Affairs he has had under his Management: For
having God and Justice on his side, there is no Reason, in my Opinion, that he
should be afraid of any thing. There is not any thing which would be left
undone, to dissuade the Queen from uniting with Monsieur and Spain. The
Government of Anjou, and the Places which she held there would be restored her:
But she refuses all honorable and safe Conditions that are proposed to her. We
shall see what her Departure will produce.

LETTER CXXII. To the Marshall de Breze.
THough I have already signified to ye, by the Letter which I directed to you,
as well as to the Marshall de Chastillon, how much I was pleased with the
Advantage which it has pleased God to give the Army under your Command, in the
Battle with the Enemy at Avein; nevertheless, I cannot but acquaint you in
particular, with my extraordinary Joy for so much good Success, as well for the
King's Glory, and the Honor which you have your self acquired. I doubt not but
you will continue, upon all Occasions, to give Proofs of your Courage, as also
to govern your self in the Army, as I understand you do; for that besides it
cannot be but greatly to your Advantage, it will be a most particular
Satisfaction to my self, considering how much I share in all your Concerns.

I beseech ye to preserve a strict Union with Marshall de Chastillon; and to
prevent, lest the Advantage you have won should give liberty to any one in your
Army to demean himself less modestly with the Hollanders, then is to be
desired. The main Business is now, not to lose Time, to pursue your Victory,
while the Country is under Astonishment. I question it not, but the Prince of
Orange will contribute toward it all that lies in his power. I cannot
sufficiently express my Joy for the good Success wherewith God has been pleased
to favor your Conduct. I beseech ye that you would acknowledge it as a
Blessing from his Hands, and to rely more upon him.

LETTER CXXIII. To the Commander de la Port.
M. de Bourdeaux is going to the Quarters where you are, for the reasons with
which he will acquaint ye, which terminate in preparing and bastning out a
Fleet to Sea, which the King desires may be ready by the beginning of March. He
will inform ye upon what design the King will employ the said Fleet, that he
may have your Advice before he sixes his last Resolutions. His said Majesty
does you the Honor, to appoint you Admiral of the said Fleet, if you think
your Health be in a Condition to endure the Fatigues of the Sea. I beseech you
not only to consult your Courage, but your Disposition of Body; your Health
being so dear to me, that if I thought such a Voyage would be prejudicial to
it, I would never consent to your going, for the World. The King thinks it
convenient that there should be a Regiment raised in your Name, to be put on
Board the said Fleet. I have made choice of some Captains, and left others,
which you may supply, as you shall please your self.

LETTER CXXIV. To Cardinal de Lion, being at Rome.
THOUGH it be not necessary to recommend to your care, those things wherein I am
concerned, and that your Affection for me is sufficient to induce you to be
particularly mindful of 'em, however I cannot but write you these Lines,
wherein I beg of ye to employ your dexterity and solicitation for the
Dispatches which I prosecute at Rome of the Bulls for the Abbys of Cisteaux,
and Premontre, of which the Monks have Elected me their Abbot; so that this
Gentleman whom I send on purpose to Rome for that end, may be dispatched with
all the speed that may be, and that he may bring the dispatches along with him.
I know the share you take in my Interests, which assures me that you will not
omit what lies in your power that may contribute to my satisfaction in this
particular according to my desire, requesting you to believe, that upon all
opportunities you shall find that I am, etc.

LETTER CXXV. To the same, upon his return from Rome.
I was extremely glad to hear, as well by your Letters, as by the Sieur
Ch^velier de Chappes, that you were happily ariv'd at Lion. Yet I cannot
forbear, but I must let you know, that my Joy is extremely lessened to hear
that your disposition of Health is not so well settled, as you and I could
desire. The share I take in it is such, that I cannot conceal from You, that
the Drugg which they call Scocolate, which I am told you frequently make use
of, being altogether prejudicial to your Health, I think it more convenient
that you should have recourse to the ordinary Remedies that Physic prescribes
to all Diseases. To this purpose I wrote to M. de Lorme, who is acquainted with
your Temperament, and in whom you have a great Confidence, to desire him that
he would wait upon you so soon as he received my Letter, to see in what
condition you were, and to contribute toward the perfect recovery of your
Health whatever his Experience could suggest to that end. I think I should
wrong your Courteous and Affable Nature, should I persuade you to admit him,
and entertain (...) the best you can, not doubting but he will answer your
Expectations. For my part, it will be to me an unspeakable satisfaction, to
hear that you are recovered to both our wishes, there being no Man in the
World, etc.

LETTER CXXVI. To the Count de Guiche.
I dispatch away this Courrier to you, to the end that upon your Arrival, you
may impart to the Cardinal de la Valletta the good News of the Victory which it
pleased God to give the King in Langu^, which I assure my self will not a
little encourage the Commanders of the Army, to do something more considerable.
I speak not in reserence to him, because I know his just Ambition cannot be
greater then it is, and I dare be answerable for him, as for my self, who
frequently reckon my self in the number of the stoutest; though not so furious as
honest Father Joseph, who is here present.

LETTER CXXVII. To Monsieur de Pont de Courlay.
I have been importuned from so many several places to favor your Request of
certain Extraordinarys which you desire to have, out of the Money ordained for
the Galleys, that I send you these Lines, to let you know, that I understand
not upon what grounds you build your Pretensions. I make no question but your
chiefest reason is that of your necessity; but in regard it is the effect of
your ill Management, I am not resolved to solicit the King to apply any remedy
to it. I believe, you are not ignorant that the Emoluments of your Employment,
if you go to the Rigor of it, are not above Eighteen Thousand Livers, so that
the Surplusage which you conceal, and which amounts to Forty Thousand Livers,
is an Extraordinary which you receive over and above; so that if His Majesty
should allow ye another, such a one as you desire, it would be like the taking
of double Grist out of the same Sack.

Besides, should the Overseers of Business be permitted to demand such Money as
was left after requisite Expenses, that would be an encouragement for 'em to do
as they pleased themselves, and by that means to embezzle what was designed for
the King's Service. Had your Galleys been all out at Sea, as you proposed for
the Funds allotted, and if then there had been any Money coming good to the
King, in that case we might have been Suitors to His Majesty, to have allowed
ye some Gratification; but in regard there is but one part of 'em ready, and
those not having been but a very little time in a readiness neither, it would
not be just, that the Funds that remain in the Treasurers Hands, should be
wasted as you desire, and I declare to ye by this Letter, that you will never
have any Gratification of that Nature in Money so reserved.

I desire ye not to deceive your self with any such thoughts, that it is in
your Power to dispose of the Money ordained for the Business you are emploi'd
in, otherwise then according to the rates of the King's allowance, which shall
be sent ye. My practice is no other in my superintendance over the Sea
Affairs, and all the Overseers of Emploiments do the same. The only thing you
have to do, is to regulate your Family in such a manner, that you may live
within compass. If you cannot live at Marsei^es upon Fifty Thousand Livers, a
whole Province would never suffize ye. One of the first things you have to
retrench in your Expenses is, is the Extraordinary of Paper and Courriers. I am
so weary of your Proposals of Reformation, without any Effect, that I desire
ye not to feed me any more with vain hopes. In the mean time, I assure ye,
provided you alter your course of Life, that I shall be allways ready to forget
what is past.

LETTER CXXVIII. To Marshall de Breze, who was withdrawn from the Army, and
had quitted the Command of it, without ever Speaking or Writing to his Eminency.
I shall never fail in my Affection for your Person; but it is so far from
hindering me the having an aversion to your Humors, that on the contrary it
redoubles my dislike of 'em, not being able to see, without a more then
ordinary Grief, that you prefer the repose and divertisements which you take at
home, before that which Men prefer before their Lives. It Is impossible for me
to think of your Conduct, without seeing the Prejudice you receive by it; and
considering the little Reckoning you make of me, in a thing of so much
Importance. I beseech God to let you see, and at the same time to cause you to
forget the Sin which you commit: To let you see it, that you may commit it no
more; to forget it, that you may be deprived of the discontent you take in
remembering it. I would be glad with all my heart that I might never think of it
more, that I might have an Opportunity to let you know that I am what I am
desirous ever to be, etc.

LETTER CXXIX. To the Cardinal de Lion.
THE sincere Affection which I know you bear me, creates in me an Assurance
that you are not a little glad of my Recovery, as you are pleased to signify
to me in your Letter. I am very glad you thought the Cure to be of another sort
then it was; knowing, by the same Reason, how much the Truth would have
troubled ye. For, that I may not conceal from you the Condition of my Malady,
I find my self obliged to acquaint ye, that after two Apostemes in my Right
Arm, there arose a third, so much the more troublesome, because it was not
perceived, which, through the Goodness of God, broke of it self the same Night;
so that, with the Continuance of his Assistance, I dare assure ye, there will
be no farther Fear after the Physicians have done. This is that then which I
beg from the Divine Goodness, and of you, Sir; that Heaven will never afford me
that Life or Health, which will not be the dearer to me, if it supplies me with
those Means to serve you, which I always wish for, etc.

LETTER CXXX. To Marshall de Breze,
HAving sent you word in one of my Letters, that the Lameness of my Arm
hindered me from signing it, I thought I had sufficiently prevented the Trouble
which that Failure might cause in your Thoughts. But since that Precaution was
not able to cure your Fears, I cannot but attribute it to the Excess of your
Affection for me; for which I cannot return you sufficient Thanks. In the mean
time, lest the Reports that run abroad of my ^ickness should disturb your
Repose, I must tell ye, that, through the Goodness of God, a third Aposteme
having broken of it self this Night, the Physicians assure me, that with the
Continuance of his Aid who blesses their Remedies, there was nothing more of
Danger to be afraid of. Be ass^'d then of this for a Certainty; as also, that I
am, as much as you can desire, etc.

LETTER CXXXI. To the same.
I I cannot express my real Contentment to find by your Letters, that the King
is pleased to be so sensible of my Illness. I must confess, it is my chiefest
Consolation in my present Condition, and which will contribute more to my Cure,
then all the Remedies I can apply. I have always promised my self the
Demonstrations of good Will from so good a Master. So that he may assure
himself that there is not any Servant mo^ zealous for his Interests, or more
devoted to his ^son, then I am, whose Actions shall be every one as many (...)
of the Truth of my Words. As for your self, knowing the Goodness of your
Disposition, as I do, I make no question but you are as deeply concerned in my
^ickness as you assure me you are.

LETTER CXXXII. To the Commander de la Port.
YOur continued Affection to M. Despois, Canon of X^intes, induces me to write
you these Lines, to acquaint ye with the Choice which the King has been
pleased to make of his Person, for the Bishopric of St. Papoul, which has been
vacant for some time. His Majesty cast his Eye upon him so much the more
willingly, to honor him with this Employment, because he promises himself that
he will discharge it so much the more diligently; and that he will, by his good
Conduct, invite him to ransack the utmost Ends of his Provinces for Persons of
Exemplary Lives, for the Supply of such Vacancies as shall happen from time to
time. I send you the Brevet for the said Bishopric of St. Papoul, which I
would gladly that the said Sieur Despois should receive at your hands; and that
you will let him understand the Value I have for him. As for your part, assure
your self, that I am, and ever will be, etc.

LETTER CXXXIII. To the Duke of Bellegarde in Lorrain.
YOU will see by what I have written to M. Bouthill^r, some Particulars of what
has happened here, upon your s^nding the two Couriers. I can assure ye, that
'twas not without great Difficulty that the King condescended to what he has
once more granted to M^nsi^ur. I have hitherto put off my Departure, that I
might endeavor to serve him upon this Occasion. But in regard there is nothing
more to be (...), I shall set forward upon Wed^sday, in order to put in
Execution the King's Intentions and Commands upon (...), in Aid of the Duke of
Man^a. I doubt not but (...) will contribute toward it all that lies in his
power, by his speedy Return. In which Case, the King makes account to advance
in Person with a Reinforcement of an Army becoming his Grandour. If so, I make
no question, but that they who attack the Duke of Mantua, will quit their
Design. I assure ye, that Monsieur will be perfectly well received by the
King, if he comes hither; and that all that belong to him will be no less in
Safety then himself; I will be answerable for it upon my Honor, which is
dearer to me then my own Life.

I am much perplexed I cannot be there, that I might pay him his due Honors in
my Station, as much as is in the power of a real Servant. I desire ye, Sir, to
assure Messieurs de Coigneux and Puylaurens of my Affection and Service, of
which they shall receive the Proofs upon all Occasions. They are wise and
considerate, and can distinguish Truth from Artifices, which are always very
rife in Courts, and seem to abound more now then formerly.

I would not engage to persuade 'em to bring back Monsieur, did not I know that
he will receive full Satisfaction, as well for himself, as for those that
belong to him; among whom, they are of the chiefest Rank. I assure ye once
more, they are in no danger of the King's Displeasure; but on the contrary,
they have reason to expect his Favors. Affirm this boldly, and believe me, etc.

LETTER CXXXIV. To M. de N.
MOnsieur de Bouthellier's Letters will give you a particular Account of what
passed here in reference to Monsieur's Affairs. I shall not persuade ye to
contribute what lies in your power, to endeavor a Conclusion of all things to
Their Majesty's Satisfaction; knowing that of your self you will do Miracles.
Monsieur will receive full Satisfaction from the King; he will save the Duke of
Mantua by his Return, and deliver the Queen, his Mother, from many Afflictions
which she undergoes, to see Persons that she loves above all the World, keeping
a Distance one from another. I am consident you will judge, that the King being
absolutely unwilling to part with that Government, they have obtained as much
as they could desire in the World. And now it is for Messieurs le Coigneux and
Puylaurens to manifest how desirous they are to serve the King, in serving
Monsieur, who sinds his Advantage in this Affair. They will have much to answer
for before God, if they let go so fair an Opportunity as now presents it self,
for the Advantage of France, and the King's and Monsieur's Honor. I desire ye
to speak freely to 'em of these things; and to assure 'em, that though the
Devils, which are let loose to foster the Divisions which they have sown, may
whisper 'em Stories in their Ears, they will meet with all Content and Safety
near the King's Person. I set forward on Wednesday, without fail. If things
fadge right, the King makes account not to stay long after in Paris.

LETTER CXXXV. To the Duke of Montmorency.
I Was very glad to understand by your Letter, how much the Gentlemen of Nismes
were devoted to the King's Service. I fairly promised my self, that so soon as
they returned to their Obedience, they would be more zealous for his Service
then ever, as now they make it evident. I know not whether His Majesty's
Affairs will permit him to go to their City: But I can assure you of one thing,
that whether he go or not go, his Intention is, not to make any Innovation to
the prejudice of what he has granted them. He assures himself of a punctual
Observation of what they have promised: And I engage you my Honor, that their
Privileges shall be carefully preserved 'em; and that if there be any who have
any Apprehension of a Garrison, they have no Grounds for it; giving you my
Faith, and my Word, that it was a thing never so much as thought of, nor likely
to be thought of hereafter. You will oblige me to assure 'em of my Affection;
and to believe your self, that I am, and will be ever, etc.

LETTER CXXXVI. To the same.
ALthough I have not been at the place where you are, to be a Judge, together
with your self, of what may be done in pursuance of this Encounter which you
have had with the Enemy, I must confess, that the Success which has attended
it, next to God, depended only upon your Courage, and Monsieur the
Superintendant's. I cannot express the King's Satisfaction upon the Receipt of
this News, by reason of the Benefit which from thence redounds to his Affairs;
nor my own particular Joy for the Honor you have acquired by it. I shall
therefore only tell ye, that there is no need of exciting you to pursue those
Advantages you shall meet with after this, which you have so fortunately gained
from the Spaniard; assuring my self, that it will be a sufficient Incentive to
quicken your Prowess.

LETTER CXXXVII. To the same.
I Write you these Lines, to acquaint ye with what you may have already
understood by other hands; which is, that the King desires you would send a
List of all the Prisoners that are in the Army; and that none may be set at
liberty, till you have known his Pleasure. Once more I rejoice with you, for
the happy Victory you have gained over the Enemy. This will encourage your Army
to continue their Progresses, and your Prudence to manage Affairs, so that the
Enemy may not take their Revenge for the Loss they have sustained. I most
passionately wish that you may not only have as much Advantage over 'em as the
Justice of the King's Arms requires, but what is due to the Valor of
Mont^nerency; of whom I am, etc.

LETTER CXXXVIII. To the same.
THIS Letter is only to give you Notice, that the fear we were in least the
Pestilence, which spreads it self very near this place, should not have that
respect for the person of the King, which I could wish that all the world had
for him, is the reason, that his Majesty has taken a resolution to retire
toward Montmelians, or Barrault, till the Troops which he has sent for back, in
order to send 'em into Italy, begin their March. We expect with Impatience to
hear news from your self, and wish that you may send us something answerable to
your Glorious Passage gained at Veillana. I stay here to see wherein I may
serve ye on the other side; nor shall I omit any thing that lies in his power
of whom you may dispose, as being, etc.

LETTER CXXXIX. To the same.
I have seen the Memoir which you sent me by the Sieur de Varicarville,
containing your Advice upon the Affairs of Piedmont. I shall not repeat what is
within it, because I know you have a Copy of it. I must only tell ye, that the
King will be very well pleased if you do what you shall seem most convenient
for his Service; and that he looks upon all those who have the principal
Commands in his Army to be so prudent, that he makes no question, but that you
consult all together upon the most advantageous methods you are to take. He
refers it therefore to your own, and the judgments of Marshal de la Force, M.
d' Effiat, and of all those to whom such designs may be imparted, to resolve,
and put in Execution, what shall be most beneficial for the Affairs of Italy.

As to the expense which will be requisite to that Effect, M. the Sur-intendant
shall have no reason to complain, as to those things wherein he is concerned.

As for the Army which is to be formed at Susa, you may believe there has been
no time lost to bring it to pass, and it will be an easy thing to convince you
of it, since it is the King, who takes the principal care of it, and labors in
it more then any body; and for that the Queen, his Mother, has not been
spairing several ways of her pains, to the same end. M. the Marshall de
Schomberg is to head this new Army, and will hold so Cordial a Correspondence
with you, that you will be extremely satisfied. You know his Frankness, and his
Affection for the King's Service, which is very sincere. I cannot but rejoice
for your good Success in the Battle of Carignan. I hope these successes will
continue, and I would be willing to contribute toward 'em more then my Life,
if that might avail.

LETTER CXL. To the same in 1631.
YOU will have a particular Account by the King's dispatches which this
Gentleman brings you, of what has been resolved upon in the affair of the
Commissaries, which you wrote to me about. I make no doubt but you will
accomplish whatever you undertake, and particularly that you will put an end to
this according to his Majesty's intention, knowing the pains which hitherto you
have taken in it. I beseech you to believe, that the Affection which I bear
you, is and, will be ever such, that time will never be able to make any
Alteration on my part, being grounded upon your Noble Qualities, which makes me
hope that they will always render you like your self. M. de Soudeilles can send
you word, as I find by your Letter he has already done, how often I have
discoursed him upon this subject. I promise to my self that you will yield an
entire belief to what I say, and that there is no person who honors ye more,
or more sincerely desires to serve you, then my self, who am, and will be ever,
etc.

LETTER CXLI. To the Duke of Rohan.
I put Pen to Paper on purpose to give a particular answer to the points
contained in your Letter, which the Sieur Prioleau delivered me in your Name;
referring my self to the Secretaries of State to give you satisfaction. 'Twill
suffize me to let you know the King's unspeakable Contentment, and how
acceptable the Tidings of your last Victory, gained by the valor of his Arms
over the Enemy at Morbeigne, where to him, especially preceded by so many
others, wherewith it has pleased God to bless him. Nor must I forget my own
particular joy, considering the share I take in what concerns the increase of
your Honor. His Majesty therefore to testify how sensible he is of your good
Success, and his acknowledgment of your good Services, has been pleased to give
a mark of both, which the said Sieur Prioleaux will make known to ye. For
which reason I shall add nothing farther to what he has in charge to say to ye
upon this subject, only that I shall always wish the Augmentation of your Fame,
and of what may give you any satisfaction, as much as you your self can do; as
being, etc.

LETTER CXLII. To the same.
HIS Majesty is so highly sensibly of the proofs which you have given him of
your Valor and your Conduct in these your last Atcheivments, that he thought
he could not give you a more Honorable Testimony both of the esteem he has for
your Person, and his acknowledgment of your Signal Services, then by honoring
you with the Employment of --. He promises himself that this will be a motive
not a little prevalent to excite your prowess, by augmenting the Reputation of
his Arms, in the places where you are, to continue the increase of your own.
For which I will most cherfully be always your surety to his Majesty, knowing
well that I shall never be put to the trouble to pay for a Person who can never
acquire so much Honor, but that he still wishes him far more who is sincerely,
etc.

LETTER CXLIII. To the same.
THOUGH the Person of M. Biscaras be extremely necessary about me, and that the
particular confidence I have in him be a sufficient inducement to me not to
part from him, nevertheless, understanding that you desire to have him to serve
under you, and the Duke of Veletta in the present occasion, I send him to ye
to do whatever either the one or the other shall deem convenient. Did I but
enjoy my Health as well as he does, and could be as useful to ye in any thing,
I would willingly undertake his Journey, so much I desire to see the Royal Arms
prosper under your Conduct. His Majesty relies so much upon your Prudence, and
in your Affection, that he doubts not in the least but you will do wonders to
that effect. For my own part I most fervently wish it, as well for the Interest
of his Majesty's Service, as your Honor, which I equally desire with your
self, as being, etc.

LETTER CXLIV. The the Duke de la Valette.
THough M. de Gramond's Commission to Command the Army of Guyenne under your
self, and M. d' Espernon, was dispatched, when the Letter you were pleased to
send me concerning that Affair was delivered me, yet is your Contentment so
dear to me, that I prevailed so far with the King, that his Majesty altered his
Resolution of sending it to the said Sieur de Gramond, into that of continuing
you alone in the said Employment, promising himself that you will serve him
with so much Prudence, care and Affection, that he shall have no reason to
repent of his favor. I assure my self, that this new Testimony of his
Confidence and Esteem, will redouble your Zeal to answer so worthy a choice by
real Effects, and that you will make your value appear to the Confusion of the
Enemies of the State. M. de Biscaras, whom I send to serve you upon this
occasion, according to M. d' Espercon's desire, will assure ye of the
Continuance of my Affection, and my desire to serve ye, and will inform ye of
some particulars which I thought convenient to acquaint you with. You may give
him the same Credence as to my self, who am, etc.

LETTER CXLV. To the same.
THE Condition to which you have reduced the Croquers, is so much to the King's
Advantage, and so much to your Honor, that although I have already testified
my joy for so happy a Success, I cannot forbear sending the Marquess of Durass
to ye, to the end he may give you new Demonstrations of it in these Lines. He
will give ye so particular an account of his Majesty's satisfaction in your
Conduct upon this occasion, of the thanks which he returns you for the manner
of your mannagement, and the Honor he has done him for your sake, as having
made him a Camp Marshall, that it would be needless to add any thing more. I
shall only say thus much, that M. de Beaupuy's Journey has been no less
acceptable to his Majesty, then that of the Sieur de Duras; for that it has not
only confirmed him in his belief of your Affection for his Person, but also in
that assurance he always had of your Passion and Zeal for the prosperity of his
Dominions. For my part, my contentment is more then I can express, to see you
so highly in the King's Favor as you are; there being no person who claims a
greater share in your Concerns, or who is more sincerely then my self, etc.

LETTER CXLVI. To the same.
I send you this Gentleman for a particular account of the Port of Biaris,
taken by our Pinaces upon the Coast of Bayonne. They who know it report, That
it will so very much annoy the Forts which the Spaniands have built at Socoa,
St. John de Luz, and other places, that they will have much a do to subsist
there. If it be so, it is my Opinion, that you may with more ease make some
attempt upon those places, then hitherto you have been able to do, and that by
molesting 'em by Land, you will have this advantage, that after you have
defeated the Croquers, you will expel the Spaniards quite out of your
Government. I passionately deserve it for the good of the King's Service, and
which is more, for your own particular sake, as being certain, that if this
good Fortune befalls ye, your Enemies will be in such a Confusion, that they
will no longer dare to be so fluent of their Tongues as they have been. I
beseech ye not to omit any thing that lies in your power for the attaining of
so glorious an End. I say nothing to ye of the preparations on this side for
the subsistence of your Army. For I doubt not but the Sieur Cartier gives ye
an account from time to time of the Provisions made for every thing; and that I
contribute toward it, as much as in me lies, by my daily soliciting the Lords
of the Treasury. I shall still continue the same earnestness, to let you see my
Zeal for your Interests, and how sincerely I am, etc.

LETTER CXLVII. To the Marquess of Coisquen, Lieutenant of his Eminencies Gens
D' Arms.
HAd you sooner acquainted me, that you did not think me a Lord great enough to
command the Troop of Gens d' Arms which it has pleased the King to bestow upon
me, I had given ye the contentment which you could desire, and you had obliged
me not to let me stay till you gave me to understand it by real effects, in
contemning your Duty, and the Military Orders which oblige the Gendarmery to be
completely armed; so that my Troop was the only Troop that appeared before the
King without Arms, though I had several times ordered 'em to be duly provided.
I will not insist upon my several Entreaties that you would observe a
discipline so exact in my Troop, that it might serve as an Example to others.
But your actions informing me, of what perhaps out of civility you were
unwilling to tell me your self, that I may answer your Courtesy, this Letter is
to let you know, that I no longer claim any Interest in the Troop which you
command; and that I willingly surrender it into your hands, to make such
provisions for it as the King thinks convenient.

Nevertheless, I assure my self that you do not believe me so unfortunate, that
I shall not able to meet with some person of Quality, who, while he commands
that Troop which shall march under my Name for the future, will be willing to
perform what his Reputation, and the Military Orders require from him, and to
observe and submit to requests and such Orders which he shall receive from me.

I Advise ye to take a course quite contrary to what you have hitherto done,
and to believe that upon any other opportunity that shall present it self, you
shall find the Effects of my Friendship, and that I am still desirous to be,
etc.

LETTER CXLVIII. To Marshall de Schomberg.
YOU will receive Dispatches from the King, wherein you will find two principal
things: The first is, That he would not have you continue the Truce: And the
second is, that you try to relieve Casal so soon as it shall be expired. I
hope, that during the Truce, you will press the Performance of his Word, in
order to a Peace, so home upon the Duke of Savoy, that there will be no need of
relieving Casal; and that during the said Negotiation, you may get all things
in such a readiness for the Relief of the said Place, that you will want
nothing to undertake it in earnest, not doubting but you will effect it. I am
extremely sorry that I am constrained to send you word that the King has got a
Quotidian Ague, of which this is the fourth Fit. All my Comfort in this
Affliction, which you may well judge to be extraordinary, is, that the
Physicians say, they never knew a Quotidian Ague accompanied with more gentle
Symptoms then this. Nevertheless, they believe it will hold him a long time. I
cannot but once more let you know my extreme Affliction; and what a Comfort it
would be to me, if we were together: But we must submit to the Will of God. I
hope we shall be soon delivered from our present Troubles: In the mean time, I
beg you to believe that I am sincerely and cordially, etc.

LETTER CXLIX. To the same.
THE King, upon the Dispatch of this Courier to ye, thought convenient that I
should acquaint ye particularly, that M. de Leon's and Father Joseph's Letters
have persuaded you to accept the Peace; (which I do not believe, considering
your particular Knowledge of the Difference between the said Treaty, and the
Instructions sent to M. de Leon:) His Majesty does not mean that you should
begin the War again by a new Rupture, but that their Letters should serve you
for a Pretense of not accepting the Peace, if you have not done it already; and
for continuing the Prosecution of the War, till you have farther Orders from
him. I cannot forbear acquainting you, that I am almost out of my Wits, to see
that M. de Leon and Father Joseph should so strangely over-see themselves. But
I will write to you more at large within four Days: In the mean time, assure
your self, that I am cordially, etc.

LETTER CL. To the same.
I Am infinitely obliged to you for the Care you take, in sending to enquire
after my Health: It is at present out of Order, by reason of a Rhumatism which
is fallen upon my Reins; of which I had some Grudgings when we were together at
Leymure. But my Pain will be much more easily endured then now it is, could I
but hear that you missed your Fit last Night; there being no Person in the
World who shares more deeply in your Preservation then I do, who shall always
be glad when I have any Opportunity to give you Proofs of the Truth of what I
say; and how I am, and shall be as long as I live, etc.

LETTER CLI. To the Duke of Halwin.
YOU will understand by the Honor the King is pleased to do ye, the Advantage
of serving so good a Master, as His Majesty; seeing we receive our Recompense
when it is least thought of. His Majesty, of his own proper Good Will, has
heaped upon you the Honor of being a Marshall of France, with so much
Goodness, that, in truth, there could be no Addition to it. For my part, who
have a particular Esteem, as you know, for your Person, I am more pleased with
it then I can express: which I am assured you will easily believe, since you
know that I am, from Father to Son, etc.

LETTER CLII. To the same.
HIS Majesty having hitherto declared himself highly satisfied with your
Conduct in those Places where you are, and of your Care in those things which
concern the Welfare of the Province, I thought it my Duty, as your particular
Friend, to give you Notice, that Hajesty did signify to me, to be somewhat
displeased at your scrupling the Execution of the Orders sent you in his Name,
for the Allowance of Quarters and Subsistence in your Government for the
Soldiers designed for Italy: And this I do, that you may, by your Prudence,
apply a Remedy to it. Had I had any Excuse to have pleaded in your behalf, when
His Majesty did me the Honor to speak to me about this Business, you may be
sure, that being so much your Friend as I am, I would not have failed to have
made use of it. But having no Reasons sufficiently prevalent to oppose against
those upon which he grounded his Complaints, I could offer no more to him upon
that Subject, but that I would write to you; and that I promised my self, from
your affectionate Desire and Zeal to please him, and for the Advantage of your
Affairs, that you would for the future make such Amends for what you have done
amiss, as should be fully to his Satisfaction. This is therefore what I beg of
ye, as much as in me lies, to the end I may be the more capable to serve you
with my Applications to His Majesty; and to let you know by the Effects, that I
am, as much as any Person can be, etc.

LETTER CLIII. To the same.
M. de Narbonne, who is returning into his Diocese, having testified to me his
Desire, for the future, to live in perfect Union and good Correspondence with
you; and having promised to contribute whatever lies on his part to that
Effect, I write you these Lines, to let you know how glad I am of it, and to
desire you to contribute on your side, as much as it is possible, to settle
that good Understanding between you both, which is so necessary for the King's
Service, so that there may appear no more Coldness in your Friendship. Seeing
therefore that he has given me his Word, so to demean himself toward ye, with
all the Respect that you can in Reason desire, I am willing to believe that he
will not be wanting to his Promise, and that you will have just Cause to be
satisfied one of another. I passionately wish it, not only for the Advantage of
the Affairs of your Province, but, which is more, for your own particular
Contentment, which I shall always desire as much as your self, as being, etc.

LETTER CLIV. To Monsieur de Zoiras.
I Have received your Letter; in Answer to which, I have no more to say, but
only this, That there is no Person who can hinder me from being your Friend and
Servant, but your self. I know well you are far from any such Design; never
questioning but all your Actions will correspond with that Remembrance, which
you will ever preserve, of the King's Goodness and Bounty to his Servants; of
which, you and I may serve for Examples.

LETTER CLV. To the same.
I Add this to my preceding Letters, to acquaint you, that the Sieur de
Castellane will let you know the Particulars of what passed here. It Is your
Duty to re-compose your Mind, and reduce it to that Confidence which it behooves
it to have; and to give the King just Reason to repose the same Trust in you,
such as you your self could desire. I can assure ye of his being absolutely
disposed to it, and that it wholly depends upon your Demeanor; and therefore I
make no question, but you will demonstrate it to be such, that your Friends,
who always bear a part in your Interests, may receive that Satisfaction from it
which they desire. I beg of you, that you would labor it on your side, as much
as I shall endeavor on mine, to put a Value upon your worthy Actions. Be
pleased to assure your self of it, and that I am, etc.

LETTER CLVI. To Marshall de la Force.
IT is impossible for me to express it to ye, how highly the King was pleased
with the Tidings of the Taking la Mothe: So much the more, because, as you may
judge, that Place is of no small Consideration in His Majesty's Hands, and not
a little beneficial to the Good of his Affairs. He also, in his Letter to you,
so particularly testifies his Satisfaction in your Care and Diligence to
procure the Success of this Enterprise, that it would be to no purpose to add
any thing farther on this Subject. And therefore it is not to that End I write
these Lines, but only to let you know, as to my own particular, my
extraordinary Joy for this happy Success, and for the Honor you have acquired
by it: As also, to assure ye that I shall lose no Opportunity of letting His
Majesty know the true Value of your Actions and Services, as much as you can
desire from a Person who esteems ye, and who is really as I am, etc.

LETTER CLVII. To Marshall de Crequi.
I Cannot but let you know by these Lines the Perplexity that I suffer, by
reason of the News which is brought me of what you labor under in those Parts
where you are, through the Malice and Artifices of some Persons disaffected to
the King's Service. His Majesty, whom I acquainted with it, was no less
concerned then my self; rightly judging, that they who strive to blemish your
Reputation, are no Friends to the Prosperity of his Affairs. I wrote what was
fitting upon this Subject to M. de Hem^ry, to the end he might prevent the ill
Consequences of such Proceedings: And I am assured, that in this Particular he
will do both what he ought to do, and what you can desire. In the mean time,
never fear lest any thing that may be said on this side to your Disadvantage
can induce the King, or his true Servants, to lose the good Opinion they have
of your Person, or your Courage; or lessen any thing of that Value which they
put upon it. For my part, I beg ye to believe, that being so well acquainted
as I am with your Affection and Zeal for His Majesty's Service, I shall put as
high a Value upon 'em as you can desire, seeing I am most assuredly, etc.

LETTER CLVIII. To Marshall de Marillac.
I Have seen by the Letter which you wrote me, the Condition of the Army in
Champagn^, and the Necessities to which they are reduced. I am extremely
troubled at it, as you may well believe. I omit nothing that lies in my power
to remedy this Inconvenience. The King has thought it requisite, upon M. de
Boullay's Journey, that the Keeper of the Seals and the Intendants should see
what they can do to provide for your Necessities.

I have seen what you send me from G^rmany. Pray do me the Favor to continue
your Intelligence, and let me know what you hear of more Certainty. If
Wallenstein intends to enter France through Burgundy, be pleased to have a
quick Foot, and a sure Eye, to move as he advances; for in that Case, it is for
the Army in your Quarters to make head against him. I have wrote to the Keeper
of the Seals, to make such Provision of Corn as you shall judge requisite.

As for the German, you write to me about, I could wish, in case we have a War,
that the King could draw him into his Service, with the Four Thousand Men which
he promises to bring along with him; and after that, all others who would do
the same: For by depriving the Enemy of those, of whose Service against us they
make full Account, we may be able to make the same use of them, with Advantage,
against themselves. The main Difficulty I meet with, is, Want of Money; without
which, there is no dealing with Foreigners, that will be exactly paid for their
Levies.

LETTER CLIX. To the same.
I Received your Letter by your Gentleman. We have received News from Germany,
altogether conformable to what you send us, as to the Retreat of the Enemy from
the Frontiers. I hope France will receive no harm on that side. As to what
concerns M. de Lorraine, I make no question that he bethinks himself of
complying with the King's Desires; so that he will follow the Counsels and
Practice of his Predecessors: The King has a Kindness for him; and so has the
Queen, his Mother. Monsieur also, as you send us word, would be glad to show
him Marks of his Affection. For my part, I shall contribute all that lies in my
power to the good Correspondence which it behooves him to hold with Their
Majesty's. I have always had an Honor and Esteem for him. But this is not the
first time that I have experimented, to my Cost, that Pretenses are always
taken to complain of those who serve the King in that Station wherein I am. No
Man knows better then your self, whether M. de Lorraine have any hard Measure,
seeing it is under your Conduct that every thing has been done, and is done at
present. The Keeper of the Seals knows better then any body, what Injustice has
been done him in the Council, since every thing is done before him, by the
particular Knowledge he has of his Affairs.

As for the ill Offices which are done me at Paris, in his behalf, according to
what you send me word, I look upon 'em, as I do on several others of the like
nature, as assured Marks of my Fidelity, and of my Zeal for the King's Service.
I beseech ye, however, to put a stop to 'em, as much as in you lies, according
as you meet with convenient Opportunities. M. de Bouthillier has already
returned you an Answer in the King's Name, in reference to the Employment of
the German Lord, which you wrote about; which is the Reason that I say nothing
more of it particularly.

I return no Answer to what you send me word, That many who are about
Monsieur's Person will not see the Vanity of their Opinions; That I have no
Desire that the Army of Champagne should be paid, because that if they who are
so possessed would but open their Eyes, they might upon better Grounds affirm,
that I was the Cause that the West India Fleet is not yet arrived in Spain.

While I was in Piedmont, I believe I wrote a hundred times at least, how
necessary it was to keep an Army on foot upon the Frontiers of Spain; and
evidently made it out, that 'twas impossible to keep it under a good Discipline
without Money. After my Return, I declared by Word of Mouth what I had set
forth in Writing before. I am my self at a loss, as well you know, for want of
the Payment of some Assignations that were allowed me, toward the
Re-imbursment of several Sums which my Friends had paid beforehand, to the end
your Army might be supplied.

After this, I have nothing more to answer, seeing the Effects themselves speak
for me. But I could wish, that they who have the greatest Desire to find Faults
where there are none, would tell me, out of their Universal Knowledge, (for
they pretend to have an Insight into all things,) whether there be any Kingdom
in the World, which is able regularly to pay two or three Armies at the same
time. I would have 'em tell me, whether Reason does not require, that we ought
to be more careful of paying an Army which acts in a Foreign Country, against a
potent Enemy, and where Scarcity, and other Inconveniences are not to be
expressed, then an Army that lies still in the Kingdom, to prevent Mischief. I
would have those People e^quire, after what manner the Spanish Armies are paid
in Italy, which for eight Months together have not received so much as one
whole Muster, but are contented with Bread only, which I believe the Army in
Champagne has not wanted. After all this, Monsieur the Superintendant has all
along affirmed, that the Assignations which he had allowed for this Army were
good; which I know not: But this I know well, that there is no Advantage
accrues to him in making bad ones, since he is obliged to make 'em good. I have
written to M. de Chevry, in his Absence to endeavor, as much as in him lies,
that the Army might be paid. And this is all that I can say, only that I am,
and shall be ever, etc.

LETTER CLX. To Marshall d'Effiat.
I Have no need to be a great Orator, to persuade ye into a Belief that the
King is highly pleased with the Victory which his Arms have won from the Enemy,
at the Pass of Veillana; or that I my self am less joyfully concerned. The
Benefit which will thereby redound to His Majesty's Affairs, and the Share I
take in your Interests, may give a better Confirmation of the Truth of what I
say, then I can express in these Lines. Seeing then it is not sufficient to
have begun well, unless you continue, I promise my self, that in pursuance of
this fortunate Success, you will make the best of all Opportunities which you
believe may bring any Advantage to the King's Service.

LETTER CLXI. To Marshall Vitry.
YOU will easily understand, by the King's sending the Bishop of Nantes into
your Quarters, His Majesty's Affection and Care for the Affairs of Provence,
since he has (...) de choice of a Person of that Condition, in whom he ^s an
entire Confidence. He has particular Order to act by your Advice, and to do
nothing without your Consent. He is a Person of Understanding, well affected,
full of Courage and Zeal for His Majesty's Service; for whom I will be
answerable, as for my self. He will acquaint you with the King's Resolution to
send you a Re-inforcement, and to keep on foot, near your Person, (besides the
Forces which are necessary for the Guards of the several ^trong Holds in the
Province,) three Regiments, and Four Hundred Horse, that you may be in a
Condition to attack the Enemy, and acquire that Honor which I wish you. His
Majesty promises himself, that you will lose no Opportunity; and that your
Actions will answer the good Opinion he has of your Prowess, your Prudence, and
your Conduct.

LETTER CLXII. To the same.
I Know that M. de Noyers is so careful to let you understand from time to time
the King's Pleasure and Intentions, in Answer to your Dispatches; as also, to
inform ye of what passes considerable in these Parts, that it would be
needless to make any farther Additions to his Informations. I write ye
therefore these Lines, to thank you for the Favors and Assistance of the
Galleys which you were pleased to afford my Nephew le Genet, for those
Occasions which he stood in need of since his being in Provence; and to beg the
Continuance of the Proofs of your Affection for him, in what he may meet with
of Exigencies for the future; assuring you, that the Obligations you lay upon
me will be the same, as if those Kindnesses were done to my self; as you will
find upon Accidents that shall give me an Opportunity to testify my
Acknowledgment. I have written to M. de Nantes, about fitting out the Vessels
of Provence, to the end they may be in a Readiness to put to Sea as soon as the
Western Fleet shall arrive upon your Coasts. I beseech ye to omit nothing that
lies in your power, to enable him that he may do something advantageous to His
Majesty's Affairs; whether it may be in having Soldiers ready to embark, or in
furnishing the Fleet with other Necessaries. Which, because I promise my self
from your Zeal and Affection, I shall say no more, but only that I am, and will
be ever, etc.

LETTER CLXIII. To M. de Charnace.
AS I cannot sufficiently acknowledge and praise the Goodness of God, for the
Victory which he has been pleased to give the King's Army, over his Enemies; so
I cannot but admire at the Order observed in lodging the Army; not being able
to apprehend how they could march in view of the Enemy, not only lodging in two
Bodies, but each Body in several Places. You know that before you came, we had
resolved rather to encamp, then to hazard our Men, by separating 'em into
several Lodgments, at a distance one from the other.

I am apt to believe the Inconvenience of Provisions hindered the exact
Observance of Order: But, in my Opinion, it had been better to have suffered a
little, then to have expos^d an Army to that Danger as yours was.

I am afraid this Accident will prove the Beginning of some Division and
^ealousie among Persons, whose Union I much rather desire. Great Care ought to
be taken, to avoid a Mischief which would be the Cause of many others. The same
Care is also to be taken, that our Soldiers do not behave themselves more
insolently then they ought to do toward the Dutch Army, by reason of this
Victory. I desire ye to do what may be done, together with Messieurs de
Cha^il^on and de Brez^, to prevent any such Disorders.

It remains now to make the best of so great an Advantage, by following the
Enemy close at the Heels. Monsieur the Prince of Orange is too wise, and too
considerate, to fail in that Respect. For that being in the Heart of the
Country, after so great an Advantage, you may do great things.

You have practiced well the Saying of the Sieur de Charrost, That a Man ought
to make himself known. You have omitted nothing that could be desired in this
Action, to make your self appear such as you were always thought to be. I
rejoice at it beyond what I can express, because of that Love and Affection
which I bear ye.

LETTER CLXIV. To the Count of Gramont.
IF I do not answer all your Letters, accuse the Multiplicity and Perplexity of
Affairs under which I labor; and do not believe it to be Want of Affection, in
regard that mine which I have for you shall be always such as you can desire it
to be. I return you a Thousand Thanks for your Care to inform me from Time to
Time of what passes in your Parts, and the Condition of the Enemy upon your
Frontiers. Here is nothing omitted on this side, to enable us to drive 'em from
their Post which now they possess.

The King lately sent up Sieur d'Espernon to Messieurs l'Espernon and de la
Valetta, to acquaint 'em with his Intentions in this Particular. Now I send you
the Sieur de Biscaras, whom you know, with Orders to contribute, under those
Messieurs, as much as possibly may be done to attain this End. As for your
part, I doubt not but you will do more then we can promise our selves; knowing,
as I do, your passionate Zeal for His Majesty's Service, and the Reputation of
his Arms. So that I press ye to nothing, but to live in Amity with Messieurs
l'Espernon and de la Valetta; so that there may be no Fractions or Altercations
between ye. Besides that it is a thing altogether necessary toward the
accomplishing of the King's Design, you will in so particular a manner oblige
my self, that no Opportunity shall ever present it self of making my
Acknowledgments, and extolling your Conduct, wherein you shall not find by the
Effects, that I am, etc.

LETTER CLXV. To the same.
UNderstanding that M. de Navaille is your Kinsman, I desire ye to do me the
Favor to find out some way to see him so soon as you come into the Country;
and get from him a Letter to his Son, that may put him out of all his Fears
that he and his Mother will no longer lock upon him, if he turn Catholic. The
Father, when he gave me his Son, openly declared to M. de Charost, (to whom I
made some Scruple of receiving him, because of his Religion,) that he believed
I would persuade him to change it: However, that he delivered him into my
hands, to follow my Advice and Counsel. I wrote to him twice about it, though
he returned me no Answer. I desire that you would persuade him to give me some
Satisfaction in this Particular. I shall think my self much obliged to ye, and
deem my self not a little beholding to your Wit and Discretion; being as I
shall be ever, etc.

If you can get a Word from his Mother by way of Consent, you will highly
oblige me: But I am afraid 'twill be too great a Miracle for such a Saint as
you to mollify the Obstinacy of a Woman. Nevertheless, let it be set down in
the Father's Letter, that the Mother is certainly of the same Mind with him:
and that he can assure me, she will not take amiss the Counsel that I shall
give him.

LETTER CLXVI. To the Marquess of Hauterive.
THE Bearer will tell you the Reason of his Journey; which is, that the
Governor of Orange has sent word, that the King had some Design upon his City.
But His Majesty has much more Reason to complain of that Imposture, not being
able to endure that his Intentions should be ill interpreted; which are such,
that his Enemies can find no fault with 'em: Or that his Servants should be
suspected of a thing, for which there is no Ground. You may be pleased to
declare to Monsieur, the Prince of Orange, His Majesty's Sentiments of such a
Supposition; and assure him, he has no Reason to be afraid of France. You may
be also answerable for my Affection, and my Service, which he shall always find
conformable to his Desires. You may be pleased to give M. de Bouillon notice
also, that Endeavors have been used to do him ill Offices with the King, as if
he had some Thoughts of being prejudicial to his Service; which His Majesty
neither does, nor ever will believe, as being too well assured of his Fidelity.
I have written to him upon this Point. As for your part, you may be certain
that there is none more really then my self, etc.

LETTER CLXVII. To M. Vandy.
I do not send ye these Lines to let you know the particular Confidence the
King has in your Courage and Affection to his Service, because you may be
easily sensible of that, by the Choice His Majesty has made of your Person, and
your Regiment, to join the Forces which he sends to the Succor of M. de
W^ymar, under the Command of M. de Guebriant; but only to assure ye, that His
Majesty will acknowledge, upon all Opportunities that present themselves, the
manner of your Deportment in this Affair; to which I shall gladly contribute
what lies in my power. In the mean time, because this Journey cannot be
undertaken without some Expense, you will receive by de Graves, who belongs to
me, a Thousand Crowns toward your Charges. And so I beg ye to believe, that
upon all Occasions, you shall find that I am, etc.

LETTER CLXVIII. To M. de Saucourt.
IT IS impossble for me to express my Joy, to hear that the Enemy have taken a
Resolution to attack Corbie, considering the Confidence that I have in the
Affection, Courage and Resolution of those that defend that Place; where I make
no doubt but, for your own particular, you will contribute whatever is to be
promised from your Person. For my part, I promise my self, that you will
altogether make the Spaniards sensible that they have mistaken their Men, and
that they have to do with Soldiers as courageous, as they who undertook to hold
out Capelle and Carelet were base and cowardly. I will not tell ye the
Punishment which His Majesty is resolved those Gentlemen shall undergo, because
you will hear it talked of within a few Days. But I will assure ye, that he is
absolutely disposed to acknowledge and reward the Services of those that do
their Duty upon such Occasions; wherein I shall be diligent to assist him. In
the mean time, I must earnestly desire ye so to order it, that your Garrison
may live in perfect Union, and good Understanding one with another; and to
assure all those that compose it, that I will make the best of their Services
to the King, and improve 'em as high as possibly they can desire. And for your
own particular, be satisfied, that I am, etc.

LETTER CLXIX. To M. de Puylaurens.
THE King is so well pleased with Monsieur's Choice of M. de Verderonne for
Chancellor of his Household, well knowing his good Qualities, that he has
willingly granted him the Employment of Ordinary in his Council, which His
Highness requested him to add to it. My Joy is greater then I can express, as
well for that the said Sieur de Verderonne has the Honor to be related to you,
as for his own particular Merit; most earnestly requesting you to believe, that
I shall always be disposed to favor your Concerns, with all the Affection that
you can expect from him who is sincerely, etc.

LETTER CLXX. To the Duke of Chaunes.
WE have just now received the News, that the Queen has left Compeigne, and is
retired to la Capelle. I send you this word, to the end you may not fail, upon
Receipt hereof, to take Horse, with all the Friends you can get together, to
the end you may be as near that place as is possible, in order to hinder her
from enterprizing upon any other, to the prejudice of the King's Service. His
Majesty will speedily send a considerable Force to your Frontiers. In the mean
time, give notice to all the Cities, and bid 'em take care of their
Preservation; and be assured that you shall see us very suddenly. I am, etc.

LETTER CLXXI. To the Marquess de Fossez.
THOUGH I know you have not as yet had time enough to take an exact view of the
place where you are, nor to observe what is wanting and necessary for its
preservation; nevertheless I cannot, but I must earnestly entreat you to send
me in General by the Return of this Bearer, whom I have sent on purpose, the
Condition of the Garrison and Magazins as you found 'em, to the end we may be
satisfied. I have such a confidence in your Affection, your care and diligence,
that I no longer believe Nancy to be in any danger, while you are there, not
doubting but that you will so well regulate all things, that we shall no longer
labor under those perplexities we have suffered for these three Months,
considering the danger of that place.

The little care that has been taken hitherto to preserve the Corn that was
laid up there, is the reason that the Magazins are almost empty; but I hope,
that yours and the care of the Bishop of Nantes, whom the King has sent into
Lorrain and Barrois to buy Corn and send it thither, will remedy this defect,
and that in a little time there will he as great Plenty in the City, as there
has been scarcity hitherto. This is that which I request of ye, as much as in
me lies; assuring you that there is nothing that I wish more passionately then
to see Nancy and Metz so well stored, that whatever Army the King may have in
those Quarters this Summer, there may be enough to spare. Be pleased then to do
your utmost, and believe me to be for ever, etc.

LETTER CLXXII. To the same.
YOU may have heard by this time how Treves has been surpised which makes me
put Pen to Paper most earnestly, to entreat you to beware, by this Example, of
falling into the like misfortune, and to that end that you keep so careful a
watch over the Inhabitants of Nancy, that they may not be able to accomplish
any ill design. To this purpose, besides those you have already put out of the
Town, if you think there are any others, whom you have good reason to suspect,
the King's service and the security of the place requires, that you deal by
them after the same manner, it being certain that it is more easy to obviate
the designs of open Enemies without, then to prevent the Machinations of
Clandestin Conspirators within. I believe it also no less necessary for you to
make a new and exact search in all suspected Houses for concealed Arms, and to
take away such as you find, thereby not only to prevent the Effect, but the
fear of any danger. My assurance that you will do whatever may be expected from
your Vigilance and Affection, will not permit me to say any more, but that I
am, etc.

LETTER CLXXIII. To Cardinal Barberini.
I Write to your Eminency to let you know the satisfaction which Mazarine has
given by his Journey to this Court, where he behaved himself in such a manner,
that the King was very much pleased with him; I will say nothing to ye of his
Address, and dexterity in Negotiation, but that he has testified so great a
desire for Peace, that he could not have shown a greater, and if the
Imperialists and Spaniards tread the same steps, that we on this side do, I
make no question but that in a little time we shall see all Italy in safe
Tranquillity, which will be a great step toward the Repose of all Christendom. I
hope his Holiness will be as well satisfied to see so great a Work
accomplished, if it can be brought to perfection, as I hope it will. For my own
part I should extremely rejoice at it; and from this very hour it is no small
consolation to me, that the said Sieur Mazarin, and all that have Negotiated on
this side, are clearly sensibly, that the King has omitted nothing that could
be desired for the promoting so great a good, and that they who had the Honor
to serve him, have sincerely contributed all that could be expected from their
Industry. And I shall continue to do the same, with the same passion that I am,
etc.

LETTER CLXXIV. To the same.
THe King having done the president M. le Coignrux the Honor to recommend him
to the Cardinalship, as deeming him worthy of it, I write you these Lines to
assure ye, that you cannot do an act of Kindness more grateful to the King,
and to Monsieur, then to make use of your Credit with his Holiness, that so
this affair may be terminated with the soonest. For my own part, I most
earnestly entreat your Eminency to believe, that your good will to the Person
in whose behalf I write, will lay an Eternal Obligation upon him who Honors
your Eminency, and desires all Opportunities to serve ye, as being as much as
man can be, etc.

LETTER CLXXV. To Cardinal Bentivoglio.
MOnsieur Le Coigneux being recommended by the King to the Dignity of Cardinal,
as well in respect to Monsieur, as in Consideration of his own Merit, I write
you these lines, beseeching ye to make use of your Power with his Holiness, so
that his Majesty and Monsieur may with the soonest receive that satisfaction
which they promise to themselves. Besides the thanks they will repay you, and
the strict Obligation you will lay upon him in whose behalf I write, I dare
assure ye, that I shall take so great a share in it, that there shall no
Opportunity present it self of manifesting my acknowledgment, wherein you shall
not find by the Effects that I am most sincerely, etc.

LETTER CLXXVI. To Cardinal Barberini.
THE King having, within these few days, nominated the Abbot of Chastelliers to
the Bishopric of Again, and written to his Holiness, to pleasure him with the
free Gift of his Bulls; I write ye these Lines, most earnestly to entreat you,
that you will vouchsafe him the Effects of your Protection upon this occasion.
Besides his Majesty's Recommendation, the Honor, which he has to be nearly
related to Marshal Schomberg, and his particular merit so well known to every
Body, even in the place where you are, will, I am confident, prevail with you
to procure him the favor which he desires. Besides, this favor will be a
greater Obligation to me then I can Express, and I shall endeavor, to revenge
my self upon all Opportunities of serving you that shall present themselves;
and that, with the same Affection as I am, and ever will be, etc.

LETTER CLXXVII. To the same.
MY Joy for the Promotion of my Brother to the degree of Cardinal, obliges me
to write you these Lines, to the end I may make it manifest by all the returns
of Thanks which I am able to repay you, I beseech you to believe that I shall
carefully seek all ways to make you sensible of my acknowledgment. I promise my
self that his Holiness will not repent of having assumed him into the number of
his Creatures, and that you will acknowledge one day that his service has not
been unprofitable, and I hope within a little time, he will confirm ye in the
belief of his particular Devotion to your Eminency; so that he will be at Rome,
what I shall be always disposed to be, near the person of the King, who has so
great an Affection for your Family, that I should fail in pursuing his
Intentions, which to me are Laws inviolable, should I omit to manifest upon all
opportunities, that I am, etc.

LETTER CLXXVIII. To the same.
THE Chevalier de Roche Coulombe having received a Box of the Ear from the
Chevalier de Janlis, which obliged him, by the Laws of Honor, to draw upon him
where e're he met him, and having killed him at the first pass, I have been
besought by Persons of Quality, to beg of you, that you would intercede to his
Holiness for his Pardon, and by that means to restore him to the Rank he held
in his Service, and the Privileges he may have forfeited by the Fact he has
committed. In doing for him, you will oblige several, who will be sharers in
his acknowlegment of your Favor, and particularly my self, who am, etc.

LETTER CLXXIX. To the Cardinal of Lorrain.
MY Distemper is quite gone off, thanks be to God; the Surgeon whom the King
sent me with all speed, having cured me with one slit of his Lancet. I am
extremely obliged to your Eminency for your good Opinion of me; judging well
that your Civility is so great, as to do more then your Friends can expect from
me. I beseech ye not to think any more of putting your self to the trouble of
coming hither, if I should stay here; frankly acknowledging, that my sorrow for
the inconvenience you would suffer for my sake, in a place where I could not be
able to receive you as I desire, would be enough to augment my Malady, which I
desire to be rid of, as soon as I can, that I may be in a condition the more
able to manifest how sincerely I am, etc.

LETTER CLXXX. To Cardinal Barberini.
UNderstanding by my Brother, the Cardinal of Lyon's Letters, the Favors your
Eminency was pleased to do him, upon his arrival at Rome, it is impossible for
me any longer to delay the return of all acknowledgments which it is possible
for me to make; beseeching your Eminency to believe, that my Brother is
altogether as sensible of your kindnesses as you can desire, wherein I presume
so great a share, that both the one and the other will be ready to serve your
Eminency upon all occasions, with the same Affection as I have been, and always
shall be, etc.

LETTER CLXXXI. To Cardinal Antonio.
THE Testimonies which your Eminency has hitherto given me of your Affection to
France, and particularly to the person of the King, causes me to take my Pen in
Hand, to beseech your Eminency that you would be pleased to add one more in
reference to the Marshal d' Estrees, by contributing your Endeavors that his
Holiness may give his Majesty satisfaction in his behalf. I shall not repeat
the reasons contained in the Letter which I wrote to his Holiness, by which he
seems to be obliged not to deny his Majesty that contentment which he has just
cause to promise himself. It shall be sufficient for me to let ye know, that
the Business in question upon this occasion being to the advantage of his
Holiness, and all his Family, which the King will procure upon all
opportunities that shall present themselves, your Excellency being so nearly
related to his Beautitude as you are, I make no question but you will
contribute to this end whatever lies in your Power; assuring your Eminency,
that as his Majesty lays this affair to heart more then I am able to express,
so he will acknowledge the Obligation laid upon him to the utmost of your
Expectation. For my own part, Sir, considering the Honor which I bear your
Eminency, there can be nothing added to that affection, wherewith I am, and
will be ever, etc.

LETTER CLXXXII. To Cardinal Bichi.
MY Affection to Monsieur the Marquess of Scurdis, and all his Family, causes
me to set Pen to Paper, to request your Eminency that you would be pleased to
favor him, as much as possibly you can, in obtaining his Holinesses Bulls for
the Coadjutorship of the Abbey of Mont-Mortre, to which it has pleased the King
to nominate his Daughter, a Nun belonging to that Convent, together with a
Dispensation for her Age, so that she may receive, as soon as may be, the
satisfaction which she expects from thence. Assuring you, Sir, that I shall be
no less engaged to your Excellency, for your Assistance in this Affair, then if
it were for my self, as you shall find upon any other opportunity wherein I
shall have an occasion to manifest my acknowledgment, and let you see that I am
sincerely, etc.

LETTER CLXXXIII. To the same.
MOnsieur Draconis being nominated by the King to the Bishopric of Lavaur, as
being deemed worthy of that Honor, I set Pen to Paper, earnestly to request
your Eminency, that you would be pleased, for mine, and the sake of his own
Merit, to sacilitate, as much as possibly you can, the dispatch of his Bulls,
and so to order it, if it may be done, that his Holiness will be pleased to
moderate the Fees, in regard of the small Revenue belonging to that Bishopric.
You will lay a very great Obligation upon the said Sieur de Draconis, wherein
the Affection which I bear him will make me a considerable sharer, so that
there shall no opportunity present it self, wherein I may manifest my
acknowledgment, but the Effects of it shall oblige ye to confess, that I am
sincerely, etc.

LETTER CLXXXIV. To the same.
IF I write you these Lines, it is not to let your Eminency know the singular
Affection which the King bears you, together with the entire confidence he
reposes in your Person, seeing that besides that your Eminency makes no
question of it, in my Opinion, you will understand it much better by the Brevet
of France's Protection, which his Majesty sends you, then by words; but only to
renew in your Remembrance the assurances of my service, and the passionate
desire I have, and ever shall have, to give you proofs of it; beseeching you to
believe, that I shall hold most dear all opportunities of showing it, as also
of manifesting that there is no man so much as my self, etc.

LETTER CLXXXV. To Cardinal Barberini.
THE King having within these few days done the Abbot of St. Mars, Master of my
Chamber, the Honor to nominate him to the Bishopric of Auxerre, and written
to His Holiness, and your Excellency, for the dispatch of his Bulls Gratis; I
write you these Lines, most earnestly entreating you, that you will be pleased
to afford him the Effects of your Protection in this particular. His Holiness
having usually granted the same favors to Masters of the Cardinals Chambers, I
am willing to hope, through your Goodness, that this Holiness will not refuse
it the Abbot of St. Mars, more especially if it be desired by your Eminency, as
I most earnestly request at your hands, and to believe that I shall always bear
in mind that grateful acknowledgment of your favor that can be expected from
a person who Honors ye, and who is most sincerely as I am, etc.

LETTER CLXXXVI. To Cardinal St. Onufrius.
THough I know that the Protector of the Order of St. Francis, which your
Eminency has been pleased to take upon you, be a prevalent motive to induce
your Eminency of your self, to have a particular care of whatever concerns the
Advantage of that Order; however I cannot but write you these lines, most
earnestly to request your Eminency that you will be pleased to afford an effect
of your Protection to the Monk who delivers you this Letter, by assisting him
with your Authority in the affairs which his Vicar General has sent him to
Solicit at Rome. His journey thither being undertaken to no other end then to
obtain an exact observance of their Rule, and the King having written
particularly about it to your Excellency, I thought it to no purpose to add any
thing more in this Letter, but only this protestation, that I am and will be so
long as I have life, etc.

LETTER CLXXXVII. To Cardinal Antonio.
I Leave it to the Count of Martinossi to acquaint your Eminency more
particularly with the satisfaction which the King and Queen were pleased to
find in your Message, and the thanks which they return you for it, which I
assure my self he will better represent to your Eminency by word of Mouth, then
I can do by a Letter.

Only I must tell ye, that you could not have sent a person to their
Majesty's, who could have been more acceptable to 'em, in regard of his
Excellent Qualitys. I have desired him to make known to your Eminency the true
esteem I have of the noble Present which he made me in your name, for which I
cannot repay you sufficient thanks. I beseech ye to believe, that neither
this, nor all those other favors for which I am engaged to your Eminency, can
add any thing to my continued Devotion to your service, or the Passion with
which I honor ye, and am, etc.

LETTER CLXXXVIII. To Cardinal Barberini.
IT behooves me not only to return your Eminency Thanks for the share you were
pleased to allow me in the Promotion of Cardinal Mazarin, but also for that you
were pleased at the same time to contribute to the King's Satisfaction. I can
assure your Eminency, that his Majesty was highly satisfied in the manner of
your Eminency's managing this Business, as you will find upon all Opportunities
when the advantage of your Family shall be concerned, or any thing that may
relate to your own particular contentment, which I always, as much as in me
lies, endeavor to procure, being as sincerely as it is possible for man to be,
etc.

LETTER CLXXXIX. To Cardinal Antonio.
YOUR Eminency has so much the more reason to rejoice with me for the Promotion
of Monsieur the Cardinal Mazarin, because he is one who has always had a
particular esteem for your Person; and who has all along manifested in these
parts an Extraordinary passion for your interests. I shall not acquaint you
with my particular contentment for the accomplishment of this affair, because
your Eminency may readily conjecture it by your Knowledge of my extreme desire
to see your Eminency in that station wherein you now are. Only I must assure
ye, that I shall be much more joyful when I shall meet with an opportunity to
manifest, by my services, the real passion where with I honor ye, and am, etc.

LETTER CXC. To Monsieur Mazarin.
I Send you a Letter which I wrote to M. de Brassac, wherein you will find how
much the King was pleased and satisfied with your Conduct; as also, that I am
not forgetful of those who resemble you, and whom I esteem and desire to serve
as I do you. I shall say nothing to ye more at this time, only I will assure
ye that upon all occasions that afford me an opportunity of manifesting my
Affection, you shall be sensible of the Effects of it. M. d' Hemery will write
to ye more at large. I assure my self that Monsieur of Savoy will seek all
occasions to make known his Affection for France, as he will receive all manner
of Proofs of the King's Friendship, and my Service. As for your part, you may
be secure that I am, etc.

LETTER CXCI. To the same.
I am extremely glad at your being recalled to Rome, I passionately desire that
it may be for your advantage; and to the end it may be so, it behooves ye to
stick fast there; because it is my Opinion, that whatever conditions are offered
ye to send ye packing from thence, ought to be suspected by ye, unless it be
to be sent Nuncio in Ordinary into these parts, when Monsieur Bologneri shall
be made a Cardinal, or else to be employed at the Peace near the Person of the
Legate. All other Commissions that may be offered ye, will only be pretenses
to remove ye out of Rome; and to lead ye to some precipice, through a Path
strewn with Flowers. I think it will be much better for ye to remain a
private person in the Court whither you are going, then to be Vice-Legate at
Avignon. As for Marshal d' Estree, you know better then I, how he was sent to
Rome, since there was nothing done in that Business but by your Advice. That
was done to put in Practice the Counsels of Cardinal Antonio, because he had
no great kindness for M. de Novailies. He is gone with Orders to comport
himself with all respect to the Pope, and to serve the whole Family of the
Barberini, particularly your Patron. It would show a great piece of Levity, and
make it appear to themselves whom we are desirous to favor in sending him,
that we are as little capable of Constancy as we are esteemed Vain and Fickle
by all the World. Both our Friends and Enemies would never believe we could
withstand any vigorous Resolution that should be taken against our designs. I
must confess, I do not believe, 'twas either for yours or our benefit to change
in such a manner from White to Black, it being certain, that whatever favor
you might obtain by his being recalled, it could never be so much to your
Advantage, as the Discovery which people would thereby make, that it being in
your power to remove him, you must have also the same share in his being sent
(which it behooves ye always to deny) would be to your prejudice. It Is your
Business to govern your self in such a manner, that Cardinal Barberini may not
think, that you have ever undertaken any thing contrary to his Desires. Marshal
d' Estrees will demean himself with so much Modesty, that the Pope and his
Nephews shall have no other cause but to speak well of him; assuring my self,
that they will not take any occasion to complain of him, for being zealous in
maintaining the Interests of France. To this purpose, it is impossible for me,
but I must tell ye, that his Holinesses Usage of Monsieur of Parma is
unsufferable, and that it is altogether contrary to the ends of a good Peace.

Had the Pope thundered out his Excommunications against the Spaniards that are
in Arms within his Territories, as he has done against the Duke of Parma^ in
case he does not lay down his Arms within such a time, he had taken from us,
in the judgment of men who are not partial to either side, all occasion of
complaint, but to pour the Extremity of his Rigor upon Monsieur of Parma, and
to say nothing to the Spaniards, to speak freely and ingeniously, is to
encourage the Spaniards to invade his Country, and give the World an occasion
to believe, that his Holiness is agreed with 'em, to share the Spoils of that
poor Prince, which will render the Intercession of a Legate altogether
suspected, at the Treaty of Peace, to all those who are not favorers of the
House of Austria. This affair so nearly concerns his Majesty, that if the Pope
does not take such Resolutions as may hinder the Spaniards from ruining that
Prince, under pretense of his Allowance, many will believe that France, having
no more to hope from his Holiness, has as little to fear on that side. I defire
ye to take some pains in this Affair, as being of great importance to his
Holinesses Reputation, and all his Family, and the advancement of the Peace. I
must confess, that only the Italians, and particularly the Giulii, know how to
do business as they should do. In time of Peace they scatter about their sweet
Powders, and throw about their Thunders in time of War. All that I can say more
upon this subject is, that I shall always make use of the latter against the
Enemies of the Church and his Holiness, when there shall be any occasion for it.

LETTER CXCII. To the same.
Monsieur the Count of Fiesque, being sent by the Duke of Parma, tells us, that
he is extremely alarmed at two things.

The one is, That His Holiness, after he had been sick, was no sooner
recovered, but he decreed an Excommunication against the said Duke.

The Second is, That the said Duke has received a Dispatch from the King, which
gives him three sorts of Advice, which are very harsh and ruinous.

He says, That the Purport of the Dispatch is, that he should humble himself to
the Pope; which he is willing to do.

That he should not make any Scruple of going to Rome, which he believes to be
very pernicious to his Person.

And, That he should not be afraid of laying down his Arms, which he holds to
be the Ruin of his Territories.

I told him, that the King had advised him, plainly and uprightly to humble
himself to His Holiness: That he had also sent him word, that the Agreement
being made, he was not to make any Scruple, either of going to Rome, or of
laying down Arms before the Pope, when His Holiness should have engaged his
Word to His Majesty, and other Princes of Christendom, for the Performance of
his Promise.

The said Count told me, that the Dispatch speaks nothing of these
Circumstances, which render the King's Counsels very reasonable; but only that
it speaks cursorily.

However, I know that the Si^ur de Lionne's Dispatch, which was not arrived
till the said Count was gone, sets down all the Circumstances at large; calling
to mind, that we did it both together: But, to tell ye the Truth, I never saw
the rest.

The said Duke's Affairs are in a bad Condition, as far as I can understand by
the Count; and I see he is greatly afraid of being stripped of his Territories.
I must confess, it is a very strange thing, that they are so harsh at Rome to a
Prince, who is guilty of no more then a piece of inconsiderate Conduct, which
it were to be wished had never happened.

For my own part, I see, to my Sorrow, the Spiritual Power of the Church
employed, to render the Temporal Power of the Popes more potent, and more
effectual to decide certain Differences to their Advantage; which are much more
prejudicia^, then advantageous, to the Safety of Souls. I am apt to believe,
that the Sieur de Lionne's ^ourney will take effect; both at Parma, from whence
Marshall d'Estrees is not yet departed; and at Rome, where His Holiness will
better consider the King's importunate Desires, when he shall find himself
pressed by a new Envoy.

Monsieur of Parma has Fifteen Hundred Horse, and between Four and Five
Thousand Foot. Things are now reduced to that Point, that he will not separate
from an Alliance with the Barberini; which I would have continue between you
and I.

LETTER CXCIII. To the King of Poland.
I Assure my self, that when Your Majesty knows the particular Circumstances
upon which Prince Casimir was seized in France, you will not think it strange,
seeing he was going about to League himself with Spain, between which Kingdom
and France there has been open Wars for some Years, as Your Majesty knows; and
that, instead of going by Sea, as he might have safely done, he would needs go
by Land, on purpose to take a View of the Fortresses and Ports upon the Coast
of Provence; upon which, Spain has already diverse times had several Designs.
Now, in regard that the Security of Kingdoms does not permit, that upon such
Occasions any Respect should be shown to the Quality of Persons, it was
impossible for those who were in the Province to do other wise then they did,
without particular Orders. At this time therefore Prudence will not allow his
Releasment, but under such infallible Assurances, that he shall not act either
directly or indirectly against France, as are no way to be evaded. He is, and
shall be, treated with all the Respect that is due to a Person of his Quality,
and who is in that Station that he is: And I shall deem it a great Honor to
see him in a better Condition, that I might be able to manifest to Your
Majesty, by my Respect to his Person, the Reverence I shall always have for
Your Name, as being, etc.

LETTER CXCIV. To the Duke of Neubourg.
IF I thought you were capable of believing what you write to me, I would make
it my Business to convince ye of that Opinion; nor would my Trouble be very
great. But I take you for too penetrating a Prince, to believe that France is
the Cause of all the Miseries which you foresee will be fall Italy; or that I
have refused any just Conditions of an Accommodation. Monsiour the Legate
knows, that I made the Way as easy to it, as it was possible for me to do. But
to consent to such a Peace, as had only the Name of a Peace, and which in three
Months, would enforce us to buckle on our Arms again, I must confess, I am not
capable of being persuaded to it. I have a greater Longing for a sound Peace in
Christendom, the Repose of Italy, and the Satisfaction of the Holy See, then
they who most pretend to desire 'em. I serve a Master, whose Aim it is, not to
enlarge his Dominions with the Spoils of his Neighbors; and who never
displayed his Banners in Foreign Countries, but to deliver from Oppression such
Princes and States as are unjustly assailed. So soon as they shall really, and
not in Words alone, surcease from doing Mischief on that side, they shall find
the King inclined to whatever can be expected from a most just Prince; and
though of a Warlike Disposition, yet most desirous of Peace.

As to the Miseries wherewith you threaten France, His Majesty's Arms are so
long, that though he has one stretched out into Italy, he will with the other
sufficiently defend his remotest Frontiers; and if they think to force him to a
Defensive War on that side, they will force him to act contrary to what he
designs, and to what he thinks of least of all. I am, etc.

LETTER CXCV. From Father Joseph, to Father Valerian, a Confident of Marquis
Spindola 's, during the Siege of Pignerol.
Reverend Father,
I Have received the Writing sent me by a Trumpeter, from the Duke of Savoy. It
would be needless to answer many things, which your Reverence, I am confident,
well knows to be a little too tart; and which I am therefore willing to
believe, are not conformable to your Sentiments.

In the mean time, I must tell ye, that they who blame Artifice and Wily Craft
upon such Occasions as these, have great Reason for what they say, since
nothing has hindered the past Treaties about the Affairs now in dispute, but
those Tricks and Shifts which have been put in practice, contrary to our Desire
and Expectation. It Is easy to know the Designs of those, who have always
talked as loudly, as they have acted openly on this side; but impossible to
make 'em talk things that are not in their power. The Prudence of those who
have meddl'd in this Affair, is too much esteemed for having designed to delay
the Preparations which they are desirous to make for the War. If they are
thought of on this side, the Proverb, Sivis pacem, para be^m, is the Cause of
it. In a Word, Neither the Thoughts nor Designs on this side are such, as the
Writing which you have sent me represents 'em. Peace is sincerely desired; but
a safe and honorable Peace. And when we shall see in reality the Securities
which your Reverence has proposed, the Declaration of the Treaty of Monson,
which you speak of; and the effectual Reparation of the Breaches of the said
Treaty, as your Writing declares that the Marquis Spinola is willing to do,
then we shall believe those Gentlemen have some Inclination to Peace; and it
will be clearly seen, whether they have Reason to say that France has no mind
to it. You say, that, on our part, we want Effects; and that, on your part, you
propound nothing but your Thoughts, upon which, you know, there is no
Foundation to be laid.

Mon Seignicur the Cardinal has always talked distinctly, according to the
Power wherewith he is entrusted, in an Affair, upon which he could not as yet
have time to know the King's Pleasure. He has no other End, no other Aim, then
the Welfare and Repose of Christendom: And when he understands His Majesty's
Intentions, he will speak 'em as freely as he has hitherto done his own
particular Sentiments. I pray to God, to bring all things to a good Conclusion;
which, I know, we both of us ought, and do desire.

LETTER CXCVI. From the King, to the Duke of Lorrain.
I Am much troubled that the Sieur de Ville has brought me no Satisfaction on
your part, to my just Complaints of your Demeanor. I beseech ye to consider
well, whether it can be a thing to your advantage, to do quite contrary to what
all your Predecessors have done, in contemning that Union which they have
always religiously observed with this Crown; and persisting in the Breach of
those Treaties which you have made with me. I expect a speedy Answer; and such
Deeds as I may reasonably desire upon this Subject, if you desire that I should
afford ye those Marks of my Good Will, which I shall be al ways ready to
conferr upon ye, if you do not force me to the contrary.

LETTER CXCVII. From Cardinal Richlieu, to the same.
YOU are too clear-sighted in your Affairs, to have need of Counsel; and living
with the King, as you do, you ought to be too jealous of me, to take my Advice.
But, for all that, I most earnestly beseech ye to consider well, whether it be
for your Advantage to lie under His Majesty's Displeasure: And in case you do
not think it for your Good, a thing which, in my Opinion, Your Highness can
never believe, I as earnestly entreat ye to seek out all the Ways which you
shall deem most proper to satisfy him for what has passed since the Treaty of
Peace. I beseech ye so much the more willingly, because it is for the Good of
your Service, for which I shall always have a sincere Affection, when you shall
give the King what he ought to expect, in pursuance of your Promises and
Treaties. Be pleased to believe what I say; and moreover, that I am, etc.

LETTER CXCVIII. To the Duke of Parma.
YOU will understand from Monsieur the Count of Scoti, how that the Succor
which the King promised ye, was all embarked, and ready to put to Sea, in
order to join your Forces, when the News of your Accommodation with the
Syaniards arrived in Provence. His Majesty, who has always wished Your
Highness's Contentment, equally with his own; and has had an Affection for your
Interests, as much as for the Interests of his own Kingdom, was very glad you
had met with your Satisfaction in the Treaty, which you have been constrained
to conclude with the Spamards: promising himself, that it will not hinder Your
Highness from preserving the ^me Sentiments you have all along had in his
behalf; and that this Treaty will be no way capable of making you alter your
Resolutions, or your Inclinations to France. I beseech ye also to believe,
that you will always find His Majesty entirely disposed to give you constant
Marks of his good Will, and his singular Esteem of your Person. And for my own
part, seeing Your Highness cannot but be sensible how much I honor you, I
shall be always unspeakably overjoyed to meet with any Opportunity of
manifesting by real Effects, in serving Your Highness, how much I am, and shall
be ever, etc.

LETTER CXCIX. To the same.
HAving made known to His Majesty the Proposal which the Person who manages
Your Highness's Affairs in this Court imparted to me in your Name, in order to
a good Accommodation with the Spaniauds, His Majesty has commanded me to tell
ye, that he will never refuse any Means, by the Intercession of whomsoever,
but more especially yours, above any other Person's, as having an entire
Confidence in your Person and Affection; but that he can hardly believe, that
the Spaniards will sincerely hearken to it, or bring themselves to just and
reasonable Terms, since that hitherto they have refused the Hollanders those
Pasports which are necessary, notwithstanding all the Importunities that have
been made use of, to attain them I can assure Your Highness, that as the King
desires nothing more fervently, then to see the Troubles of Christendom
appeased, by a sound and lasting Peace, to the Repose of all his Confederates;
so His Majesty will omit nothing that depends upon him, to obtain it; and that
he will always make his Friends the common Judges of his Interests. For my own
part, Sir, I shall esteem my self extremely happy, if, in following His
Majesty's good Intentions, I can contribute any thing toward it; and make Your
Highness sensible, by my Actions, and my Services, that there is no Person who
honors ye more, or who is more passionately, or more sincerely, then my self,
etc.

LETTER CC. To Prince Thomas.
MY Joy for the Conclusion of the Accommodation between Your Highness, and the
King, and Madam, was not a little augmented by the Assurances which Monsieur
the Count de la Trinite gave me of your Affection; which was confirmed by the
Letter which he delivered me, in your Name. I will assure ye, that I shall
always make you answerable Returns, by all the good Offices you can desire from
mine; which will rejoice me so much the more from this time forward, that the
Interests of your Family are no longer separated from those of France.

I promise my self also, according to what you send me word, that you will give
me more and more Cause to be a strenuous Advocate for 'em, to the King; while
you do His Majesty as good Service for the general Good of his Affairs, as you
have done the Spaniards, when you were engaged on their side. It Is so much your
Interest, that I assure my self, you will lose no Opportunities to do it, no
more then you will of manifesting to the World, that a generous Prince, as you
are, is no way capable of salsifying his Word. I assure my self, that Your
Highness will not be offended at the King's Choice of M. de Longueville to
command his Army in Piedmont, seeing that, besides the Alliance between ye, I
know that you are both engaged together in a strict Tie of Friendship. I dare
undertake, that he will have a particulare Care of all your Concerns; and that
His Majesty will not suffer him to depart, without recommending it particularly
to him, to give ye all the Satisfaction you can reasonably desire. For my
part, I beseech ye to believe, that I shall contribute by my Services to that
End, whatever you can expect from a Person who esteems ye, and who is most
sincerely, etc.

LETTER CCI. To Duke Bernard, of Weimar.
THough the Confidence which the King has always had in your Fidelity, your
Affection and Zeal for the Honor of his Kingdom, and Advantage of his Affairs,
was such, that one would' have thought there could nothing have been added to
it; nevertheless, if your Conduct, and your Demeanor toward His Majesty, in
reference to that Business which occasioned the Dispatch of the Sieur de
Varenne to ye, some few Days ago, have augmented it in such a manner, and
satisfied His Majesty to that degree, that it would be impossible for me to
express it by these Lines, I suppose you will be glad to understand it, by the
Employment which he confers upon ye, both in Alsatia, and Lorrain, where he
designs ye the Command of his Army, and to carry on the War all the
Winter-Season; of which M. de Noyers will give you a more particular Account,
in the King's Name. I say nothing, Sir, of my own Contentment, because you may
easily conceive it, by the Share I have always taken in your Concerns, and the
Passion which, as you know, I have always had to serve ye; of which you will
receive new Proofs, upon all Occasions that shall present themselves, to let
you know that I am sincerely, as much as Man can be, etc.

LETTER CCII. To the same.
THE King has too great an Affection for your Concerns, not to give ye all the
Satisfaction you can desire from His Majesty; not only for the Subsistence of
your Men, but also for all other things you stand in need of. The Orders that
have been sent the Cardinal de la Valette, for your Winter Quarters, will
sufficiently demonstrate His Majesty's Care of your Affairs; and if we could,
without the absolute Ruin of the Frontiers, assign you others, you may believe,
Sir, it should be done without any Hesitation, since it is the King's Pleasure
to give you all possible Contentment. For my part, nothing ca^be more to my
Content, then to meet with Opportunities of letting ye know by real Effects,
that I am sincerely, as much as Man can be, etc.

LETTER CCIII. To the same.
I Believe it would be needless for me to display before ye, in these Lines,
my extraordinary Joy for your good Success in the Execution of your Design upon
the City, Bridge, and Pass of Lauffenbourg; in regard that, knowing, as you do,
my extreme Passion for the Prosperity of the King's Affairs, and your Honor in
particular, it will be easy for ye to conceive it. I must only tell Your
Highness, that His Majesty is so much the more pleased with it, because he
promises himself from your Prudence, Courage, and good Conduct, that a Success
so propitious will produce something more advantageous for the common Good. I
can assure ye, Sir, that His Majesty will omit nothing that depends upon him,
to second your good Intentions, and to put ye into a Condition, not only to
prosecute 'em, but to preserve the Post which you are now Master of; and which
is of that Consequence, that I doubt not but that you have taken all the Care
of it that may be. As to my particular, I beseech Your Highness to believe,
that in my Station near His Majesty, I shall contribute toward your
Satisfaction as much as in me lies, or that you can expect from me, who no less
wishing the Increase of your Glory and Reputation, then your self, shall always
be glad of any Opportunity to let you see by Effects, that I am, etc.

LETTER CCIV. The the Count de Picolomini.
THE Events of War are usually so various, that when any thing of Prosperity
befalls us, I always considered, that we must expect to hear of bad fortune.
Your Excellency's good Conduct, and the bad Conduct of many that were in the
Army commanded by M. de Feuquieres, has given ye an advantage, which I had
rather should have befallen you then any other that acts against the King, by
reason of your particular Merit and Civilty. I would have willingly proposed to
his Majesty the sending back of the Baron of Equenfort according to your
desire, were it not already agreed that he should be exchanged together with
General Wertz for Monsieur the Marshal Horn, Coll. Tubal and Chevalisquy. As
for M. de Feuquieres, I assure my self you will not dislike the putting him to
so easy a Ransom, to the end he may have cause to speak well of your good
usage, and that you may be quit of a Person that for a long time has not been
able to stir out of his Bed and his Chamber. I promise my self that your
Civility in this particular will crown your good Success at the Battle of
Thlonville, and I assure ye that upon any other opportunity that shall present
it self, the example which you set me upon this occasion, shall be religiously
observed, and I shall take it for a favor that I may have the Liberty to
manifest that I am, etc.

LETTER CCV. To the Chancellor Overstein.
M. d' Avaux having made known to us the Inclination of the Crown of Sweden, to
assist France with a certain number of men of War, for which she has an
Occasion, I write these Lines, most earnestly to entreat your Excellency to be
instrumental, by virtue of that Power which I know you have, that the King may
receive the Benefit of this Favor, upon the Conditions that shall be
propounded by the Sieur d' Avaux; beseeching you to believe, that besides the
Thanks which His Majesty will return you for your Care in procuring this
Satisfaction, and the Obligation you will lay upon me in particular, the common
Cause will receive no small Benefit by the Service of these Vessels; for the
Advantage of which it is, that the King more especially desires 'em. And for my
part, Sir, I shall always deem it one of my chiefest Happinesses to serve your
Excellency, as being, etc.

LETTER CCVI. To the Grand Master of Malta.
THough I wrote to ye two Days ago, by the Chevalier des Roches, who is going
to attend ye, upon the Report which is spread abroad of the Seige of Malta;
nevertheless, I cannot but write once more, to give ye new Assurances, that I
shall contribute upon this Occasion, as much as lies in my power, toward the
Good of your Order. The King has written to Marseilles, to the end you may be
furnished with Powder there by the Merchants, to serve you according as
Monsicur the Commander of Villegagnon has already spoke to me in your behalf. I
am glad you have committed to his Care the Affairs of your Order, in the
Absence of Monsieur de la Port, my Uncle; knowing that he will most honorably
discharge his Trust. I shall say nothing to ye at present, touching the
Commanders and Knights that are employed for the Service of the King, in his
Armies, because that besides that His Majesty has written to ye at large upon
this Subject, I have already made it my Request to you, in my former Letters,
to hold 'em excused: And therefore I shall only now assure ye of the
Continuance of my Affection, and that I am, etc.

LETTER CCVII. To the Lords of the Swiss-Cantons.
Messieurs,
YOU will understand, as well by the King's Dispatches, brought you by the
Sieur Sonneberg, as by M. Melland, his Ambassador; to whom he has written more
at large, the Good Will which His Majesty bears the Lords of the Cantons, and
the Desire he shall always have, carefully to preserve the Union which France
has maintained with 'em, Time out of Mind. However, I must tell ye by the by,
that the King is highly pleased with your sending to him the said Sieur de
Sonneberg, upon his entering into Franche Comte with his Army; wherein he had no
other Aim, but to enforce from those of the Country Reparation for their
Breaches of the Neutrality, which His Majesty will be always as careful to
observe on his part, as they shall show themselves willing to do the same on
theirs. For my part, my Lords, I beseech ye to believe, that when I shall have
any Opportunity to serve ye, you shall find, both in general, and particular,
that no Body is more sincerely then my self, etc.

LETTER CCVIII. To the Marquis of Mirabel, when His Eminency was admitted Duke
and Peer of France.
I Take it for no small Honor, that an Ambassador of Spain, and particularly
the Marquis of Mirabel, whom I highly esteem, would be pleased to signify by
his Letters to me, his sharing in my Satisfaction for the new Marks of Favor
and Goodness bestowed upon me by so great a King, and so good a Master, as I
have the Honor to serve. The best Acknowledgment I can return for this
Civility, is, to acquaint His Majesty with it; who will be highly pleased, to
find that you are pleased with what he has done. If I meet with any Opportunity
to manifest by any other Way my real Acknowledgment, I shall not fail to do it.
In the mean time, believe both what I say, and that I am, etc.

LETTER CCIX. To the Lord High Treasurer of England.
UNderstanding that Endeavors are used to create in your Lordship an ill
Opinion of the Bishop of Calcelon, who is fled for Sanctuary to my House; and
that he is accused to have been tampering and meddling with Affairs of State,
and, as it is said, to have been writing likewise something to your prejudice; I
cannot but I must let your Lordship know, that I should by no means suffer him
under my Roof, if there were any Likelihood of Truth in those Reports. But
knowing his Innocence so well as I do, and that he is a Man that only minds his
Prayers, and his Books, I was willing to give you this Assurance of his Course
of Living; as also, of his Loyalty to his King, his Affection to his Country,
and his Service to your Lordship. I promise my self, that you will give no
Credit to those false Imputations; and that they will not be capable of
blemishing the Honor and Reputation of this good Prelate, whose Merit I have
known a long time; but that you will rather believe the Sincerity of my Words,
both in this particular, and in the Protestation which I make, of being ever,
etc.

LETTER CCX. To the Count of Cramail, after the Battle of Veillana.
FEwer Lines then you have received Cuts and Slashes, will serve to testify
how glad I am, that the Enemy has cut out more Work for your Tailor, then
Employment for the Surgeon. I pray to God, that in such like Encounters, you
may have more need to expend your Money in Stuffs and Silks, then in Salves and
Ointments; and that, for the Advantage of the King's Service, and the Honor of
those who have acquired so much in this Battle, he may meet with many such
Occasions, among which, I wish for some one, wherein it might be proper for me
to manifest how much I am, etc.

LETTER CCXI. To the Count of Charost.
BRave Charost, the Honor of thy Race; These three Words will let thee know
how much thou art esteemed on this side the Mountains, for the Courage which in
these last Encounters, thou have shown upon the Theater of Mars; and which will
give thee an Occasion to let the Valor of Rambures know from me, that no
Person living sets a higher Price upon it, then I do, or who desires more to
manifest how really I am the Slave of your Martial Virtue.

LETTER CCXII. To the Marquess of Sourclis.
HIstory makes mention of several Captains in the past and present Ages, who
have taken Towns; but never, till now, did we hear of any Captain that took a
Town without Cannon, and with only two Regiments; a Town wherein there was a
numerous Garrison, which was constrained to surrender at Discretion; that
extended it self so far, as to hang two Thirds of 'em for Examples sake.
Certainly History will speak of this hereafter, and not forget the Name of the
generous Marquis, who commanded in this Action. The Gazette shall do its Duty,
or Renaudot shall lose his Pensions that he has hitherto enjoyed. Nay, more.
There shall be set up a small Inscription upon the Fountains of Jouy, importing
that they stand there only for a Sign, that he who set 'em up, has found a Way
to make the Blood of his Master the King's Enemies run Purple Streams, as they
piss Water. But this Inscription will not reach Chastillon, in regard that they
who were sentenced to Death, having ended their Days by the Rope, their manner
of dying has not that Resemblance to the Effusion of Liquid Blood, of which we
will have the said Fountains to be the Hieroglyphics. Continue, Marquis, to
tread the same Steps in the Path of Honor, which will acquire ye lasting
Renown in this World, and everlasting Glory in the other.

LETTER CCXIII. To Madam de Bullion.
I Wish it were in my power to manifest, more advantageously then. I have done,
my affectionate Desire to serve you. Besides that the Consideration of your
Merit inclines me to it, the frequent Solicitations of M. de Bullion, in order
to what may concern your Contentment, are not a little pleasing to me. I knew
the Time, when I thought him one of those Husbands that only loved their Wives,
as a part of their Inventory: But now I perceive that he loves his Skin better
then his Shirt; that is to say, his Wife's Interests better then those of other
People; and that, in reference to Marriage, he is one of those who never think
they do a good Work, unless they do it in secret. This requires, in my Opinion,
that the Tenderness which you have always had for him should still increase;
and that, in Acknowledgment of his stirring in your Concerns, as he does, you
should not wonder at his open Repulses, since they turn to Effects such as you
can desire. For my part, Madam, I shall omit nothing that lies in my power, to
let you know that I am, etc.

The Instructions of M. Schomberg, Count of Nantueil, Counselor to the King in
his Council of State, His Majesty's Lieutenant General in Limousin, the Upper
and Lower March, for his Journey into Germany, 1617. Signed de Richlieu, out
of M. de Puys 's Study, MS. 121.
THE first thing that M. the Count of Schomberg is to have before his Eyes, is,
that the End of his Journey into Germany is, to dissipate the Factions that may
be set up there, to the prejudice of France; to carry the King's Name as high
as possibly may be, and powerfully to settle his Authority there.

This being the End proposed, he is next to see what are the most speedy and
proper Means to attain this End.

Upon this Examen, the Means will be found proportionable to the Ends, in
diverse Kinds; some General, others Particular. General; those that may be
serviceable over all Germany. Particular, are such as must be varied, according
to the Dispositions of several Princes. The General ones also are to be of a
various Nature; either such as are proper to deface the ill Impressions that
have been made in those Parts, by misrepresenting the Affairs of France; or
proper to settle an honorable and advantageous Belief; or such as are capable
to produce both these Effects together.

The first consist in refuting and eradicating the Opinion inculca^d by those
of Monsieur the Prince's Party, that he was seized without any lawful Cause.

They consist also in making it out to be a perfect Calumny, which has no other
Foundation then the Passion and Imposture of our Enemies, to say that we are
sometimes Romans, sometimes Spaniards; that we embrace the Interests, either of
Rome, or Spain, to the prejudice of our ancient Alliances, to the prejudice of
our selves; that is to say, of those who profess the pretended Reformed
Religion in France, or of those that hate Spain, and pride themselves in
calling themselves true Frenchmen.

The Second General Means consists in making a good Impression of our
Government, in justifying our Actions, though we are not obliged to give 'em an
Account of 'em. And this may be easily done, by taking Cognizance of all that
has been done in France since the Death of Henry the Great, of glorious Memory,
according to the Discourse hereafter set down.

The Third General Means consists in Visits, Compliments, Civilities,
Assurances, and Testimonies of Affection; which are generally very proper to
extinguish Discontents, to remove Ill Will, and create Kindness at the same
time. And as to this Point, there needs no other Instruction, then what Natural
Civility, Dexterity and Wit inspires into those that are to make use of their
Parts.

Only, you must observe, That for avoiding all manner of Jealousy, there needs
no other Order in the Visits that are to be made to Princes, and Imperial
Cities, then what your Journey shall prescribe: And that one of the most
important things to persuade 'em, is, that we put a high Value upon their
Alliance; and that we have an unexpressible Care to preserve 'em; and that upon
all Occasions they shall receive our Assistance. This is that which will slide
into their Minds, greatly to our Benefit, if dexterously insinuated into the
Compliments that shall be made 'em; if, in order to make 'em believe what we
promise 'em for the future, you artificially lay before 'em what we have
formerly done for 'em; and how that Henry II. carried his Arms into Germany, in
Defense of Princes prosecuted to the utmost Extremity. How that Henry the Great
always protected and favored em, was strictly united with 'em by the Treaty of
Hall; and a little before his Death, set a powerful Army on foot upon the
Supplications of some of the Princes.

As to the Particular Means, they are various, according to the various
Interests of Princes, who have any thing of Quarrel with us. The Memoirs
presented by their Agents, will inform ye of their Pretensions; and our
Answers annexed to 'em, will let ye know how far we can now go, in order to
treat 'em civilly upon their Demands.

After the execrable Parricide committed upon Henry the Great, of immortal
Memory, upon the 14th of May, 1610. the Queen, being declared Regent by the
King, her Son, sitting in Parliament, upon his Seat of Justice; and being as
soon acknowledged by the common Consent of the Princes and Lords, the Sovereign
Courts of the Kingdom, and, in a Word, by all France; the first thing she set
before her Eyes, was, the maintaining of Peace, and keeping the King's Subjects
fixed to his Person, by the Ties of Favors and Benefits.

To attain this End, she renewed the Edict of Nantes; and by that means removes
all manner of Jealousy out of the Minds of her Subjects: She re-calls Monsieur
the Prince of Conde, and retrieves him out of the Arms of the King of Spain,
into which he had thrown himself; enlarges his Pensions upon his Arrival, makes
him great Presents, and heaps her Favors upon him; opens her Hand of Bounty to
all the rest of the Princes and Lords, and engages 'em by great Sums of Money.

Considering that the ^trength of a Prince lies as much in his Counsel, as in
his Arms, and being desirous, in all things, as much as possibly might be, to
follow, the Steps of the deceased King, his Lord and Father; she makes use of
those whom she finds to have been employed by him in the Management of Affairs.

Things being thus settled, as she thought to have enjoyed the Repose which
France enjoyed; a Repose so entire, that we may truly say, she had no other
Trouble, but that of her Sorrow, and her Tears; her next Business was, to take
care of Foreign Affairs.

The Death of the Duke of Cleves and Juliers being attended with a great
Dispute about the Succession, the Competitors had Recourse to Arms; upon which,
she takes the same Resolution which the deceased King had taken, to interpose
her Authority: She sends Forces thither, to render the Reasons for her
composing that Difference more prevalent and powerful.

Having accomplished her Design, to the great Reputation of this Crown, she
preserves the glorious Title which that great Monarch had acquired, of
Arbitratrix of Christendom.

This Foreign Tempest was no sooner calmed, but a Storm threatens France:
However, she immediately procured fair Weather, by dissipating the evil Designs
of several factious Spirits, who, to take the Advantage of our Misfortunes,
would fain, in the Assembly of Saumur, have engaged the Kingdom in a War.

Having warded off this Blow, she maintains all things in Peace, till the
Troubles began at Mavieres, in the fourth Year of her Regency; Troubles which
she stifled in the Birth, by the Treaty of Monehould.

Following her Inclination, which persuaded her to Clemency, she pardons all
the King, her Son's Enemies; and despoils him of some of his Towns, to deliver
'em into their Hands; opens his Treasure, imitating in so doing, that same
ancient Prince, who thought it behoov'd him to give away for the Good of the
People, what had been hoarded up to that End. She endeavors to hold fast those
turbulent Spirits with Chains of Gold. But her Hands were no sooner emptied of
the Treasure which she had given away, to purchase Peace, but the Clouds began
to thicken again, presaging a new ^torm. And now, the Tempest pouring down, she
is not daunted; but because she did not think fitting to avoid the Tempest by
giving way to the Waves, she resolves to resist the Weather, and make head
against the Whirlwind: And indeed, her Resolution was attended with such good
Success, that marching against her Enemies, she reduced 'em by Force, to what
she could not bring 'em by Reason.

Poictou and Bretagne being swept clean, she returns in Glory, with her Son, to
Paris.

The Peace of France being more firmly settled by this Progress, a War broke
out in Italy: Thither she sends, to quench it; and she proved so successful,
that she accomplished what she undertook.

At the same time she declares her Son to be of Age, causes the Edicts of
Pacification to be re-publish'd; and having a little before summoned together
the States of the Kingdom, to regulate the Disorders of the Realm, and remedy
the Oppressions of the Subjects, she most industriously labors to render the
Fruit of that Assembly conformable to her Designs; and being disturbed in her
Design, by Branglings, Factions, and a Thousand Artifices, she disappointed 'em
all as much as possibly she could.

That Assembly applauded and thanked His Majesty, for that, after he came of
Age, he had unloaded the Burden of his Affairs upon her Vigilance. Presently,
to preserve the King's Dignity, she re-demands the City and Castle of Amboise,
which had been granted to Monsieur the Prince, and has 'em surrendered. She
importunes the King to consummate t^ Marriage projected by the deceased King,
his Father, and decreed by the Queen Mother, and all the Princes and Lords of
the Council. The King consents to her Request, and resolves to accomplish it.
All those that wished him ill, opposed it; and to attain their Ends, make use
of all manner of Artifices.

The King departs that he might not perform what he had resolved upon with the
Consent of the whole Kingdom. Monsieur the Prince betakes himself to Arms and
some Hug^n^, and some Catholics, forgetful of their Duty, join with him.
Foreigners are also introduced into the Kingdom; and nothing but Acts of
Hostility, firing of Houses, Rapes, and other Cruelties and Inhumanities are
discoursed of.

The King's Journey is crossed by the Sickness of Madam, his Sister; which gave
his Enemies Leisure to multiply in such a manner, that they had the Boldness,
upon His Majesty's Return, to dispute his Passage.

Nevertheless, he attains his Ends, his Marriage is accomplished. He passes in
view of his Enemies, who stood their Ground, because that, full of Clemency, he
would not fall upon 'em, to the end he might give 'em Time to repent. He stops
at Poictiers, he fights 'em at St. Maixant, pursues his Enemies, who, to avoid
the Rigor of his Arms, betake themselves, for Security, to Flight, and the
Protection of the Night. Being quelled, and reduced to Extremity, he admits 'em
to a Treaty with him; he buys their Allegiance; and besides six Millions, which
he gave 'em to return to their Duty, he gave to the Prince of Conde the City
and Castle of Chinon, the City and Tower of Bourges, the Government of Berry,
and several Places in that Government, and the greatest part of the Demesnes,
by way of Engagement. And thus he puts an End to the War, concludes a Peace,
and restores Rest and Quiet to the People, harassed beyond Measure, and eaten
to the Bone.

The good Intentions of these Reformers appeared in this, That instead of
discharging the People which served 'em for the pretense of their Discontents,
their insatiable Appetites obliged us to lay heavier Burdens upon 'em; that
instead of releasing their Pensions, which they offered to do for the Benefit
of the King's Affairs, they demanded an Augmentation of 'em, and exacted above
six Millions more clear Money, out of his Coffers.

The King returns to Paris; the Queen advises him to recall Monsieur the
Prince, to be near his Person^ and so he in like manner gave Liberty to all
that had al^ted themselves, to attend His Majesty.

Monsieur the Prince being arrived, she shares with him that Authority which
she exercised with the Permission of the King, her Son: Nay, she does more; she
despoils her self of it altogether, to invest him in it; absenting her self
from the Councils, and leaving to him the entire Administration of the
Finances: a thing as extraordinary, as unheard of. But this Obligation was no
sooner laid upon Monsieur the Prince, but it was forgotten.

Hardly was a Month expired, before it was perceived that he was possessed by
those Evil Spirits, who always instigated him to the Ruin of France: 'Twas
perceived that he rendered Evil for Good, desiring the Government, and sowing a
Thousand Reports among the People, to the Disadvantage of the Queen. He goes
farther; He throws himself into the first Factions, cabals all the Societies,
and endeavors to make sure to himself all the Corporations of Paris.

To these Ends, several Assemblies were held in the Nightime; Darkness being
proper to cover the Shame which Conspiracies imprint in the Foreheads of their
Contrivers: The Curates and Preachers were tampered with, and Public Faith was
violated. Peronne was taken by the Arms of the Sieur de Longueville, but by the
Counsels of Monsieur the Prince, and his Adherents.

This opened the Eyes of all the World; the Aposteme breaks, and the Matter
appears; several discharge their Consciences, accuse themselves, and testify
their Acknowledgment; one Prince deposes, a Princess talks; two Dukes
intervene; a Prelate declares what he knows; several discover what came to
their Knowledge, and all unanimously agree to reveal a pernicious Plot against
the King, his Kingdom, and his Government: It Is confirmed that they assure
themselves of Soldiers. Lastly, Monsieur the Prince speaks, believing his Plot
discovered; he confesses it to the Queen, palliating his Offense as much as he
can; tells her, that the King and she are beholding to him for their Lives; and
promises never to procure any Meetings, and to desist from his factious
Beginnings.

The Queen pardons him, resolves to forget all that is past; but understanding
by undeniable Proofs, that the Prince's Acknowledgments were all counterfeited,
that he had new Meetings, that he was resolved, as before, to make himself
Master of the King, her Son's Person, and hers, Nature could not permit her to
suffer more: She showed her self to be a Mother, she showed her self to be a
Queen, by securing those that sought her Ruin.

For this Reason she arrested Monsieur the Prince; and without doing any Injury
to his Person, procures the Good of the whole Kingdom, by that Means
disappointing his pernicious Designs.

After this Arrest, some other Princes and Lords, advi^d by their own Fears, or
by their Consciences, withdrew from the Court, made a Bustle, and a great
Noise. The Queen, without losing her Courage, advised the King to put himself
into a Condition to reduce 'em by Force, then to stretch forth his Arms of
Mercy, and admit 'em to acknowledge their Faults; or that, if innocent, they
might justify themselves; if guilty, that they might have Recourse to his
Compassion. To this Effect the King goes to his Parliament, and gives 'em an
Account of all that had passed, and imparts to all the World, what he need not
have done, the Reasons which forced him to that Resolution, promises a strict
Performance of the Treaty of Laud^n; offers Pardon to all those who, having
rendered themselves guilty by their Actions, should deserve it by a quick
Return.

Several Persons interpose, complain of these Proceedings, find fault with the
Arrest; though commended by all good Men, approved by Foreigners, as also by
Monsieur the Prince, though the Person most interested; who, touched in
Conscience, confesses ingenuously, that by securing his Person, they secured
the Person of the King.

They are offered all the Security they could desire; they accept of it; the
King forgets their withdrawing themselves, and all that was past; Their
Majesty's receive 'em into their Favor, as if they had never given any Cause
of Offense.

All things being now quiet, People were astonished that M. de Nevers, who was
never known to have tampered with these Factions, displeased at something that
had happened between the Governor and him, gives himself the Liberty to speak
disrespectfully of the Queen, and to the disadvantage of His Majesty.

People wondered that he should permit himself to run out into Actions which
exceeded the Bounds which no true Subject can transgress in a Sovereign State,
or ought to exceed in reference to his Prince: He provides Arms, lists
Soldiers, takes the Field with some, re-inforces his Garrisons, and fortifies
his Towns.

Intelligence comes from all Parts, that they gave out salfe Reports among the
People.

Upon this, our Eyes are opened again* the King resolves, by the Advioe of all
his Council, to send Forces to the Places where those Disorders were committed,
not so much to do any Harm to any Body, as to prevent Mischiefs. He sends
Commissioners into his Mutinous Provinces, to inform themselves of such as
deviated from their Duties; and after an exact Cognizance thereof, to apply
requisite Remedies.

This is an exact Recital, and, as it were, a Picture, in short, of the
Government of this Kingdom, for these six Years.

They who have nothing before their Eyes, that may hinder them from discerning
Things, such as they are; nor a Will that carries 'em contrary to their
Knowledge, find very little to urge against all this, but only to what the
Misfortune of Times, customary to the Weakness of Minorities introduces, for
which there is no Remedy to be applied.

But some disaffected Persons, like those envenomed Stomachs that convert into
Poison the best of Nourishments, observe in the Government many Things, which
being rightly considered, deserve rather to be applauded, then sound fault with.

The first Action which they censure, is, the Marriage with Spain; which they
put in the first place, as a Hidra, with several Heads; since, as they reckon,
from thence proceeds the Division of France, the Rupture of ancient Amities,
and the Scorn of Foreign Alliances with England, Italy and Germany.

The Second is, the Waste of the Treasury.

The Third is, the Fortune of some Foreigners.

The Fourth and Last is, the Seizing of the Prince of Conde; so clearly
justified by what we have said, that it would be superfluou^ to say any more of
it here.

By these Heads, artificially disguised, and published, they decry the
Government which, however, being duly considered, will appear as worthy, as
they would render it infamous, after we have cut off all the Heads of this
monstrous Hydra.

To make 'em approve the Alliance between France and Spain, I shall not insist
much upon it, that it is an ordinary thing for those two Kingdoms to unite
themselves by Marriages; History containing a great Number of Examples: Of the
most remarkable were, the Marriage of Charlemaine with Galiena, the Daughter of
the King of Toledo; Of L^wis VII. with Constance, the Daughter of Alphonso,
King of Spain and Galicia: Of Lewis VIII. with Blanch, the Daughter of the King
of Castille; to which Marriage we are beholding to the Birth of St. Lewis, and
all the Happiness we enjoy by the Regency of his Mother. Of Philip the Bald
with Isabel, the Daughter of the King of Arragon. Of Francis I. with Elenor,
Sister to the Emperor Charles V. Of Charles IX. with Elizabeth of Austria,
Daughter of the Emperor Maximilian, and Granddaughter to Ferdinand King of
Spain.

I will not urge, that because the Enmities between great Personages are
frequently pacified by Marriages, that therefore this Match was useful to
establish a Peace between the two Crowns. I will not insist, that there was
nothing remaining for this Monarchy to do, being assured of all her Neighbors,
but to secure her self by an Alliance with this Crown; to the end, that being
in no danger from without, she might be the more at liberty to reduce those
that endeavored to trouble the Kingdom within.

I will not set forth, that we have already gained this Advantage by Marriages;
that they have, at least, deprived those who have gone about to trouble the
Repose of France, the way to make a Benefit of Spain, which was formerly wont
to foment our Divisions, and sow 'em also among us.

It Is sufficient to stop the Mouths of those that condemn 'em, to justify 'em,
and cause 'em to be approved by all the World, to declare, that they were
designed and desired by the deceased King; that they were agreed to by the
Princes, Lords, and Officers of the Crown; transacted by the Duke of Maine;
commended and desired by the Three Orders of the Kingdom; imparted to the King
of England, by the Duke of Bouillon; and to other Princes, Republics, and
Confederates of this Crown, by the Ambassadors residing near their Persons; and
lastly, happily accomplished: And that, instead of a bloody War, of which, as
it was given out, they were to be the Forerunners, they have been attended
with a general Peace over all France; which Their Majesty's being desirous
always to preserve among their People, as they have sufficiently made it
appear, there is no Occasion to fear, that, contrary to their Words, and the
Edicts of the deceased Henry the Great, they will attempt any thing that may
infringe it.

It Is to no purpose to urge the daring Humor of the Spaniard, seeing that,
without diving into their Intentions and Designs, we should do our selves an
Injury to believe that we cannot keep our own, and preserve our selves from
those who justly ought to fear us.

Then again, it is an idle Terror, to fear that the Alliance of the two Crowns
should occasion the Division of France. For no Man will readily believe, that a
Man will burn his own House, to do his Neighbor a Kindness: Or that a Man will
hate and ruin himself, for the Love of another. Different Beliefs do not render
us different Kingdoms: We are all united under one, in whose Service no
Catholic is so blind, as to think a Spaniard better then a French Huguenot.
There will be found a real Division, not in this World, but in the other; not
occasioned by the Matches between France and Spain, but by the Diversity of our
Religions. If this Match contained any Article contrary to the Edicts of
Pacification, there might be some Reason to fear: But there being no such
thing, quite the contrary; seeing the Articles are signed and decreed; since it
is done, and consummated; seeing the Edicts have been renewed no less then four
times, upon the Death of the late King, upon the King's Majority, at Bourdeaux,
and at Laudun, though those of the Religion had greatly offende^ the King, in
joining with the Rebels, what Reason is there to fear that he will give any
Interruption to what the deceased King Henry the Great has established, for the
Union and Tranquillity of his Subjects? What Reason have they of the pretended
Reformed Religion to complain, seeing their Edicts have been renewed under this
Reign, and confirmed several times; their Pensions augmented and paid,
notwithstanding all the Exigencies of State: Themselves also assisted against
the most zealous and furious Catholics, as the Difference between the
Rochellers and M. d' Espernon can justify; and lastly, favored to that
degree, that we may say, that many Enterprises have been unpunished for their
sakes.

You must not forget to insinuate. how that we sent back the Spaniards that
waited upon the Queen, which clearly justifies our Design to make our selves
Spaniards in France.

Moreover, You must take an Occasion to signify to 'em, to our Advantage, that
we desire not the Advancement of Spain: We offer 'em, though discreetly, to
assist 'em against the Attempts of the King of Spain, to set the Crowns of
Hungary, Bohemia, the King of the Romans, and the Empire, upon the Head of a
Child of Spain: And to give 'em Proofs of our Affection, and to let 'em see
that we have no Designs, but the Good of the Empire, 'twere well that you
should let 'em know, that we pretend to no other thing, but only to concur
with 'em to set the said Crowns upon the Head of that Person whom they shall
deem most acceptable to His Imperial Majesty, and most useful to Christendom.

Seeing then this Match can create no Jealousy by any Condition inserted in
those Articles, it is past all Doubt, that if they have any Cause to except
against it, it is by reason that the Alliance with Spain is of it self odious,
and prejudicial to Christendom: In which Case, England deserves more justly to
be blamed then we, since she has so passionately sought the same Alliance that
we have accepted. This Match ought also to give as little Jealousy to the
Foreign Protestants, as to the French; since the Interests of State, that bind
Princes, are different from the Interests of the Salvation of Souls; which
obliging us to live and die in the Church wherein we were born, bind us only in
respect of others, to desire 'em by fair Means, not to hall 'em by Force and
Constraint.

Several Christians have been so united with Mis-believers, that their Arms
have never been separated in Conquests of this World; though in those which
they pretend to Heaven, they have been divided.

Since Error insinuated it self into Europe, into England, and among our
selves, these Crowns have been united together by the same Bonds. Philip, King
of Spain, having married Elizabeth, the Daughter of Henry II. these two Kings
being greatly puissant; Henry naturally Warlike, and an Enemy to the Huguenots;
the Crown of England enjoyed by a Woman, the Catholics potent in her Country;
Scotland was Leagued to France, by the Marriage of Francis the Dauphin, to Mary
Steuart. The Huguenots were every where weak; they had not any Province in
Flanders, not one in France, Liberty of Conscience was forbid; nevertheless,
these two Crowns were so far from making any Advantage of their Union, against
the Queen of England, and other neighboring Countries, that on the other side,
the Huguenots in France rebelled against their King; in Flanders, against their
Prince; and in Scotland, against their Queen.

All that we desire, is, to preserve our selves in such a manner, that they may
make no Attempts upon us. In that Case, we shall show, that no People surpass
us in desiring to maintain our ancient Alliances, for which we have a high
Value.

Does not our desire to renew our Union with England appear by the Tie which
binds us to Spain? It appears by the Conditions which we have coveted to that
end, that we wholly desire that Alliance; and by the proceeding of the English,
who have relaxed in their pursuit of it, in prosecution of new Alliances with
Spain, that there is Cunning, if not Malice, in what they do, to render us
odious, in order to make themselves acceptable.

Can it be called a Contempt of our ancient Alliances with Spain, that we keep
in Pay four thousand Foot for the preservation of the Protestants in that
Kingdom; whereas we were not bound by the Treaty to pay 'em above two years? Is
it not sufficient for us that we know it was one of the last marks of the
deceased King's Goodwill, to bestow upon 'em Seventeen millions all at once.

Is it a Contempt of our ancient Alliances, to take care of the continuance of
the Treaties between them and the Archduke of Austria? To give the Republic of
Gen^a a Pension of 24000 Crowns, which was paid in the midst of our
Necessities, and for the maintenance of the Garrison necessary for their
defense.

Is it a Contempt of our ancient Alliances with Germany to set an Army on foot,
in order to compose the Differences that happened about the affair of Cleves
and Juliers? Does the Treaty of Kempen, at the Instance, and by the Authority
of France; does that, I say, testify our Scorn of 'em? If it be not performed,
where lies the fault, but among those who possessing the thing in Contest, as
it were in deposito, will not let go their hold, for the turning of their
Titular Possession, into succession of Time? Have they not themselves forged
Difficulties to bring about their ends? Has not France offered to become
Guarantee of the Treaty with England? Has she not often renewed her
importunity, as now she does?

Is it a Contempt of our ancient Alliances in Italy, to take Arms to hinder the
Duke of Savoy from oppressing the Duke of Mantua? and afterward to interpose,
on purpose to prevent Spain, who comes in for her Stakes from ruining the Duke
of Savoy?

The Conclusion of the Treaty of Ast, does it not show our great Care of our
Neighbors? If the Treaty have not taken effect, are the mediators the cause of
it? If the Parties are not so free to perform as to promise the Conditious,
shall they who have taken their Words be accounted^ guilty? If afterward they
slip in some obscure Article into their Treaties, to the end that by putting
their own Interpretation upon them, they may take from thence a plausible
Pretense to disclaim em when they please, as it has fallen out in that
particular, where lies the Fault? The Spaniard obliges himself to remove from
the Duke of Savoy the Jealousy of his Arms; the Duke interprets this Article
to be an absolute laying down of Arms: The Spaniard averrs, That his meaning
was never to oblige himself to stand to that Condition; are we to be
responsible for these Shifts and Artifices? Is it not sufficient that His
Majesty interposes afresh, to reconcile this Dispute? Does he not satisfy by
so doing, what he may be thought to owe the Duke of Savoy out of Civility, by
permitting his Subjects freely to assist him? That his whole Army consists of
Twenty thousand men; Is this a feeble Succor to a Prince? What have we done,
that it might not be thought we have broken the Laws of our alliance with that
Prince? We permitted a passage to the Duke of Nemours; but how? With such
assurance, that he should have no Benefit by the Permission; when the
Ambassadors of Savoy agreed to it, judging before us, that in so doing we
should oblige Spain without opening her Purse, since his Master could receive
no Prejudice.

People are too apt to observe what with most probability be said against us,
but not what really justifies us. They raise Causes of Complaint, but pass over
in silence that for which they ought in Justice to thank us.

Then again, where is there any Englishman, German, Hollander, or Reiter, to be
found in the Duke of Savoy's Army? Yet these are the Nations who tacitly find
fault with us; doing in this, like him who standing upon the brink of a River,
assists in words his drowning Friend, but blames another, who, to save him from
the danger, ventures the drowning himself.

Is it a Contempt of our ancient Alliances with Spain, to grant the Venetians a
passage through the Grisons, which they cannot have without us, and without
which the Archduke de Grets would have had great Advantages over 'em?

Is it a dealing unkindly with that Republic, not only to grant 'em a free
passage, but also to permit 'em to allye themselves with the Grisons, to the
end that afterward, without our intermediating, they might enjoy that passage
which they could not have without us as things are now? If it be a Contempt to
suffer Prejudice, that we may do another a Kindness, we despise our Alliances;
and which is more, we are resolved to despise 'em in that manner, to the end
that by that Contempt we may give 'em all the Cause imaginable, not of
Complaint, but of Content and Satisfaction. It appears from hence, that our
Confederates have all the reason in the World to be satisfied with us: and now
let us see whether we can satisfy those who are discontented at our Expenses.

The good Husbandry of the deceased King's Treasury left us, when he was taken
from us, Five millions in the Basteille; and in the hands of the Treasurer of
the Exchequer between seven and eight millions more, which he had appointed for
the payment of the Army, which he had raised with an intention to have enlarged
the Bounds of his Fame, which could admit of no other than the Limits of the
Universe.

But the Uncertainty wherein that fatal Accident plunged us, requiring that we
should secure our affairs by the counterpoise of a considerable strength, we
were constrained to employ one part of those Finances toward the maintaining
for some months a great number of Soldiers that had been raised before: so that
the said Expense, the King's Funeral Charges, and the Coronation of the Queen,
in a short time, very much lessened the reserve.

After the death of that great Prince, who was the true Pattern of Government,
it was impossible to prevent Disorders from growing to such a head, while
several measuring their Merits by their Ambition, were not ashamed to demand
and importunately to solicit where they durst not so much as wish for during
the King's Life. But they made their Advantage of the Necessity of the Times;
they offered their Service, they boast their Abilities to serve, or otherwise
to do mischief, and at length clearly show, that they will not be brought to
their Duties, but upon advantageous Conditions, behaving themselves in such a
manner, that they themselves, who had assisted the King in hoarding up his
money, advise the Queen to comply with the Times, by opening her hands, and
giving largely to every body.

In pursuance of this Counsel, she augments the Pensions and Maintenances of
the Princes, Lords, and old Servants; she gives 'em new ones; she augments the
Garrisons of their Towns, as well for the satisfaction of those that kept 'em,
as for the security of the Kingdom, and keeps in Pay more Soldiers than she was
accustomed to do. The augmentation of these Pensions, one with another,
amounted to three millions every year. The Roll of the Light Horse and
Regiments in Pay is now at Three millions and three hundred thousand Livres;
whereas in the year 1600 they were no more than Fifteen hundred thousand
Livres. She bestowed a great number of Presents, and so by Advice and Counsel,
without increasing her Receipt, but decreasing it Two millions and Five hundred
thousand Livres upon the Salt every year, she increased her Expenses to that
degree, that upon an exact examination of it, and considering the Condition to
which we are reduced by so many necessary Expenses, we are rather to be
commended than blamed, for being at so great a charge.

Monsieur the Prince, in six years, received Three millions six hundred and
sixty thousand Livres. Monsieur and Madam the Princess of Conti, above Fourteen
hundred thousand Livres. Monsieur de Guise near Seventeen hundred thousand
Livres. Monsieur de Nevers Sixteen hundred thousand Livres. M. de Langueville
Twelve hundred thousand Livres. Messieurs de Mayenne, Father and Son, Two
millions and odd thousand Livres. M. de Vendosm, near Six hundred thousand
Livres. M. d'Espernon and his Children, near Seventeen hundred thousand Livres;
and M. de Bouillon, near a million of Livres.

All the Marshals of France, whose number is increased above half in half,
received four times as much as they had before, their Pensions being augmented
to 24000 Livres apiece; within six years, for every one, to 144000 Livres; and
for eight, as they were always wont to be, one with another, to One million one
hundred fifty two thousand Livres.

Six other Dukes or Officers of the Crown received the same Gratification,
amounting in six Years to Eight hundred sixty four thousand Livres.

By this it is easy to see how the Treasure of France was exhausted, seeing
that eleven or twelve Articles in favor of the Grandees of the Kingdom amount
to near seventeen millions, not including their Salaries, and the Fees
belonging to their Employments; besides the increase of Pay for their ^roops of
Gens d'Arms, the Extraordinaries of War for the Garrisons of their Towns; nor
reckoning in, the last place, the Troubles occasioned by some of 'em, Troubles,
which having three times caused us to betake our selves to Arms, have put us to
the Charges of Twenty millions in extraordinary expenses.

These things being considered, can their Majesty's be accused of wasting their
Treasure? must it not be clearly acknowledged, that if France be in Debt, it is
by reason of the Expenses she has been constrained to be at for her own
Children? If they who are mentioned have received so many Benefits, what have
others done? They were not remiss either in begging or receiving. By
consequence the public Exigencies having constrained the giving not only to
those that served us, but also to be liberal to the greatest part of those that
begged of 'em, as it appears by this, that the increase of Pensions, concerning
which we have spoken in general, those of the Princes and Lords being deducted,
amounts for the last six Years, since the King's death, to seventeen millions;
those of the Soldiers in pay, to above nine millions, and the Gifts bestowed to
one or other, not to speak of those presented to the Grandees above mentioned,
to Sums almost incredible.

If the deceased King, who was at liberty to be sparing in his expenses,
because of his absolute Authority, could not in ten years of uninterrupted
Peace, hoard up, besides the payment of some Debts, above thirteen or fourteen
millions; can it be a Wonder, that in six years of continual Trouble, wherein
the weakness or misfortune of the times obliged us to have our Hands
continually open, we should be somewhat in Debt?

No body ever did so much with so little in so much time; never did Vessel
resist so great a Tempest with so few Wrecks as were observed in ours.

After this exact account of Expenses, who will not acknowledge the Blindness
and Passion of those who impute the miseries and necessities of this Kingdom,
to the advancement of some Foreigners? Who will not acknowledge, that such
People blame a Government which is not to be found fault with? That they
complain when there is no occasion; that they condemn Expenses, which they know
in their Consciences were made for their sakes.

It Is no strange thing, that a Foreigner should make his Fortune out of his
Country; that in this Kingdom such persons may be advanced to Honors and
Employments, History produces so many Examples of it, that instead of being
troubled to find 'em out, a man may make his choice of such as he pleases to
make use of.

That which is so much discoursed of, is far from the Degree of Preferment to
which others have attained; he is only a Foreigner born, but so much a French
Foreigner, that he shows his Fortune to none but French. How many of the best
Families of this Kingdom have been advanced by his procurement? Where is that
man whom we loaded with his Master's Favors, who is not obliged to their
Majesty's for 'em?

In England all the Scotch are advanced, and no Englishman; in France; but one
Stranger only, all the rest French, What cause for Complaint in this? If there
be any, it is they that make it are to be blamed, and not they who are
complained against. Since it may be truly said, to conclude all in three words,
the Government was such, that if we consider it without Passion, there can be
nothing found in answer to this Article, nor to any thing else here set down,
but that there may be seen to have been in it too much Clemency without Rigor,
too many Favors without Punishment.

Signed, RICHELIEV.

The Instruction sent to M. Miron, going into Switzerland, in 1617, signed also
DE RICHLIEU, was all the same, only that it began with these words; After the
most execrable Parricide committed upon the Person, etc. And that some lines
were left out about the middle, after these words, You must not forget to
insinuate how we send, etc. to these words exclusively, This Marriage not being
able to give any Jealousy, etc.

Instructions for Monsieur de Marquemont, Archbishop of Lions, for Rome, 1617.
From Mr. du Puy 's Study, M.S. 504.
THE King sent his Commands to the Marquess de Tersnel, by his Secretary, to go
back to Rome (in case he met him in any part of Italy) to continue to serve his
Majesty there in the Quality of his Ambassador in ordinary, judging it
necessary in the present Conjunture of Affairs to give his Holiness a constant
and perfect Knowledge thereof. But the said Secretary found him so forward on
his way that the Marquess could not easily comply with the said Order, and
therefore proceeded toward the Court; where at his Arrival he has confirmed
his Majesty's Resolution about the sending of some M^n of Quality and Merit,
whose Person might be acceptable to the Pope and Sacred College, until another
be sent thither to reside there with the Title of his Ambassador in Ordinary in
the usual manner. There is indeed at Rome Cardinal Vicenzo, late Vice
Protector, whose Fidelity and Affection the King is fully satisfied with, and
Cardinal Vrsini, lately honored with the Comprotectorship, who both take Care
of his said Majesty's Affairs in his Ambassador's Absence: But whereas there
seems to be a certain Emulation between them, concerning the Mannagement and
Direction of the said Affairs, and that it is highly important to represent the
true State and Constitution thereof to his Holiness, together with the Causes
and Motives of the Counsels and Resolutions that have been taken by his
Majesty, which can never be performed so well as by Persons sent on purpose,
with fresh Informations of whatsoever has been transacted there; his Majesty
has been induced by the aforesaid Considerations to send the Archbishop of
Lions expressly to Rome, being persuaded that he could choose no person more fit
for the executing of that Office, by reason of the Experience the late King of
glorious Memory had of him there, when he served the Holy See and his late
Majesty in the Quality of Auditor in the Rota, and the Reputation he has left
there of his Virtue and Probity, which will give him the more Credit with his
Holiness and the sacred College, whenever any Occasion shall happen to treat
with them for his Majesty's Service.

There are Two Affairs depending at this Time which require this Ministry; the
one general relating to the Public Tranquillity of Italy, and indeed of
Christendom; the other particular, respecting the Welfare of this Kingdom, and
both of them the Honor and Satisfaction of his Majesty. The said Archbishop is
to begin the performing of his Office, by kissing the Feet of his Beatitude in
the King's Name, by presenting the Letters his Majesty has written to him with
his own Hand, by assuring him of the Perseverance of his Devotion and Filial
Observance, of his Zeal and Desire for the Increase and Propagation of the Holy
Name of God, and of the Catholic Apostolic Roman Religion, according to the
Example of the Kings his Predecessors, and of his Affection and Care to promote
and settle the general Repose of Christendom, as also to maintain Union and
Concord among all the Princes his good Friends. Allies and Neighbors, to make
them Sharers of that Peace with which it has pleased God to bless his Kingdom,
by the Death of the Marshal d'Ancre, who was the sole Incendiary and real Cause
of the Troubles that have been raised of late Years, and the Spring of those
Divisions that have perplexed all the parts of the State, and the Minds of the
Grandees thereof, making use of both to advance himself, to increase his Credit
and Authority under the King's Minority, the Weakness of a Regency, and a
confused Government. That having attained such a degree of Power and Insolence
by means as unjust as base, and after having received more Favors and Honors
than ever he could deserve, or at first durst hope for, he had reduced the
Power of his Sovereign to the necessity of serving his unruly Passions, and
made it the Instrument of his insatiable Avarice and unbounded Ambition;
insomuch that after he had caused most of the Princes and ancient Officers of
the Crown to be removed from his Majesty's Person, in order to manage and
dispose all things with greater Liberty, and to imbezle and order the King's
Revenue at his Pleasure, under Pretense of doing him Service, in respect to the
principal Affairs of State, he brought the Kingdom into Confusion, that he
might govern alone, according to his own Fancy, to the Disgrace and Prejudice
of the Dignity and Authority Royal, and took the Advantage, at the Expense of
his Majesty's innocent afflicted Subjects, of the Calamities and Miseries of
the War, of which he was the principal Author and Contriver, to secure the
Fortune he had built upon such illegal Foundations, which his Majesty, after
having born too long, has been forced to destroy, in order to restore Peace to
his People, and deliver the Kingdom from the Persecution of a Man that was so
Ungrateful and Wicked; the Consequence whereof has immediately convinced every
one, how pernicious and destructive his Life was to the State, which has
recovered its Vigor and former Peace by his Death: The Princes and Lords who
had taken up Arms presently returned to their Duty, and assured the King of
their entire Obedience, without any Conditions but their Fidelity and his
Majesty's Goodness: And he is so well satisfied with their Service and
Assistance at present, that he promises to himself by their good Advice and
Counsel, together with that of those whom the late King had always employed
with Success in his most important Affairs, and were removed by the Malice of
that pernicious Man, to reign (by the Grace of the Almighty, the inspirer of
the Hearts of Kings, and their Director to Justice and to his Glory) in all
Equity and Goodness over his Subjects, in Peace and Amity with his Neighbors,
and in all Reverence toward the Holy See and his Beatitude, on all occasions.

If our Holy Father enquires' Why then his Majesty did not rather choose the
common Methods of Justice in punishing him for his notorious Crimes, that he
might serve as an Example to Posterity? the said Archbishop is to answer, That
it was his Majesty's Intention so to do, and that it was so ordered: But that
the Persons commanded to apprehend him perceiving that he was guarded, and
preparing to defend himself, were obliged to have recourse to this Extremity,
for fear of missing an Opportunity of such consequence for his Majesty's
Service, who is an Enemy to Blood, and to such extraordinary Proceedings, though
just on such occasions. This Accident falling out, the King took particular
care to send an ample account thereof to the Queen his Mother, whose Goodness
and Favors he had too much abused. She was soon sensible that His Majesty had
been forced to it, for no other consideration, but the welfare of his Affairs,
for which she has always showed her self very affectionate, since the Death of
the late King her Lord, cherished and cheerfully embraced every Occasion to
promote the Good, Honor, and Advantage of the State to His Majesty's
Satisfaction and Glory; who was very desirous that, according to her affection
and experience in the affairs of his State, she would have been pleased still
to continue that Care, and to ease and assist him with her assiduity and
prudent Councils. But she desired to be excused of so great a Burden, have
Leave to remove from Court and the hurry of affairs, to apply her self with
more Freedom to the Service of God, and a quiet Life: So that the King
preferring her Desire and Satisfaction to that of her Presence, and the
advantage of her assistance, yielded, tho with great regret, to her Entreaties
and reiterated Instances to retire, causing his Guards to accompany her
honorably with her own, to the place which she her self had made choice of and
desired for her abode: and the King endeavors to alleviate the Trouble of her
absence, by frequent Messages and Visits to enquire after her Health. This she
answers with the like care and affection; which is a Subject of great Joy and
Comfort to all those who observe this Royal Correspondence, and his Majesty's
Filial Respect, with that natural and reciprocal affection which the said Queen
contributes toward it. And this His Majesty is resolved to continue, on all
occasions, more by real effects, than by any outward formal appearances, to
acquit himself of his Duty and Obligations to her for the constant care she has
had of his Royal Person, and for the Welfare of his Kingdom.

As to the present Difference between the King of Spain and the Duke of Savoy,
every body knows, and particularly his Holiness, (to whom a particular account
has been given from time to time of those Transactions) the earnest Endeavors
used by His Majesty at the very beginning, to prevent the misfortunes and
accidents which arise at present, to His Majesty's great Sorrow, who has not
only represented the same to the Emperor, King of Spain, and the said Duke of
Savoy, and wherever else it was necessary; but has also sent three Embassies
extraordinary at the Desire and Entreaty of the said King of Spain, the second
of which produced the Treaty of Ast, not observed since by the said King and
his Ministers, employed in the Government of the Duchy of Milan. This obliged
the Duke of Savoy again to provide for his Defense and Safety, and his Majesty
to ^enew his good Offices on both sides, by the Sieur de Bethane, to mediate
and resume the said accommodation. But the Treaty has been since removed into
Spain, without consulting the Marquis de Senescey, his Majesty's Ambassador in
ordinary there, any wise about it; or ever acquainting his Majesty with the
Cause of this sudden removal and alteration, notwithstanding he had been so
zealous in promoting it, at the earnest Entreaty of the said Catholic King
without any prospect but that of the Public Good. However the King is not so
much concerned at their Endeavors to deprive him of the Honor of the
Agreement, after his having taken the mediation thereof upon him at their
Entreaty, as he is to find that the said Negotiation has not succeeded to the
satisfaction of the Parties; neither does he any wise envy any body the honor
and satisfaction thereof; provided so good a Work be done, no matter by whose
means. But he has a just cause of Displeasure, and to complain, that
notwithstanding such good Offices and Demonstrations of Friendship made in all
Candor and Sincerity for their common satisfaction, the said King has all of a
sudden unexpectedly, and without acquainting his Majesty therewith, attacked
the said Duke with open Force, even besieging his chief Cities and Fortresses,
contrary to his often reiterated Promises and Assurances, that it was his
Desire to compose this Difference amicably; and that he would attempt nothing
to the disadvantage of the said Duke, or of his Dominions. This Proceeding has
no less surprised his Majesty than enflamed his Courage, and obliged him to
take Resolutions which he all-along endeavored to avoid by mildness and
treaties; his Honor and the Interest of France not permitting him to suffer
the Duke of Savor's being oppressed, especially he not refusing to submit to
reasonable Conditions when offered to him, which on his part has not been done
hitherto: in which case he would be the first to blame his Highness, and to
compel him to condescend by force, as he will always be against those that
shall molest him, or invade his Territories against Justice and Reason. This
His Majesty has declared to the said King's Ambassador, residing at his Court,
and has caused the same to be represented to the King himself by his Minister
in Spain; That comparing the just Causes and reasons thereof, with the perils
and misfortunes that may arise, and are to be expected from the sequel of such
a resolution, he might rather choose a Treaty to compose all things amicably,
than to prosecute a Design, attended with many Inconveniences very prejudicial
to the general Peace, and to the particular Repose of Italy; that will be made
the Theater on which this bloody Tragedy will be acted, to the disadvantage of
the Princes and States thereof: And, besides the sensible Displeasure his
Holiness will receive thereby, it will be difficult to avoid its proving fatal
to the Church and Carholick Religion, by the multitude of Strangers of diverse
Nations and Religions, who are preparing to run to the Duke of Savoy's
assistance, as to a common Cause, both out of Dread and Jealousy of the
increasing Power of Spain, and for the Justice of the Cause itself, as well as
by the example of others. The assistance of the States of the United Provinces
has already been implored, who will be the readier to grant it, because it is
against the King of Spain, their ancient Adversary, whom they will be pleased
to see employed and weakened in his Territories in Italy. The Protestant
Princes of Germany seem inclined to favor the same Cause out of the same
Considerations, and will do it yet more powerfully when they find the War begun
in earnest. A vast number of Captains and Soldiers this Kingdom swarms with at
present, upon the disbanding of the Army, will freely repair thither for
Employment; besides, the Forces both of Foot and Horse the King is sending
toward the Frontiers to assist the said Duke from thence (if it be necessary)
under Marshal de Lesdiguieres Command, a Person whose Name and Reputation is
sufficiently known; a resolution His Majesty can never desist from without a
blemish to his Faith and Honor, which are both engaged to protect and defend
the Duke when attacked, he not refusing to submit to reasonable Conditions:
besides that, it is the Interest of his whole Kingdom not to suffer the King of
Spain to extend his Dominions so near his Frontiers: all which he may prevent
with ease at present, without fear or danger at home, where all his Subjects
express their Fidelity, and the Nobility invites him to it by their Obedience.
Nevertheless the World may easily imagine with what Trouble and Grief His
Majesty finds himself reduced to take this resolution, living as he has
hitherto done, and is still desirous to live with the^, his Father-in-law,
having on both sides such dear Pledges of their mutual and fraternal Affection.
But the consideration of the Interest of his state, joined with the public and
private reasons heretofore alleged, oblige his Majesty to prefer them to those
Ties of Friendship, not violated by his Majesty, but by those who force him to
take measures so contrary to his Inclination, tho lawful in themselves, and
worthy of a most Christian King, zealous of the public Peace, as well as of
the Safety of his real Friends.

Moreover, his Majesty looks upon this means as the most effectual to promote a
good understanding between the Parties, and to prevent their proceeding any
further. For his Arms shall never be employed to disturb the Peace of
Christendom, but on the contrary to settle it, to oppose those that would
interrupt it, and to maintain every one in his Right; protesting before GOD and
Man, that this is his real Intention, and that he only takes Arms by force and
constraint, and, for his Honor, to preserve the said peace, and to protect his
Friends; as it appears by the good Offices and Endeavors heretofore used by
him, and still continued with Vigor in Spain and elsewhere, and will be farther
evinced by real Effects in this and all other occasions. This the Archbishop is
to represent to his Holiness, and to Cardinal Borghese, to make them sensible
of the Consequences of such a Resolution and Breach; his Majesty's sincere
Intention in this affair, the Endeavors he has used, and still continues to
prevent it, together with the powerful motives and reasons inducing him
thereunto, to the end that being moved by their Affection and usual Prudence in
affairs of such weight and consequence; either by persons sent on purpose, or
by other means suitable to the urgency of the danger, they may endeavor to
prevail with the said King to incline to a Peace which will be more honorable,
more useful to his affairs, and without any comparison, far more advantageous
for the Public Good than a War, the events of which are uncertain, long, and
liable to produce Effects contrary to our expectation and projects. That in
case the said Duke of Savoy should refuse to submit to Reason, and to what
shall be thought just by their common Friends, his Majesty, as he has already
declared, will not only be against him, but will join his Arms with the said
Rings, to compel the said Duke to it by force, espousing no Party on this
occasion but that of Justice.

His Majesty being of opinion, that the most effectual way to compass the end
he proposes, was to obtain a suspension of Arms on both sides, during which,
means might be thought on for a reconciliation: he proposed the same to the
Spanish Ambassador, who answered, That he had no Power to do it; but that he
would write to the King his Master about it, to whom his Majesty has likewise
made the same Proposition by his Ambassador in ordinary residing at his Court:
and his Holiness would do well to second the said Suspension, by his entreaty
and recommendation, in order to its being the sooner granted by the said King,
lest matters being once exasperated, and one side getting some considerable
advantage over the other, this Remedy, as all others tending to a Negotiation,
should prove the more difficult, and the evil increase to the prejudice of all,
and particularly of those who despise the means of an accommodation. But it
will be needless to compose the Quarrel between the King of Spain and the Duke
of Savoy, unless that between the Republic of Venice and the Archduke Ferdinand
be made up at the same time; for whereas they are linked by the Interest and
Affection of the Parties, the Public would profit but little by the one without
the other. And therefore his Majesty designs to put an end to both, at once to
remove all the Evils Italy is threatened with: and it behooves his Holiness to be
the more active and vigilant therein, because some men presume to ta^k at
random about his Holiness's Inclination in this particular, as if he were
pleased with this occasion to resent some things that have passed of late
years, between his Beatitude and the said Venetians; a thing we know to be very
opposite to his Holiness's Wisdom and Piety, and which nevertheless it imports
him to provide against, out of his Paternal Care, to repel and dissipate such
Impostures and Calumnies. The said Archbishop is to manage those reasons
dexterously, to induce him the more to the desired effect, and not to animate
him by too rough a relation of the said reports.

The said Archbishop is to represent the same thing to the great Duke, in his
passage through Florence, after having saluted and assured him of his Majesty's
Good will, knowing his affection for the Welfare and Friendship of those two
Crowns, as a person who had a great share in their conjunction, in order to his
using such means as he shall think most convenient for the importance of that
affair. He is likewise to give him the same relation about the death of the
Marshal d'Ancre, and what concerns the honorable Treatment the Queen Mother
receives from his Majesty, which he will ever continue in the same manner, as
much out of Affection as Duty, as if she were still with his Majesty, and had
continued to take care of his affairs. His Majesty being informed, that the
said Great. Duke has sent the Archbishop of Pisa to him, only to recommend the
Queen his Mother's Person to his Majesty, has taken it in very good part, as a
thing proceeding from his Highness's good Nature, and his respect for the
King's Honor and the said Queens Satisfaction; yet looks upon this good Office
as a thing superfluous toward him, there being no Person in the World his said
Majesty honors and cherishes more, nor to whom he thinks himself obliged to
make a more express demonstration thereof; as he will ever make it evident by
all manner of effects of Gratitude and Affection toward the said Queen his
mother, on all occasions.

The said Archbishop is likewise to communicate the affairs he shall be
entrusted with to the Cardinals Delfini, Vrsini, and Bonzi, as much as he shall
think necessary and proper; not to give them cause to suspect, that the King
doubts their devotion to his Service. Nevertheless he is to make direct
applications himself to his Holiness, about such Commands as he shall receive
from his Majesty during his abode there. He is to take a particular care not to
impart them to the Abbot d'Aumale, whose Behavior the King has no reason to be
satisfied with: he is to observe it strictly, and without taking the least
notice thereof, to acquaint his Majesty therewith. He is also to assure the
Kings Servants and Pensioners, that they will be paid better for the future
than they have been hitherto, upon the account of the disorder of his Majesty's
Finances, caused by the Revolutions and Troubles of the Kingdom, which his
Majesty takes pains to settle again, insomuch that they may expect Satisfaction
hereafter; and to share the Fruits of the Peace and good Order, his Majesty
designs to restore in all things.

He is to take care to acquaint his Majesty with all Occurrences, by the usual
way, and his Majesty will send his Commands to the said Archbishop in the same
manner, not doubting but he will acquit himself thereof to his satisfaction,
until he relieve him by an Ambassador in ordinary; and this he expects,
according to the Trial he has had of his Piety, Capacity, and Fidelity.

Done at Fontainbleau the 14th of June, 1617. Signed LEWIS, etc.

A Relation of the Queen Mother 's Removal from Blois.
Out of the Study of the R. F. Talon of the Orat. M.DC.XIX. by M.L. C.D. L.V.
AT the King's Return from the Progress he made in Guyenne about his Marriage,
his Majesty being at Tours, Monsieur d'Espernon left the Court, being
dissatisfied with the Treatment he had received there; for seeing that Monsieur
de Bullion, and the Commandore de Sillery were banished from thence, and that
the Chancellor de Sillery, and M. de Puisieux, daily did expect the same fate,
he thought it no longer safe to tarry with his Majesty.

Soon after this, the Conference at London was concluded to the Prince of
Conde's Satisfaction; and the old Ministers being banished from Court, and
others put in their Room, the Prince returned to Paris. I do not positively
know what passed between him and the Grandees that were with the King at that
time, about the Marshal d'Ancre's Ruin; but it is certain that Monsieur de
Guise sent a Gentleman to Monsieur d' Espernon at Bourdeaux, to acquaint him,
That the Prince of Conde and he were rennited, that they were in Hopes of
ruining the Marshal d' Ancre, and that he desired him to enter into the Union,
which was made between most of the Grandees of the Kingdom.

Though Monsieur d'Espernon was not resolved to join with them, yet he did not
absolntely reject their Proposition.

Within some Days after this, being at Bourdeaux, he was informed that the
Marshal d' Ancre had left this Court abruptly, and almost at the same time that
the Prince of Conde was secured.

This put him upon the resolution of going to his Government of Xaintonge, and
of sending the Archbishop of Toulouse, his Son, to their Majesty's, to assure
them of his Service.

^fore the said Archbishop's departure, Monsieur de Guise sent a Gentleman to
him, to give him an account of the Reasons he had to leave the Court upon the
Prince of Conde's imprisonment, and to desire his advice and assistance, in
case he could not agree with the King.

Monsieur d'Espernon's Answer was, That the shortest Follies were the best;
and, That as he was not concerned in what he had done, so he had no Counsel to
give him. That for his part he was sending one of his Children to the King and
the Queen Mother, to assure them of his Fidelity and Service.

Soon after this the Archbishop of Toulouse arriving at Court, found Monsieur
de Guise's Peace concluded, and saw him return, but in such dread of being
secured, that he was ready to fly again, the night the Prince of Conde was
removed from the Louvre to the Bastille, upon some Informations he received
that the Guards were doubled.

During these Transactions at Court, Monsieur d'Espernon was in his Government,
when having received a Letter from the Mayor of Rochel, which he thought was
not very respectful, he made a very rough Answer to it, and resolved to go into
the Country of Aunix, to take possession of his Government.

I cannot tell whether he was induced to this by his hatred to the Huguenots,
and particularly to the Rochelois, who refused to own him as Governor of the
Province; or whether he sought a Pretense to take Arms during the Troubles
which he fancied yet greater than they were at Court, and to seize the King's
Receipts. However, upon this Pretense he gave out Commissions to raise men,
assembled the Gentry of the Country to accompany him in his Journey to
Surgeres, and took the Money he found in the King's Costers. I do not positively
remember whether it was before or after this Journey the said Money was seized.

The Transactions of this Journey into Anjou gave great disturbances to the
Rochelois, who did not remember the having seen any Soldiers in their
neighborhood; and the fear the Court was in, lost this might create a War with
the Huguenots, obliged their Majesty's to send Monsieur de Boisisse to Monsieur
d'Espernon, to put a stop to those Broils.

Boisisse being come to Surgeres, found no Difficulties in this affair, but
such as proceeded from the said Duke's Humor; so that after some Pains and
Contestations, he did persuade him to obey, and to return to Xaintonge.

It was at that time Carbonnier brought him a Brief of Duke and Peer for Mons.
de la Valette, and moreover offered him the Marshal d' Ancre's Daughter for his
said Son, which Monsieur d'Espernon refused, and the said Lady died soon after.

At this very time Mons. de Bullion came for shelter to Mons. d'Espernon, not
thinking himself safe in his own Houses.

The Chancellor de Sillery, and Puisieux his Son, also begged shelter of him in
Mets, which was granted them, but matters altering at Court, before they had
executed that design, they also altered their minds.

After his return from Aurix, and some stay at Xaintes, he went from thence to
Bourdeaux, much about the t^me the War was resolved upon against the Princes.

At the beginning of the Siege of Soissons, Mons. de Bullion, who had all-along
kept a secret correspondence with the Duke de Bouillon, laid the first
Foundation of a third Party, and made a Proposal to the Duke d'Espernon to join
with the Marshal d'Esdiguieres, Bellegrade, and other Lords, to prevent the
ruin of the Princes, which seeur'd inevitable, under pretense of desiring a
Peace.

But the Treaty went on so slowly, and the Siege of Soissons was prosecuted
with so much vigor, that I am of opinion there was not time enough to bring it
to perfection.

And tho the Duke d'Espernon seemed inclinable to Bullion's Propositions, and
was in hopes to prevail with the Marshal de Rocquelaure, the first President of
Bourdeaux, and and part of the Nobility, and of the Parliament of Gayenne; yet
there was no great likelihood of bringing matters to a conclusion,

Bullion knows more Particulars of that affair than I do.

The Duke d'Espernon was informed at that time, that something was treating
with the King about the Marshall d'Ancre, without knowing positively what it
was.

But the matter was soon cleared by the news of his death, the detention of the
Queen Mother in the Louvre, and her Journey to Blois, whither she was sent two
days after it.

Hereupon Mons. d'Espernon dispatched du Plessis to the King, to congratulate
his Majesty upon what he had done against the Marshall d'Ancre; and at the
same time charged the said du Plessis to wait on the Queen Mother at Blois, and
to make a Compliment to her upon her misfortune.

He also dispatched Mons. de la Valette to Court, with a resolution to follow
him, as he did within a few months; and being come to Loches, he sent some
Soldiers to the said Sieur de la Valette, to be distributed in the first
Company of the Guards.

But Mons. de Luynes having notice of it, being very suspicious, as fearing the
Duke's having a design against his Person, he represented it so hainously to
the King, that Mons. de la Valette was obliged to remove the said Soldiers, and
send them to Mets.

This was the first Proof Mons. d'Espernon had of Mons. de Luynes ill will
toward him, and I believe it would have stopped his Journey to Court, had he not
received this News so near Paris, that he could not possibly go back without a
manifest Breach.

Soon after his arrival at Court, he discovered, on two occasions, that Mons.
de Luyne was not pleased with his presence.

The first was, in the promotion of the Archbishop of Paris to the
Cardinalship, who was preser'd to the Archbishop of Toulouse; notwithstanding
his Nomination was Ten years after his.

The other was, in the Dispute of the Dukes with the Lord Keeper du Vair; in
which, tho the Cause was common, and that the Duke de Montmorency was Speaker,
yet the fault was only laid at Mons. d'Espernons Door.

And it is certain that the King was so exasperated against him, that he gave
him to understand, that his presence at Court was displeasing to him; so that
he immediately took leave of his Majesty, and left Paris within a few days.

During his abode at Paris, several persons spoke to him from the Queen mother,
and others to the Archbishop of Thoulouse.

The Marquis de Mosni was the first who carried a Letter from Chanteloube to
the said Archbishop, and pressed him to go to him in the Country, but the Duke
d'Espernon disapproved it, and answered, That he would answer to nothing till
he were come to Mets.

This did not hinder Mademoiselle du Tillet from coming to him, nor from
delivering a Letter to him from the Queen Mother, together with a Diamond-Watch
her Majesty sent him.

She prevailed with him to read the Letter and keep the Watch, but he would
engage to nothing while he was at Paris.

When he went from thence he designed to spend some days at Fontenay, to order
his affairs: but Guron having given him notice from the Chancellor, if I am not
mistaken, that he was not safe there, he left it immediately.

Soon after his arrival at Mets, the Queen Mother sent Vincens to him, formerly
Secretary to the Marshall d'Ancre, who was ordered to make his application to
the Archbishop of Thoulouse, as he did. He had a Letter of Credence from the
Queen Mother to Mons. d'Espernon, full of Civility and assurances of Good Will.

The said Archbishop having acquainted the Duke, that this man was come to him,
and that he was commanded to speak to him, he appointed to meet him the next
day at the said Archbishops house.

Vincens Credentials were, That her Majesty not thinking her self safe at
Blois, where the ill treatment she received gave her just cause to fear worse,
according to the Intelligences she daily received about it, had cast her Eyes
upon Mons. d'Espernon, to desire Resuge in some of his Towns; and, that she was
of opinion, that Loches being the nearest to Blois, i^ would also be most
proper to receive her.

He was about to urge several Reasons to persuade the said Duke to do the Queen
this Service; but he found him so well disposed to what her majesty desired,
that it was needless to say any more to him.

Not but afterward he was sometimes in doubt as to the time of the execution
of his Promise, and put off his Journey from Mets near five months together;
but still he persever'd in the resolution of doing the Queen this Service, to
which he was the more induced by du Plessis persuasion, and by his difidence of
Monsi^ur de Luynes.

The Answer he made to Vincens, after some slight Complaints of the
Queen Mother, was, That he would serve her according to his desire; but that in
order to execute that design, it was necessary for him to remove from Mets, and
that he could not leave that place in safety, unless the Queen would allow him
Fifty thousand Crowns for the payment of the Garrison.

He also told him, that he could not hearken to that Treaty, in case the Sieur
de Ruccellai were acquainted with it, because he looked upon him as his Enemy,
on the account of the Marquis de Rouillac.

Vincens answered to this, That Ruccellai neither had nor should have the least
knowledge of this Treaty; that the Marquis de Mosni, and Chanteloube, were the
only persons to whom the thing had been or should be communicated; That he
would acquaint the Queen with what the said Duke said to him; and that he
believed there would be no difficulty in this point, because the Queen had Two
hundred thousand Crowns at Florence, and that it would be easy to send for
Fifty thousand from thence.

Hereupon Vincens was dismissed by Mons. d' Espernon, and went back to the
Queen Mother at Blois, where he acquainted her Majesty with the said Duke's
Resolution to serve her.

Her Majesty did not detain him long, without sending him back with great
Thanks a Promise to perform what he desired, and a Letter to the said Mons.
d'Espernon, by which she declared, that she no wise Intended to engage him to
do any thing against the Kings Service.

She also sent him one, the said Duke d' Espernon had desired of her for his
discharge, which the King had written to her, by which his Majesty gave her
leave to go into any part of the Kingdom, commanding all Governors to receive
her.

The said Vincens was also ordered to go to Florence, for the Fifty thousand
Crowns which were to remain in Mets; and Mons. d'Espernon was to begin his
Journey on the 15th or 16th of August, 1618; but diverse things stopped him until
the month of January of the following year.

During Mons. d'Espernon's stay at Mets, and Vincens Journeys to and fro, two
things came to pass which increased his suspicion against Mons, de Luynes, and
confirmed his Resolution of serving the Queen Mother.

The first was an Advice he received from one la Grange an Inhabitant of Mets,
that Mons. de Luynes had tampered with him, and some other Inhabitants of the
said City, to serve him against Mons. d' Espernon.

The second was, that the Sieur de Peraes acquainted the Archbishop of
Thoulouse, that applications were made to him from Mons. de Luynes, pressing
him to approve a Visit he designed to make to Mons. de Luynes, in order to
discover his Designs against Mons. d'Espernon.

The said Archbishop did not oppose the desire of the said de Pernes, but he
acquainted Mons. du Plessis with it, who was his Uncle; and the said de Pernes
gave Monsieur d'Espernon an account of what had passed, and excused his having
seen Mons. de Luynes, upon the Archbishop of Thoulouse's Advice.

But to persuade him that he was no ways wanting in his Fidelity toward him,
he told him since a thousand ill things of Mons. de Luynes.

These two Advices increased Mons. d'Espernon's Suspicions to that degree, that
he thought himself obliged, for his own preservation, absolutely to embrace the
Queenmothers Party, and speedily to execute what she had proposed to him for
her liberty.

During these Transactions, and Vincens's going to and fro from Blois to Mons.
d'Espernon, he received Letters from Court, that Mons. de Luynes had some
desire to be his Friend; that he was sorry for what past about the Difference
of the Dukes with the Lord Keeper, and for the ill Treatment he had received in
particular about it; and that if he would send the Archbishop of Thoulouse to
Paris, he should receive all manner of satisfaction there.

Monsieur d'Espernon received this Proposition, not as a thing that did alter
his design, but to make use of it to remove the Suspicion the Court might have
of him, and to treat with more Safety about the Queen-mothers affair.

Being then resolved to send the Archbishop of Thoulouse to the Court, he gave
the Queen Mother notice thereof.

The said Archbishops Journey was in the month of July 1618. He was informed at
his arrival there, that Mademoiselle du Tillet was taken up, that Barbin was
prosecuted, and that the Court did proceed with great severity against all the
Queen-mothers Servants.

The Order he had, being at Paris, was to speak to the Marquis de Mosni alone,
and to tell him that Mons. d'Espernon was to depart from Mets on the 15th or
16th of August, to repair to Xaintonge, from whence he would execute the Design
they had for the Queen mothers Liberty.

But as the Archbishop of Thoulouse was about to speak to the Marquis of Mosni
in the Queen's Closet, he found himself so furpriz'd, that he could neither
hear nor answer him. The next day the said Marquis sent the Sieur de Ruccellai
to him, to be informed of what he said the day before. And as the Archbishop
began to deny his being any wise privy to the things h^ talked of, Ruccellai
told him all the Particulars of Vincens diverse Journeys, and that he was the
Author of the whole Treaty; besides that, all the Queen-mother's affairs passed
through his Hands.

The Archbishop of Thoulouse was very much surprised at the knowledge Ruccellai
had of all the Transactions between the Queen Mother and Monsieur d'Espernon;
but seeing he could not disown it, he only advised him not to let the said Duke
know that he knew the Queenmother's design, because it would hinder the
execution thereof.

During these Transactions Sardini and Ruccellai were commanded to leave Paris,
which the first did with all the speed imaginable, and the other refused to
obey the King's Commands, until he had seen Monsieur de Luynes. But after
having obtained leave from him by Colonel Ornano's means to remain some days
longer there, he was forced to go, and retired to Joinville, to the Cardinal de
Guise.

In the Archbishop of Thoulouse's Journey to Paris there only passed
Compliments between Monsieur de Luynes and him, about Monsieur d' Espernon's
affairs; without coming to a more particular declaration of Friendship.

As soon as Bardin and Mademoiselle du Tillet were tried the said Archbishop
returned to Mets.

He found that Vincens had been there during his absence, and that the Queen
mother had sent him to Florence, if I am not mistaken, about the Fifty thousand
Crowns.

Soon after the said Archbishop's arrival at Mets, be received Letters from
Ruccellai, by which he defir'd to see him; and after several Journeys to and
fro, Monsieur d'Espernon, who had hitherto suspected him, offered to receive
him secretly at Mets.

The said Sieur de Ruccellai immediately accepted this Proposition; and after
having been at Sedan, he came to Monsieur d'Espernon at Mets, who was so
delighted with him, that he placed an entire confidence in him from that
moment, and made use of him for his reconciliation with the Duke of Bouillon.

The said Ruccellai made several Journeys to Sedan, and to Joinville, where the
Cardinal de Guise was; and after having reconciled the Dukes d'Espernon and of
Bouillon, he proposed to them to send for the remainder of the Two hundred
thousand Crowns the Queen Mother had at Florence.

Their design was to divide them between the Cardinal de Guise, Messieurs de
Bouillon, and de la Valette, and to raise 12000 Foot and 3000 Horse, to divert
the King's Forces, in case the Queen Mother were attacked, after her being
retired at Angoulesme.

Monsieur de Bouillon desired, if I am not mistaken, Twelve thousand Crowns to
supply the Necessities of his City, which were granted him, and taken out of
the Fifty thousand Monsieur d'Espernon had in his hands; as also Eight
thousand, that were given to St. Luc to provide Arms.

During all these Treaties, more time was spent than Monsieur d'Espernon had
taken for his Journey of Xaintongue; for tho he was to go in the month of
August, he still tarried at Mets until the end of the year.

His first resolution was, to send the Archbishop of Thoulouse before into
Xaintonge, and to make an Offer to Mons. de St. Luc, to accompany the said
Archbishop in the execution of the design the Queen Mother had to leave Blois;
which was to be on the same day Mons. d' Espernon was to pass the Loire. But
Mons. d' Espernon altered his mind since.

Being resolved to set forward for Xaintonge, he sent one of his Attendants to
Court, to sound Mons. de Luynes's Intention by his Friends, and to see whether
they were disposed to permit him to make this Journey without coming to the
Court, which he was no wise desirous to do.

The Person he sent was ordered not to mention the permission he desired,
unless he were sure to obtain it.

He applied himself to Mons. de Bellegarde, who seemed to be in favor with Mr.
de Luynes, and who being nearly related, and a particular Friend to Mons. d'
Espernon, undertook that affair.

He spoke to the Sieur Deagers about it, who engaged his Word to him, that the
King would grant Monsieur d'Espernon a permission to go to Xaintonge, in
whatever form he desired it: but instead of allowing the same, the King writ to
him, That he judged his Presence necessary about Mets, by reason of the
Troubles of Germany.

This Answer did no less trouble Mons. de Bellegarde than the Duke d'Espernon,
insomuch that Mons. de Bellegarde took this pretense to break off his
Friendship publicly with Deagers, and pressed this Affair so close, that he
obtained a Letter from the King for Mons. d'Espernon, by which his Majesty
indeed gave him Leave to pursue the Journey he desired, but at the same time
ordered him not to set forward till he heard farther from him.

The obscurity of this Permission did not hinder Mons. d'Espernon from pursuing
the design of his Journey.

In order thereunto, he set out on the 6th or 7th of January, in the year 1619.
And tho he had resolved before to leave the execution of the Enterprise of
Blois to the Archbishop of Thoulouse, on the day he was to pass the River
Loire, he altered his mind, and resolved to be there himself, for Reasons too
long to be inserted here.

He gave no notice of his departure to the said Archbishop of Thoulouse, till
he came to a place called Pont ^e Vichy, whence he dispatched a Gentleman to
the King, to give him Reasons for what he had done.

After that, he stopped no where till he came to Confollant, where the Archbishop
of Thoulouse met him, with the Nobility of his Government, which he had
summoned.

He remained there two or three days, uncertain what course to take; but after
having taken the Advice of Ruccellai and du Plessis, he sent the latter Post to
the Queen mother, and put forward the next day himself directly toward Loches.

Du Plessis at his arrival at Blois found the Queen Mother very impatient to
hear from the Duke d'Espernon; for being informed that he was gone from Mets,
without having given her notice of it by Letters, she did not know what to
impute that Neglect to.

This was the reason that he found her so little prepared to leave Blois, that
both Chanteloube and the Marquis de Mosni were absent, tho they were the only
persons she was to make use of in that occasion.

A little before the said du Plessis's arrival, she had received a very long
Letter from Bellegarde, by which he endeavored to dissuade her from putting
her self into Mons. d'Espernon's hands, by reason of the singularity of his
Humor, representing to her, That she could commit no greater fault, than to
retire into any place under his command.

As for himself, indeed he offered to receive her into his Government of
Burgundy, tho it is very likely that he was not very desirous of it; but at the
same time he excused himself from serving her, in case she put her self into
Mons. d'Espernon's hands.

This Letter did not hinder the Queen from prosecuting her first design, and
from resolving to leave Blois, without staying either for the Marquis de Mosni,
or for Chanteloube.

This Treaty between Monfieur d'Espernon and the Queen mother was carried on in
the beginning with a great deal of secrecy on his part; but toward the latter
end it was known or suspected by most of those that were about him, and it is
certain, that at his going from Confollaus all his Servants seeing him go back
to Loches, said publicly, that he was going to carry away the Queen Mother.

But those she had entrusted with it kept the matter far less secret; for
Monsieur de St. Luc passing through Blois, acquainted Mademoiselle de Bains
with all the particulars of it; and the Marquis de Mosui, from the beginning,
spoke of it to Mademoiselle de Talsy, before one of her Women, by whom Madam
Bonuaeil and Sardini were acquainted with the matter.

The thing succeeded nevertheless, and Monsieur de Luynes was either so
careless, or so unhappy, as not to receive the least notice of a thing which
was known by so many.

It is observable in this place, that Chabanes was sent to Monsieur d'Espernon,
by Monsieur de Luynes, and that he passed through Loches two days before the
said Duke's arrival there, without being informed of his Journey; so that he
went very near Poictiers without hearing any thing about him. But tho the said
Chabanes had had notice of his departure from Confolaus at that time, and of
his design, which was known by his attendance, as abovesaid, it was too late to
give Monsieur de Luynes a sufficient notice thereof, to prevent the
Queen-mothers escape from Blois,

But to resume what the Queen was doing at Blois, having no body with her
capable to serve her in her Enterprise, she detained du Plessis, and left the
management of all things to him.

She took but one day to dispose her self to remove in the Night, and ordered
the Count de Breyne, la Mazure, and Marce, Officers of her Guards, to be ready
against the following Nights, because she had a mind to depart secretly from
Blois.

In the mean time she ordered du Plessis to write to Monsieur d'Espernon, to
desire him to send the Archbishop of Thoulouse, and some of his Attendants to
Montrichard to seize the Bridge, over which she was obliged to pass of
necessity.

The said Archbishop repaired thither immediately with sixteen Gentlemen and
Ruccellai, who came incognito, as he had done during all the Journey.

All things being thus prepared, the Queen came out of Blois in the Night,
through one of the Windows of the Castle, by a Ladder, which Count de Breyne or
la Mazure had prepared for her.

She took but one of her Women along with her, whose Name was Catherine: Count
de Breyne, and four of her Guards, stood waiting at the foot of the Ladder with
du Plesses, who was to order all things.

She was constrained to crawl along the Ditch, and to walk on foot to the other
end of the Bridge of Blois, where her Coach waited for her.

She stepped into it, with one of her Women, her Jewels, and a Lantern, because
she could not tarry in her Coach without a light, and came in this Equipage to
Montrichard, where she shifted her Coach and Horses, and was met by Ruccellai
and the Archbishop of Thoulouse.

From thence she went with speed to Loches, where Monsieur d'Espernon arrived
the night before, and went out a league to meet her. She tarried there but one
day, for her Attendance and her Women, and the next Chanteloube came to her.

Instructions for the Commandore de Sillery, going Ambassador to Rome, to his
Holiness, in the Year 1622.
From M. du Puy 's Study, MS. 687.
THe King, who, together with the general Good of Christendom, respects the
Advantage and Reputation of his Affairs abroad, as he is industrious to settle
them at home with his Authority, by all possible means of Vigilance and Care,
wherever it is required, has thought fit to fill up the Vacancy of the Roman
Embassy, by a Person fitly qualified to serve him, and to please our holy
Father the Pope, to watch and observe all public Occurrences, and to promote
the Honor and Service of his Majesty in all things.

To this end he has chosen the Bailiff de Sillery Councellor in his Council of
State, a Person very well known to his Majesty by several Employments and
Commissions he has discharged to his satisfaction; and commands him forthwith
to repair with all speed toward Rome, about several affairs, relating as much
to the Peace of Christendom, (equally respected by his Holiness, and by his
Majesty) the Tranquillity and Liberty of Italy, as to the Welfare and Safety of
the Friends and Allies of France; and has ordered this memorial to be drawn, to
be the Rule and Guide of his Conduct, saving such Orders and Commands as shall
be sent to him by his Majesty in a more precise manner, by the usual way,
according as the new Accidents that may arise shall require it.

It is his Majesty's Pleasure he should go through Turin, tho it were only
(besides that it is in his way) to visit his Majesty's Sister in his Name, his
Highness of Savoy, and the Princes and Princesses his Children, as also to
acquaint the said Duke in particular with his Majesty's Sentiments upon the
present Occurrences, and to assure him of his said Majesty's sincere
Friendship, which he is very desirous to make him sensible of, by Effects, to
his advantage and satisfaction. His Majesty knows the Esteem the late King his
most honored Lord and Father ever had for his Person, and has made his late
Majesty's maxim his rule in the conduct of the General, as he was a wise
Prince, endued with a long experience in Public Affairs: He designs to live
with the said Duke in that strict bond of Affection for their Common Interest,
lately strengthened by the dear Pledge his Majesty has given the Prince of
Piedmont, of his dear-beloved Sister; declaring again, that as it has pleased
God to let him take the management of his Affairs into his own hands, and to
direct them with a Will full of Equity and Honor, so the said Duke, and his
being so nearly related to him, shall freely share that Happiness, from which
his Majesty expects to see effects arise one day useful to the Public,
favorable to his Friends, and acceptable to his Holiness.

His Majesty is sensible that the said Duke is desirous, as well as himself,
that every one should be maintained in his Right, to oppose all Usurpations,
and that Neighbors and Confederates living in a friendly manner, may keep so
good a Correspondence, that such as would attempt any thing to the prejudice of
so just a Resolution, may feel the effects of their ambition and rashness, if
so daring as to attempt it; or be kept within bounds, out of fear of the Force
and Councils of the said Associates for the common Cause.

The present state of affairs in Valtelina requires this to be urged to the
said Duke, who is likewise concerned for the Safety of Italy. The King has
already acquainted him with the perpetual Endeavors used about it from the
very beginning, that his Majesty prevents the Inconveniences of such a
precipitated Usurpation, to remonstrate the Consequences thereof, and to
promote its restitution at Rome, in Spain, and elsewhere, being desirous at
first, by mild means to endeavor the obtaining of an amicable Treaty, before
he would proceed to those of Rigor, merely out of respect to the Public Peace,
so justly valued and desired; as also because the Infringers thereof are so
nearly united to his Majesty by Alliances, that he had reason to expect from
their very Promises, that they would at last yield to his just Remonstrances,
to execute the Agreement made at Madrid, for the restitution of the said
Countries, as soon as might be, according to the Articles thereof. This has
been pressed without intermission (...) thereby discovers his entire Affection
for the Welfare of his Affairs, so he may assure himself that he shall have a
good Share in the Success thereof, which he hopes to promote and to settle by
Power only.

He also thinks it very necessary, once more to advise the said Duke to
facilitate, as much as in him lies, the reconciliation between himself and the
Duke of Mantua, diverted hitherto by those who envied his Majesty the
satisfaction of being the Promoter thereof, and would improve their dissension
to their own advantage. But both of them would do wisely, considering the ends
of their Neighbors, to yield something in respect to the Public Good and
their Interest, rather than to hearken to the artificial Suggestions of those
who have and do still endeavor to keep up their Division. The said Commandore
is to enquire of the Sieur Marini, who is in those parts, and will assist him
in all things, on what Terms the said Duke stands in that respect; and if his
Majesty's Name and Authority can be any wise serviceable therein, he is freely
to employ himself in it, in his passage, as he likewise is to do at Rome,
(where this Affair was formerly referred) when any occasion shall offer it self.

He is to do the same Office toward the Duke of Mantua (without going thither
himself) by sending one of his Gentlemen to assure him of his Majesty's
Good Will of his being ordered to favor his Interest at Rome, and to use his
utmost endeavors to facilitate their reconciliation; to which he shall be
desired to show himself the more disposed, seeing that the public occasions
seem to invite them all to a speedy and strict reconciliation. He is also to
complement him upon the late Marriage of the Princess his Sister with the
Emperor, wishing him and all his Family all manner of Prosperity and Content
therein.

The King doubts not but the Duke of Savoy, and the Cardinal his Son, will put
him upon the Subject of the Comprotection, which he has been too much moved and
offended at, since his Majesty, considering his quality, the nearness of his
relation to him, and the place he has in his Affection, never had or could have
the least intention of doing any thing to his disadvantage. When he honored
Cardinal Bentivoglio with the Title of Comprotector, it was not to equal him
with the said Cardinal of Savoy, being very sensible of the difference of their
Birth, for he was expressly enjoined to yield to him in all things, and to
meddle with nothing in his presence, but what (...) remain as they are at
present, than to make any Innovations, since none can be made without prejudice
to his Majesty's Affairs at Rome. Therefore if it were possible to divert the
said Cardinal of Savoy from this thought, the said Commander would do his
Majesty a signal piece of Service, the management of which is left to his
Judgment and Discretion, according as he will discover the Temper and
Disposition of the said Cardinal, upon the Place as well as by Marini's
Informations.

He is still to confirm his Majesty's Journey to Lions, as well to please and
comfort the Allies in the affair of the Grisons, as because their Highnesses
have a great desire to see and wait on his Majesty; which when they mention, he
is to assure them will be very acceptable to him. The said Commander is also to
assure the Princess, his Sister, of his Majesty's cordial Love and fraternal
Affection, and that whenever any occasion shall offer it self to give proofs
thereof, he will embrace it with great satisfaction; that he rejoices at the
good and honorable Treatment she receives, and will allways be ready to do her
all manner of good offices toward the said Duke, and the Prince, his Son; he
is likewise to acquaint her with the charge and command he has re-iterated to
the aforesaid Marini, to let him hear often from her, and what confidence his
Majesty reposes in his devotion to his service. He is also to visit the other
Princes and Infanta's whom he is to complement, and to assure them of his
Majesty's Friendship and Good Will. And without making any longer stay there,
he is to continue his Journey to Rome, through Florence, as it is usual; where
his Majesty is persuaded that he will be kindly received by the Great Duke, the
Great Duchess Dowager, and the Widow Arch-Dutchess. At the delivery of his
Majesty's Letters, he is to renew the Declarations of his Good Will, which they
have lately received from Father Arbinot, Confessor to the Great Duchess; and
after having performed the usual Duties, Assurances of Friendship, and of
savouring their Affairs where he is going to reside: He is not to forget,
before his departure from thence, to reiterate the Instances that have often
been made concerning his Majesty's Money, carried thither by the late Concini,
which is justly due to him, by reason that the sums drawn from Rome are but
slight and inconsiderable in proportion thereunto; and to acquaint them that a
longer detention of the said Money might create misunderstandings, as it has
already been declared and fully proved to Father Arbinot, in order to make
their Highnesses sinsible thereof, that according to their Equity, and the good
Correspondence they desire to hold with his Majesty, they may have a due regard
to his right, and to the desire they ought to have to cultivate and maintain
the same carefully. The particulars hereof shall be explained by word of Mouth
to the said Commander, that he may be the better able to argue about it; and he
is to inquire and receive a more particular information in his Journey from the
Archbishop of Lions, of what he has done and Negociated heretofore in the like
case at Rome.

He is also to take care to let them know the perfect Union and good
Intelligence that is between his Majesty and the Queen Mother, (in which that
House of Medicis is highly concerned) which has always been one of his
Majesty's most earnest desires, as a duty to which he is obliged both by God
and Nature, as well as by the reciprocal affection he receives from the said
Queen his Mother, who is heartily sorry that the artificial Impressions and
passionate Councils of Persons who endeavored to improve their Division to
their own advantage, have lasted so long. But that having through the Grace of
God discovered the Truth, and the Malice of the Authors and Contrivers of a
course so prejudicial, she has resumed her former Confidence in his Majesty's
mild and truly Royal Temper, whose Soul rejoices thereat, and will ever study
by all the means and duties of filial Respect, to confirm her said confidence
to her satisfaction. And in order to give the World a very evident proof
thereof, the King has lately admitted the said Queen again into his Council,
and most secret affairs, to be assisted with her good advice upon all occasions.

He is to observe in what manner this representation will be received at
Florence, and the Judgment they will make of his Majesty's behavior toward
the said Queen, to give his Majesty notice thereof, that he may the better and
more securely regulate his Conduct upon that knowledge for the future. For
really he has not had much reason to be satisfied with their Highnesses of
late, and particularly about the restitution of the Money of the said Concini;
their manner of proceeding therein, which the Archbishop of Lions is very well
acquainted, with, being as unseemly, as displeasing to his Majesty, which was
acknowledged by Arbinot himself. If any of the Ministers should put him upon
this subject, he may inform them, that the matter is very well known, and that
it cannot long remain in those terms, which may be remedied by a speedy payment
of the said Money.

Before his Arrival at Rome, he is to inform Cardinal de Sourdis of his coming,
if he be still there, to confer with him before his entry into the said City,
about the form thereof, or else with Cardinal Bentivoglio, who is Comprotector
there: He is to make it as Honorable and Solemn as can be, according to the
usual Custom; to get informations from them about the general state of Affairs,
and of his Majesty's in particular; what he is do to at this beginning; and to
learn from them, as persons better informed with the use of the Country, how he
is to behave himself to be admitted the very first Night of his Arrival to kiss
his Holinesses Feet; to whom, presenting the King's Letters written with his
own hand, he is to confirm the assurances of his Majesty's Affectionate and
Filial Observance, for the Service and Honor of the Holy See, by the Example
of the Kings, his Predecessors, to the satisfaction of his Beatitude, and the
advantage of his house and designs. He is also to make him sensible of the
Confolation his Majesty received at his assumption to the Pontificate; his
Prayers having been granted on this subject: Since it has pleased God to give a
Person of his Piety and Virtue to Christendom, who has the intentions, and is
endued with all the Qualifications required in a common Father; that it is his
earnest desire he may enjoy it long for the Public Good, which he will again
confirm to him, at the sending him the usual Devoirs and Obedience. That his
Majesty is persuaded that his Holiness puts a greater confidence in this Royal
Freedom, and in the real and solid Effects, his Majesty daily discovers to the
advantage of the Church, and of Christendom in General, than to impute his not
having been able hitherto to perform that duty to the least want of Inclination
or Devotion toward his Beatitude, but to the Troubles and Divisions of his
Kingdom, which he has begun to disintangle so happily, and so much to the
advantage of the Catholic Religion, and of his Authority; that his Majesty is
persuaded that he will prefer such salutory Effects to a Ceremonious Duty,
since his Majesty yields to none, besides his Title of first Son of the Church,
in Duty or Devotion toward the Holy See and his Holiness, as he will ever make
it appear both at Home and Abroad; and that he hopes that God will bless him so
much again this Year, either by Agreement, or Force of Arms, as to extend the
Catholic Religion, and the Honor of the Name of God in his Kingdom, so far as
to deserve the Continuation of the good Will and Paternal Counsels His Holiness
has sent him upon that Subject; which, his Nuncio can assure him, have been
received by him with Sentiments suitable to his Zeal, and to the Respect he
bears to whatever proceeds from the wise Counsels of His Beatitude.

The said Commandore is to remain within these Bounds at his first private
Audience, only giving His Holiness Assurances of His Majesty's Devotion,
according to the usual Custom. For, as to other Affairs, they are referred to
that which is to be solemn and public, as well as others which will be given
him from time to time, according as Occurrences shall offer themselves. He is
to wait on Cardinal Ludovisio, His Holiness's Nephew, the same Night; whom he
is to acquaint with His Majesty's Good Will toward him; the Confidence he
reposes in, and Knowledge he has of his Affection for the Welfare of his
Affairs; in which he shall be desired to persevere, and to make his Uncle
favorable in such Occasions as shall occurr during his Residence in Rome:
Which His Majesty will be ready to acknowledge to his Advantage and
Satisfaction, on all Occasions, by profitable and honorable Effects.

The greatest and most important Affair in debate at this time is that
abovementioned about Valtelina, which his Holiness is very well acquainted
with, together with the Endeavors hitherto used by his Majesty, to stifle the
Misfortunes he is sensible must arise from that Contention in their very birth.
He is again to lay the dangerous Consequences thereof before his Holiness, in
relation to the public Good of Italy, and even of the Roman Religion it self;
and that unless the Spaniards will speedily submit to his Counsels, and
paternal Exhortations, to hasten the Restitution thereof, the King will be
obliged to espouse the Cause and Interest of his Allies; that his Holiness is
not only obliged, as a common Father, to prevent Troubles, but as a Temporal
Prince of Italy to obviate and oppose all manner of Usurpations. His Majesty in
this point only requires the Observation and Execution of the Articles of
Madrid, made with the approbation of his Holiness's Ministers; the
accomplishing of which the Spaniards, under a specious pretense of Religion
toward him, and of deference toward several Princes and States concerned,
have delayed and put off; insomuch that the Distemper is now grown to such a
head, by the artifice and desire of the Governor of Millan, to preserve what he
has Usurped against all Right and Reason, to the prejudice of his Majesty's
Alliance, and of the safety of the Princes of Italy, that his Majesty has
freely declared, and lately again acquainted his Holiness, his Nuncio, and the
Spanish Ambass^dor, that unless the aforesaid Agreement were effectually
performed, he could no longer resist the desires and general Interest of his
Confederates, who made earnest Solicitations to him to assist and strengthen
them with his generous Resolutions in their pressing need, and that on their
sides they would cooperate to the utmost of their Power and Interest: That in
compliance thereunto his Majesty has sent Orders in all parts to keep all
things in readiness; and that being resolved to repair to Lions, his Orders
were also dispatched to the Marshal d' Esdigureres, to be ready at the first
Command. That it is most certain that the Princes concerned, and several others
who will not stir until they see the Game begun, will freely enter the Lists
for their preservation, others for Interest, and that then his Holiness, though
perhaps too late, will find whether the Reasons alleged by Spain for Religion,
are as important and considerable, as the Evils and Accidents which will arise
to his grief, even to the very detriment of the Catholic Religion. For
undoubtedly several Protestant Princes will make this Cause theirs, being
jealous, with reason, of the growing greatness of Spain, and diverse Nations and
Religions will enter and fill Italy. And all this is occasioned by the
immoderate Covetousness and Ambition of the Ministers of Spain; the prejudice
and blame whereof will fall upon the Authors, and his Majesty will be
sufficiently discharged toward God and Men, by the Endeavors he has used to
prevent these Misfortunes; for considering the time when the Enterprise was
first began, and the Treaty concluded upon that Subject, but not executed by
Spain, a longer patience would be imputed to want of Courage and Resentment.
Therefore his Majesty again entreats his Holiness, seriously to renew the
Efforts of his paternal Admonition, to prevent such Calamities. His Majesty is
very sensible that the said Spaniards, the better to color and justify their
Attempts, and to make him the more favorable to their Design, have all along
laid the Case of Religion before his Eyes, to blind him, and consequently
prevent his joining with the rest of the Allies, or at least to make him
connive at their Enterprise: But whereas the Mask is now thrown off, and that
it is evident by other Occurrences in Christendom, that they are induced
thereunto more out of Ambition than Religion, his Holiness must be entreated no
longer to suffer himself to be imposed on, both for his own Honor, and for the
good and peace of Italy, as well as for the sake of the Catholic Religion; the
advantage of which, he may assure himself, his Majesty will ever be one of the
first to promote with all his power. But there is some danger, (as it has often
been represented) in being too obstinate for one, of losing both together. For
it is most certain, that the said Leagues of the Grisons are not obliged, by
the Articles of the Treaty, to maintain the Catholic Religion alone in
Valtelina; and consequently the Spaniards cannot insist on this, without a
Breach of the Treaty, and without wounding his Majesty's Royal Intermission.
But moreover to remove this borrowed Veil, and to go beyond them by a Zeal not
apparent, but truly sincere of Religion, though this be not included in the
said Agreement, he will employ his Credit and lively Remonstrances toward the
said Grisons by his Ambassadors, and use all other reasonable means to prevail
with them for the preservation of the said Religion in Valtelina, though not in
the nature of a Condition, as abovesaid; it not being mentioned in the Treaty,
and they being obliged, notwithstanding a refusal to accomplish the said
Agreement, and to perform the said full and entire Restitution. That in case
his Majesty can succeed in this design, it will be a great comfort to his
Holiness, whose Nuncio in Switzerland must be ordered to facilitate with his
Majesty's Ministers, all honest and sure means to hasten the said R^stitution.
His Majesty presses this Affair, being justly pressed by the thing it self, and
by the Persons concerned therein, which should invite his Holiness to double
his vigilance and serious Instances in Spain; otherwise he will find, by real
Effects, that his Majesty's foresight has been good, and his care in so many
places very praise worthy.

But in order the better to convince his Holiness of the truth of the
premises, here is a very certain and most visible Argument thereof. The
Spaniards, who boast, and seem very desirous of promoting the good and
advancement of the Catholic Religion in Germany, where they had promised to
Invest the Duke of Bavaria with both the Palatinates, are now out of Reasons of
State more reserved in the matter; out of fear of displeasing the King of Great
Britain, and lest the Duke of Bavaria should grow too powerful in Germany;
Causes altogether Temporal, which hinder them from advancing the Glory and Holy
Name of God in so fair an occasion; while his Majesty shows himself more
inclinable and favorable to it; for though the Elector Palatin is Allied to
him, he knows in his Soul what he has done on that subject, where it was
necessary to show his good intention. His Holiness's Officers, and his Nuncio
here, have discovered it themselves, and that it was only a Blind u'sd by them,
to abuse the most simple, but not capable of obscuring the prudence and clear
sight of his Holiness, who will be praised and blessed by God and Men, for
endeavoring to prevent Usurpations, and to maintain the public Peace, which
are the only Ends his Majesty proposes. But the said Commandore is chiefly to
insist on the Mischiefs that may ensue for the Public, these Crowns proceeding
to a Breach, (which his Majesty will prevent to the utmost of his power,) by
the advantages the Turk will easily gain by the division of the Christian
Princes. Whereas being united, as it is his Holiness's Office to keep them, and
to which his Piety, and other good Considerations, should incline him above all
things, considering the present state of the Turks; great progresses might be
made against them. But our Sins and Discords making us unworthy of that
happiness we must implore the goodness of God, and his Holiness by Prayers and
Exhortations must use his utmost Endeavors, to reconcile the hearts of
Christian Princes to an Enterprise so holy, so important, and so seasible at
this time, according to the knowledge the King has of the now State of the
Grand Seignor's Affairs and Provinces. This business of Valtelina being
adjusted, before which nothing can be resolved on, if his Holiness finds a good
Disposition in other Princes, His Majesty will ever be ready to second his good
Intentions, and to promote them to the utmost of his power. It is His Majesty's
Desire, that the Honor of a Design so pious, and so full of Glory, should be
reserved to the Happiness of this Pontificate; and that, in order thereunto,
His Holiness would be pleased to continue his best Endeavors for the
Pacification of the Troubles of Italy, as well as those that are kindling in
Germany; that the chief Princes of Christendom, having no other Quarrels to
decide, may be the better able to unite their Wills and ^orces for this holy
Enterprise.

His Majesty is very sensible that none are so busy on the Stage of the World,
as the Spaniards, in order to extend their Empire more and more; which will not
only be the Occasion of neglecting the Opportunities of this Christian Project,
but also of uniting the Protestant Princes more strictly to oppose the Projects
of the House of Austria. And while this Game lasts, the Turk will have many
fair Occasions to improve it, to their Cost and Shame; and the Christ^an^
themselves will pay the Faults of their Ambition and Imprudence.

The Emperor having re-gain'd Bohemia, which had been taken from him, seems to
have more Cause to let his Arms rest, in order to provide against this common
Enemy, than to satisfy the Passion of another, who leads him under his
Authority to a Design which keeps him in Servitude himself, and makes him share
the public Loss. For here is Work cut out for a long time, unless the Parties
will put an end to it themselves; since there is Reason to believe that the
King of Great Britain, with his Confederates, will not let his Son-in-Law
perish; and that the States General of the United Provinces will neither be so
weak, nor so destitute of Friends, and of Assistance, as to fall so soon by the
Efforts of the Arms of Spain. And in the mean time the great Occasions of doing
good, as to the general, slip away, Princes weaken each other by vexatious,
bloody Exercises; thereby giving great Advantages to a potent Enemy, who is
only withheld by his Ignorance of our Condition, or by the Hand of God, who,
in his Mercy, has not yet given us over to his Wrath. But we have reason to
fear, that the Continuance of this Misfortune will draw it upon us, as being
too unworthy of his Favors, in not having made use of the fair Opportunities
he had given us, of making great Progresses against this Enemy, in these last
Ages.

The said Commandore is also to enquire of the Cardinals de Sourdis and
Bentivoglio, on what Terms the Marriage proposed between Spain and England
stands at present, not to raise the least Obstacle against it, His Majesty
having had several Occasions so to do, since he first was informed of it, had
he been so pleased, but only to give him a constant Account thereof; His
Majesty having no Interest in the matter, provided the Catholic Religion be
thereby promoted; he preferring that Consideration to all the Policies that can
occurr upon this Account, though perhaps others would not deal with so much
Candor toward him. But whereas his Majesty is of Opinion, that this
proposition of Alliance is only to gain time, and to improve occasions on both
sides, as it appears sufficiently by all their proceedings in relation to the
general affairs in which they are concerned; so his Majesty thinks fit not to
trouble himself any further with it, but to refer it all to the Prudences and
wise Consideration of his Beatitude.

Who must needs be sensible, by the good Offices lately done at Venice, for the
restoration of the Jesuits in their Demean, what care his Majesty takes to
promote whatever tends toward his Holiness's satisfaction, who has expressed a
great deal of concern in this Affair, as a thing tending to the service of God,
the honor of which might have been raised, had the Republic been pleased to
adhere to his Holiness's and his Majesty's good Councils and Salutery
Remonstrances. And though his Majesty has some reason to be dissatisfied with
the refusal he has incurred at his Holinesses Entreaty, he having exposed his
Name and Dignity in this Business, contrary to his first intentions;
foreseeing this resistance from the Seignory; Nevertheless, in order to do
well in all things, whenever any reasonable likelihood of success shall appear
in the issue of the said Recommendation, his Majesty will freely undertake it a
new: But at present his Majesty is of Opinion, that it is proper to refer it to
another Season, when time shall have made the Venetians sensible of the fault
they have committed, and of the misfortunes which may arise in their State, by
the Banishment of the said Fathers.

If his Holiness should put the said Commandore upon the subject of the
Enterprise of Geneva, to which he has lately invited his Majesty by a person
sent on purpose, he is to make him sensible, according as it has already been
freely declared to his Nuncio, and to Father Barnabite, sent on purpose on that
subject, that this would be directly contrary to the design his Majesty has
proposed to himself in this Kingdom, to remove the Opinion which some malicious
persons publish, that by the War he makes against his rebellious Subjects, he
aims at their Religion, and not at the Faction, which would make them all Unite
again, not only in France, but those of the same Sect out of the Kingdom, who
hitherto have only been Spectators of this Tragedy, which the said Revolters
have been the cause of, his Majesty having all along told and satisfied them,
that without respect to Religion he only attacks Disobedience, and that if any
of his Catholic Subjects should lay aside their Allegiance, he would use them
in the same manner, for the good of the public Peace, and for the security of
his Authority. Had he consented to this Enterprise against Geneva, these
public Causes failing, he would be at a loss for the prosecution of this
project, which is in such forwardness. And therefore when the said Nuncio and
the Ministers of Savoy have pressed him upon that affair, they have sound the
solidity of his Reasons by his Answers, besides the reasons of State which his
Majesty does not allege at this time, and which have always been held in great
consideration by the late King, his Father, when the said Duke, as he has often
done, has proposed the said design. But possibly he has thought, that his
Majesty being employed at home, could not so easily divert him from the said
design, or that his Holiness would have more power to persuade him.

If the Duke speaks to the said Commandore about it, he is to make the same
answer to him, and that his Majesty for these Reasons, which have been known to
him heretofore, cannot agree to the said Enterprise; and that when he has put a
good order to his Affairs, according to his good beginning, it will then be
more ^asie for him to resolve about it, and to consider of means to favor his
Highnesses designs, who at this time would do better to join with his Holiness,
to seek out and propose good expedients to promote the advancement of his
Majesty's good design in his Kingdom; the rather, because the security of his
Neighbors, and the Public Peace, partly depends on the good Condition
thereof, by the counterpoise every body knows his Majesty's power keeps against
other Kings and States, which might make attempts to the prejudice of the
Common Liberty.

The said Commandore is also to represent, that his Holiness has good
informations thereof: his Majesty's happy Progresses the last Year, and the
advantage he has gained by the reduction of upwards of Sixty Garrisons; his
being resolved to prosecute his Fortune a great deal farther, yet unless the
said Revolters submit to their Duty of their own accord, on such conditions and
submissions as are required from Subjects to Sovereigns. That he is persuaded,
that as God has been pleased hitherto to favor his Arms, he will still assist
him for the future, since he has no other end, but the maintaining of his
Authority, and the promoting of Religion under the favor of the Edicts, as
much as justice and their behavior will permit him, being now ready to march
under the protection of God, whom he entreats his Holiness to implore for him,
as he has hitherto done, in order to prosecute the success of his just and
pious design. And the said Commandore is to take care to acquaint his said
Holiness with his Majesty's Moral and Pious Life, a true example for his Age,
to all other Kings. He assures himself that God will grant the Vows and Prayers
of his Holiness, and of all his Majesty's good Subjects, thus following the
paths of Honor and Virtue; which gives hopes, besides, that being seconded by
his Holiness's good Advice, he will daily fructify for the better, and employ
those advantages bestowed on him by Providence, to the Honor of his Holy Name,
and unto the benefit of the Christian Commonwealth. And it is highly important
for the promotion of this good Work, that it be favored, and that all the
World may know that it was undertaken by the Authority of his Holiness; his
Predecessors having lost many favorable occasions to advance the public good
for want of so doing. His Majesty expects from the Justice and Wisdom of his
Beatitude, that making his profit of their Faults and Omissions in what relates
to him, he will be more careful of it, and will look upon him as the most
Christian King, first Son of the Church, who in his private and public Conduct
aims at nothing, but the Exaltation of the Holy Name of God, Equity, and the
general Good and Peace of Christendom.

These things appear particularly in the Actions which are done in the sight of
all the World, and especially in the promotions of Cardinals, in which some
things having been wanting in his Predecessor, he hopes they will be repaired
and mended by the Prudence and Goodness of his Holiness, as indeed it would be,
might the two Persons heretofore recommend, viz. the Bishop of Lusson, and the
Archbishop of Lions, be included in the same promotion, according to the
request already made to his Holiness about it in his Majesty's Name, by the
Cardinal de Sourdis; But the said Commandore is no otherwise to insist upon it
for fear of Engaging the King's Dignity too far again, in case of a refusal,
which is apparent enough, and that he will grant but one to his Majesty in the
next Promotion; in which case he desires it may be the said Bishop of Lusson,
to gratify the Queen his Mothers desire, who behaves her self so well toward
him, that he will be glad of any occasions to pleasure and oblige her. His
Holiness seems to be in Expectation of other Vacancies to favor Princes with;
if not, he must but slightly entreat him to advance the said Promotion, in
respect to the affection his Majesty bears to the said Queen, his Mother.

The Marquess de Caeuvres had orders gently to sound the intention of the late
Pope on this subject, in favor of Monsieur de Mets, his Natural Brother, but
as he took special care not to press it in his Majesty's Name, for fear of
exposing him to an absolute refusal; the said Commandore is to follow the same
Method, in not making the like propositions for the Future, without first
giving notice thereof, in order to receive his Majesty's further Commands about
it.

Who wishes his Holiness a long Pontificat, for the advantage and honor of the
Church of God, and the Public Good. But whereas his Beatitude is of a pretty
weak Constitution, and like others subject to the Common Law, if any mischance
should happen to his Person during the said Commandore's residence at Rome, in
case he could not have time to receive his Majesty's more precise Orders on
this Subject, he thinks fit to acquaint him that he has no other desire than to
see that supreme Dignity supplied by a Person, knowing in all things the Office
and Duty of a common Father without any Affection, Interest, or Partiality, but
for the common good of all and general Concord. This is to serve as a rule for
the said Commandore, without prescribing any thing more particularly to him in
this case, which depends more from the Holy Ghost than from the will or
affections of Men. Nevertheless as far as humanly may be done, it is his
Majesty's desire that it may be a subject born on the Territorys belonging to
the Church, so that all suspicions being removed, all Christians Princes and
States may make their applications there with more confidence and freedom, upon
all those occasions which occur so frequently in the World, in which their
Dignities and Qualifications revered by all men, have always been of great
Weight, and have often supplied the defects of the Parties to bring them to
reason. Which when it shall happen the said Commandore is to consult with the
said Cardinals and other Persons, well affected to the service of France, and
he is to use such care and diligence therein, to the utmost of his Power, as
may show that his Majesty considers no interest therein, but that in which God
and the public is concerned. Nevertheless, foreseeing all Accidents, as much
as in him lies, and in those that serve the King, he is to project his design
at a distance, and with secrecy, for it would prove prejudicial being divulged.

And whereas though it is usual and expedient to mind the present, yet it would
be imprudent to neglect the other parts, since His Majesty has no other End or
Interest, but the public Good. Therefore, as the said Commandore, by his
Conduct and Behavior toward the Pope and Cardinal Ludovisio, is, to give them
all the Reason imaginable to commend His Majesty's Intentions, and to make use
of all Occasions that may occurr; so he is likewise, as much as Discretion and
Interest will permit him, to manage the Good Will of Cardinal Borghese, and his
Faction; but with so much Address and Temper, that the present Government may
take no Umbrage thereat; in such a manner nevertheless, that both he and his
said Faction may have reason to hope His Majesty's Protection and Favor in
case of Need.

His Majesty's Ambassadors, and his Ministers elsewhere, have always taken care
of what relates to the Interests and Affairs of the Religion of Maltha, who has
had Recourse to His Majesty's Authority in time of need; he having also
received several good Offices and Services from the present Great Master, in
Matters concerning his Subjects. Therefore His Majesty enjoins him to continue
his said Assistance and Care for them, if needful, His Majesty being persuaded
that the said Commandore, by his Profession of the said Order, as well as by
his Command, will effectually fulfill the same.

His Majesty is informed, that a certain League has been proposed at Rome,
between the Princes of Italy, under pretense of preserving the Catholic
Religion, and of hindering the Coming in of Heretics; but in effect, under
this Color, to invade their Liberties; it being very evident, that the said
Overture was only made to obstruct the Deliverance of Vatlelina, and of the
Grisons, from the Oppressions imposed upon them. And therefore the Republic of
Venice has rejected the said Propositions, perceiving the Drift of those that
have made it; neither is it like to succeed. The said Commandore is to keep an
Eye over it, that in case the like Occasion should offer it self during his
Embassy, he may prevent the Effect of it, as prejudicial to the Safety of the
Princes of Italy; and artificially varnished, to ^ull them asleep insensibly,
and to surprise them.

The King is very sorry that the Pensions given to some Cardinals and Prelates
at Rome, have not been paid better of late; which has been occasioned by the
Troubles of the Kingdom, and the immence Charge His Hajesty has been at: But
particular Care will be taken for the future, for the Payment thereof; which
the said Commandore may give them full Assurances of, that they may have the
better Encouragement and Reason to persevere in the Affection they express for
His Majesty's Service, in order to make use of it according as Occasions shall
offer themselves. Cardinal Bentivoglio, as the Person in whom His Majesty
confides most, and who is well acquainted with the Affairs of Rome, and the
Affection of those that espouse the Interests of France, will give the said
Commandore a particular Account thereof, that he may regulate himself
accordingly, and be able to distinguish the one from the other. He is to
express His Majesty's Satisfaction to him, for his Services; and that he knows
he has been crossed in them by powerful Adversaries, to prejudice him; but that
he must endeavor to overcome those Obstacles by his good Conduct, and by
getting as much Credit in the Palace as he can, to render his Talent the more
profitable to the King, and to destroy the malicious Reports that have been
spread to his Prejudice.

Cardinal de Sourdis and he, will acquaint him on what Terms the Affair between
those of the Congregation of St. Lewis and the Fathers of the Oratory stands,
in order to apply such Remedies and Moderation as will be requisite in the
Case, jointly with them, for His Majesty's Service and Satisfaction; who is
very well satisfied that those of Savoy and Lorrain have obstructed the
Execution thereof. The said Commandore is to take care to have the same
remedied speedily, by His Majesty's Authority. And not to enter any further
into several trivial Affairs, which do not deserve being inserted in an
Instruction: He shall be informed there on what Terms they stand, and shall
behave himself therein, according to the Time and Occasions, to the best of his
power.

And for as much as the good Fathers Minimes of the Trinity of the Mount have
always been recommended to His Majesty's Ambassadors, in order to their being
preserved in the Purity of Life they have chosen and continued with great
Praise; and that none but those of the French Nation may be received in the
said Monastery, into which some Foreigners have slipped heretofore, who were not
rightly qualified for the same, the said Commandore is to take a particular
Care of them.

He is often to visit the Cardinals of the sacred College in the usual manner;
and is to be very careful to give each of them assurances of his Majesty's
Favor according to the degree of their affection for the King's affairs, which
he shall be acquainted with by those of Sourdis and of Bentivoglio, in order to
confirm the Votaries of France in their Devotion, and to endeavor by good
Offices and Courtesies, according to their Dignity, to increase their Number.

There has been some disorder of late in the Taxes of Benefices, which has
somewhat burdened his Majesty's Subjects; the said Commandore is to conferr
with those that are intelligent in those affairs, about means to redress the
same, making use of his Majesty's Name and Credit, according as he shall think
it convenient.

As this Embassy has ever been looked upon as the most honorable and most
considerable, in respect to his Majesty's Reputation and the welfare of his
Affairs (as it is the first in Rank) so his Majesty is fully persuaded that the
said Commandore's Conduct will produce Effects resulting to the Grandeur of his
Royal Name, the Public Good, and his Holinesses Satisfaction, by his
deportment, which he is to make as acceptable as can be, preserving what is due
to his Majesty's Dignity, that he may have as much cause to commend the said
Commandore's Services, as the choice he has made of his Person, for the
knowledge he has of his past Actions, and to reward him for the same to his
Satisfaction.

Done at Paris the 18th. of March, 1622. Signed Lewis and Lower Brulart.

Cant given to the said Ambassador:
ROME. GARDEN. The Pope. The Rose. Cardinal Ludovisio. The Carnation. Cardinal
Borghese. The Pensy. Cardinal Aldobrandin. The Jasmin. Cardinal of Savoy. The
Laurel. Cardinal Montalto. The Cypress. Cardinal de Sourdis. The Peach Tree.
Cardinal Vincenzo. The Quince Tree. Cardinal de la Rochefoucaud. The Pear Tree.
Cardinal de Rets. The Plum Tree. Cardinal de la Valette. The Apple Tree.
Cardinal Bentivoglio. The Abricot Tree. Cardinal Bevilaqua. The Cherry Tree.
Cardinal Barberini. The Griotier, or Sour Cherry Tree. Cardinal Ubaldini. The
Lote, or Nettle Tree. Cardinal Bandinis. The Dazy. Cardinal Medicis. The May
Blossom. Cardinal Mellini. The Orange Tree. Cardinal St. Susanna. The Lemon
Tree. Cardinal Verrallo. The Fig Tree. Cardinal Ara-caeli. The Thym Plant.
Cardinal Ursini. The Marjorum Plant. Cardinal Campora. The Lettuce Plant.
Cardinal Esti. The Bugloss Plant. Cardinal Savelli. The Borage Plant. The Great
Duke. The Amaranth. The Great Duchess. The Vine. The Arch Duchy. The Grape.
The Bishop of Mantua. The Wallnut Tree. The Seignory of Venice. The Almond
Tree. The Governor of Milan. The White Thorn. The Republic of Genoa. The
Linden Tree. The Duke of Savoy. The Tulip. The Prince of Piedmont. The Wind
Flower. The Duke of Mantua. The Sauge Plant. The Emperor. The Courser. The King
of Spain. The ^arbe. The Arch Duke Leopold. The Sorrel Horse. The Infanta of
Flanders. The Pad. Count Olwarez. The Dapple Gray Horse. D. Balthazar de
Cuniga. The Dun Horse. Germany. The Stable. Spain. The Manger. Flanders. The
Rack. England. The Fork. The King of Great Britain. The Groom. The Prince of
Wales. The Little Nag. The Elector Palatin. The Curtall, or middle sized Horse.
The Duke of Bavaria. The War Horse. The Duke of Lorrain. The Sumpter Horse. The
Switzers. The Stirrops. The Grisons. The Spurs. Valtelina. The Saddle.
Catholics. The Boots. Protestants. The Reins. The Nuncio of France. The Bit.
The Nuncio of Switzerland. The Bridle. The Vice Legate of Avignon. The Horse
Cloth. The Bishop of Lusson. The Switch. The Archbishop of Lions. The Master
of the Horse. Monsieur de Villiers. The Page. Monsieur Marini. The Manege. The
King's Ambassadors in Switzerland. The Pillars. Le Sieur Eschinard. The List.
Le Sieur Rabi. The Ring. Secretary le Fevre. The Lance. Seignior Pol Fiesco.
The Career. Seignior Frangipani. The Pike. Monsieur Ruccellai. The Musket.
France. Building. The King. Pedestal. The Queen. The Cornish. The Queen Mother.
The Door. The Duke of Orleans. The Window. Madam, the King's Sister. The Room.
The Prince of Conde. The Hall. Count de Soissons. The Garret. Monsieur de
Guise. The Yard. The Prince of Joynville. The Chimney. The Duke of Longueville.
The Table. The Duke of Vendosme. The Chair. The Duke of Nemours. The Bench. The
Duke d' Elbeuf. The Bed. Count St. Paul. The Side-board. Monsieur d'
Angoulesme. The Cabinet. Monsieur d' Espernon. The Carpet. Monsieur de
Montmorency. The Chevron, or Rafter* Monsieur d'Esdiguieres. The Beam. Monsieur
de Crequy. The Boarding. Monsieur de Schomberg. The Window Frame, or Cross
Work. Monsieur de Bassompierre. The Small Pinnacle. The Marquess de Couvres. The
Stair case. The Commander de Sillery. The Tabernacle, Pavillon. The Chancellor
de Sillery. The Chaplain. Monsieur de Puysieux. The Oratory, or Private Chappe.
Madam de Puysieux. The Chappe. Monsieur de Marais. The Priest. Monsieur de
Bellievre. The Clerk. Monsieur de Valencay. The Choirist, or Querister. The
Bishop of Chartres. The Chanter. The Chevalier de Valencay. The Novice.
Monsieur de Berny. The Deacon. Monsieur de Leon. The Accolite, or Boy that
Ministers at Mass. The Lord Keeper. The Fire Lock. Monsieur de Gesvre. The
Murrian, or head piece. Monsi. de la Ville-aux-cleres. The Sword. Monsieur
d'Herbault. The Pertizan. Monsieur de Beaumarchais. The Holbard. Monsieur
Morant. The Pistol. Pensions of Rome. The Balls. The Duke Sforza. The Powder.
The Duke de S. Gemini. The Carabine.
Memoire, for the Precedence of Cardinals in the King's Council, collected by
Cardinal de Richelieu.
MDCXXII.
From M. du Puy 's Study, M.S. 478.
THERE is no account to be given of the Treatment Cardinals receive in all
other Kingdoms, where Kings give them the Precedence before all others
whatever. But France having peculiar Laws to which it is reasonable to submit,
they pretend to no more there than what they have had for the time past; and I
am persuaded that the World will commend their Modesty, if they consider that
they freely suffer some diminution of the first rank they have had, out of
respect to the Blood of their Majestys.

In the Year 1467. at the Estates of Tours, Cardinal Balue was seated on the
King's Right Hand, and Rene, King of Sicilly, Prince of the Blood on the left.

In 1493. du Tillet Reports, That the King sitting in his Parliament, the
Cardinal of Lions, was seated immediately after the Dukes of Orleans and of
Burgundy, the King's Brothers and after him the Counts d' Angoulesme and de
Montpencier, Princes of the Blood.

The Possession of this Rank has been so clear, that du Tillet says in express
Terms, that the Quality of a Cardinal is such, that he preceeds all the Princes
of the Blood, after the second Person.

The first contest between the Princes of the Blood and the Cardinals, happened
under Charles the 9th. not between a lay Prince of the Blood, but between the
Cardinal of Bourbon and the Cardinal of Lorrain. The Cardinal of Lorrain was
the most Ancient, and was seated in the Council above the other, without any
Contestation. They became Enemies, and it was feared that the Princes of the
House of Lorrain would become too great in the State. Therefore in order to
Temper and Humble the said House, the precedence was given to the Cardinal of
Bourbon, after his having declared that he only pretended that Rank in the
Council, upon the account of the interest those of the Blood have in the State
above others.

Since that time, there have been disputes sometimes between the Princes of the
Blood and the Cardinals in the Council. But without the least Contradiction,
the Cardinals have always preceeded all others.

And it would be without the least ground or reason, should any Constable or
Chancellor pretend to dispute the said Rank with a Cardinal, since they have
ever been preceeded by Persons, who do not dispute it with the Cardinals.

Du Tillet reports, page 439. in a Sessions of Parliament, That the Constable
was seated after the Dukes of Guise, d' Aumalle and Vaudemont.

In another Sessions under Henry the 2d. after the Duke of Guise.

In another Sessions under the said Henry, after the Dukes of Guise and Aumalle.

And yet in another, after the Dukes of Gu^se and of Nivernois.

He also says elsewhere in express words, That the Prelates are after the
Constables or Chancellors, unless they are Princes or Cardinals.

Under Henry the 2d. the Constable, Anne de Montmorency was Favorite. He did
not love the Cardinal of Lorrain, and yet he never thought of disputing his
Rank.

Since the Cardinal of Lenoncourt has always been seated in the King's Council
above the Lord Keeper, officiating the place of Chancellor.

At the Declaration of the Queen's Regency in the Parliament held in the
Monastery of the Augustine Friars, the Constable of Montmorency, seated himself
after the Cardinals of Joyeuse, Sourdis and du Perron. And no Constable or
Chancellor ever had that thought, except Monsieur de Sillery, who imparting his
Ambition to the Constable, induced him to aspire to it.

All the Ancients of the Council remember to have seen Monsieur de Guise seated
above Monsieur de Sillery, and on the same side with him.

The Queen remembers to have seen the Cardinal of Joyeuse seated there, and
formerly the Cardinal of Sourdis.

She also remembers he complained to her one day, that the Chancellor
endeavudr'd to break up the Council to incroach that place.

The Expedient proposed by the said Chancellor, was, That there should be one
Side of the Dignities, on which the Children of France, the Princes of the
Blood, and other Princes, Dukes and Peers should be seated consecutively: And
another Side of the Officers, on which the Constable, Chancellor, Mareschals of
France, and other Officers should be placed.

And foreseeing that this would be looked upon as a great Absurdity, since by
this Means, he would be seated sometimes above the Children of France, Princes
of the Blood, or Cardinals, he proposed the making a Declaration, which settling
the two Sides of Dignities, and of Offices should at the same time express,
that the Second Place on the Side of the Dignities should be Nobler than the
First Place on the Side of the Officers.

This Proposition destroys it self evidently, seeing that not only Kings, but
even God himself, cannot make the Vale of a Hill to be the Top thereof; nor the
Feet of a Man to be higher than his Head. So that, in reality, whatever
Subtlity was used, the Chancellor had a mind to precede those who in Reason
have always preceded him; since the Second Person of the Right Side would not
have been so nobly seated, as the First on the Left.

This Design was, openly to settle a perpetual Precedence in the King's
Council, by the Chancellor, like unto that of the First President of the
Parliament, who has a certain fixed Seat, which he does not so much as yield to
the Princes of the Blood. This would be of very ill Consequence in the Council,
for several Reasons easily thought on.

No body can be ignorant of the End of this Pretension, if they consider that
the Jealousy of keeping this regulated Place has often induced the Chancellor,
His Majesty being absent from the Council, to give the King's own Place to
qualified Persons, (which was never done before,) rather than quit his own.

Therefore the King has wisely condemned the said Pretension, as being very
prejudicial; and given the First Place of his Council, in which the Prince of
Conde sits when he is there, to the Cardinal de la Roch-foucaul^; declaring,
that the said Prince coming, the said Cardinal should remove to the other Side,
which is the Second Place. And thus the Chancellor was absolutely deprived of
the Advantage he expected by this Proposition; which is the same that is
continued at present, contrary to the Judgment the King was pleased to give at
that time.

Should any thing be altered about this Pretension at present, it would be as
unjust, whatever Retrenchments were made, as it was in the whole; since it is
evident, by the Examples abovementioned, that the Cardinals have never yielded
to any but the Princes of the Blood, for the Reasons abovesaid, which can only
be of force in relation to them; and consequently, that, next to them, they
ought to possess the first Places, and of Course theirs in their Absence.

That the noblest Places have always been looked upon to be those that are the
first on the two Sides, opposite to each other; and thus successively, Du
Tillet shows us by the following Words: The Difficulty is, when the Pr^la^es
are mixed, and not by themselves, viz. to the Left, or Right. The first Rank
due to them, must be understood, next to the Queen and the Children of France,
both Princes and Princesses.

It is most certain, that all the Members of the King's Council keep their Rank
according to the Dignity by which they possess that Place. Since then
Cardinals, in all places, precede those who at this time dispute the Precedence
with them in the Council, undoubtly their Pretension is unjust.

The Cardinals have always had a free Entrance into the King's Council, with
the Rank due to their Dignity: And those who are acquainted with History,
cannot be ignorant that it is not so with Chancellors, who have only been
admitted there since a certain Time.

None of the Chancellors before Monsieur de Sillery, were ever admitted to the
Secret Council, or to that of the Direction of the Finances. And the Ancients
of the Council know, and can testify, that Messieurs de Chiverny and de
Bellievre were not of the Council of the said Affairs, nor of the Finances,
unless when, on some extraordinary Occasions, the late King sent for them
thither.

To what End should an Innovation be made in a most Christian Kingdom, under a
most Just, and most Pious King, contrary to what has already been adjudg'd. An
Innovation to the prejudice of the Church, of which he is the Eldest Son and
that only to satisfy the Passion of one particular Person.

If the thing in question were, to dispute a Point, in which neither of the
Parties contending had any Right, the Cardinals then ought to be preferred: How
then can that be disputed, which they are in possession of; and they be
deprived of that which belongs to them, to give it to those who have no Title
to it, but their Pretension?

If that Overture were received, one might henceforward pretend all to obtain
part; which would be a thing of very ill Consequence, since no Man hereafter
could be certain of any thing, though lawfully his.

An ACT concerning the Precedence of one of the Cardinals, in the Council,
above the Constable.
MDCXXIV.
THis Day, being the 9th of May, 1624. the King being at Compiegne, after
having heard the Duke de l' Esdiguieres, Peer and Constable of France, in his
Remonstrances about the Seats in Council, against the Cardinals, his Majesty
was pleased to admit into the same; and taken his Reasons into serious
Consideration; His Majesty was pleased to command him to yield that which he
did pretend to, at the most earnest Entreaty of the Queen, his Mother, on
Condition that it should not serve as a President against him, or any of his
Successors in the Constableship; and that only to one of the said Cardinals.
Whereof His Majesty (the Marquis de la Vieuville, Knight of his Order, and
Superintendent of his Fiances, and du Hallier, also Knight of his said Order,
and Captain of his Guards, being present, and Witnesses to these Presents) has
ordered this Act to be drawn by us, his Counselors, Secretaries of State, and
of his Commands, who were present at the whole Action.

Signed de Lomenie. and Potier.

Instructions for the Sieurs de Chastillon and de Breze, Mareschals of France,
and the King's Lieutenants General.
THE said Mareschals must know, that His Majesty has written to the Prince of
Orange, that his Army, consisting of Five and Twenty Thousand Foot, and Five
Thousand Horse, and a suitable Train of Artillery, will repair to Rochefort on
the 12th of May.

The said Mareschals are to take a particular Care to cause all necessary
Preparations to be made for the Passage of the King's Army, in order to join
that of the States.

The said Mareschals are to be at Meziers on the 28th of this Instant, to put
all things in readiness for their March, in order to be at the aforesaid place
on the 12th of May.

His Majesty allows the said Mareschals, in case they judge it more convenient
and proper for his Service, to join the said Prince of Orange by any other Way,
provided it be by the Consent of the said Prince.

If the Spanish Forces should oppose the Passage of the said Mareschals, so as
to hinder their Conjunction with the said Prince of Orange, without coming to
Action, His Majesty permits them to combat the Enemy, if they think they can do
it with Advantage, and great likelihood of Success; unless they judge it more
proper to encamp before the Enemies, and to send the said Prince of Orange
notice to advance on his side, in order to enclose the Enemies between the two
Armies.

His Majesty's Army being joined with that of the said States, the said Prince
of Orange is to give the Word in both, by virtue of the Power given unto him by
His Majesty.

All the Resolutions of the two Armies are to be conserted between the said
Prince, and the said Mareschals only: And the said Mareschals are to summons to
the particular Councils they shall hold for the Execution of the things
resolved on with the said Prince, all such Persons as use to assist in the same
in the King's Armies.

The two Armies being joined, His Majesty is of Opinion, that the first thing
to be done, is, to fight the Enemies, which is to be endeavored as much as
possible.

In case the Enemies should put themselves in such a posture by Encampment, as
to secure themselves from being forced to sight, Endeavors must be used to
starve, and make them perish that way, or else to force them in their Trenches,
if the Maxims of War permit it.

If any particular Considerations, as, the Abundance of the Enemies Provisions,
and the Dissiculties of getting them for the two Armies in Conjunction, should
prevent such a Design, His Majesty's Opinion is, That the only Remedy would be,
to march directly into the Heart of the Country, toward Brussels, Louvain,
Malines, and such other places as shall be thought fit by common Advice: And
that for this Reason, That besides the attacking the Enemies chief Cities, by
this Means their Forces, being obliged to march to their Assistance, will
hardly be able to avoid a Combat.

If the Enemies, instead of keeping the Field, should divide their Forces into
their best Garrisons, it is thought, that the best way would be to attack the
Place into which the Cardinal-Infant shall retire; by reason that if he could
be taken, the War would be at an end in Flanders.

And in case he should retire into some Place belonging to his Neighbors and
Allies, it will be necessary to follow him there, and, if possible, to force
the Place into which he shall retire, if the thing be feasible, and advisable.

The said Mareschals are also to take notice, That if it be needful to divide
the 50000 Foot, and 10000 Horse, which are to be in His Majesty's and the
States Armies, into several Bodies, the said Division must be made in such a
manner, that every such Body may be composed with part of His Majesty's, and
part of the said States Forces; to show in all things the strict Union there is
between His Majesty and the said States.

And in case, by the Taking of any Town, the Queen, His Majesty's Mother, or
the Princess Margaret of Lorrain, should chance to fall into His Majesty's and
the said States Hands, it is His Majesty's Desire, that the said Queen, his
Mother, be used with all the Honor and Respect due to her Quality; and that
the Princess Margaret be kept in such a manner, that they may be able to answer
for her Person; treating her however with all the Civility required toward a
Person of her Birth. In such a Case, the said Mareschals are to cause those
that shall be taken with the Queen, to be carefully secured; and are to know
her Pleasure, to acquaint His Hajesty therewith; and in the mean time, are to
take particular Care that she may neither receive or execute any Resolution,
contrary to His Majesty's Service.

His said Majesty authorizes the said Mareschals to resolve with the said
Prince of Orange all things not contradictory to the Treaty made with the said
States on the 8th of February last past, or that are not contrary to the
Article of the present Instruction, as they shall think it most proper for the
common Good

Done at Compeigne, April 23. 1635. Signed, LEWIS, etc. Lower, Servien.

Memoire of Cardinal de Richelieu for the Cardinal de la Vallette.
From Charonne this 15 Sept. MDCXXXV.
THE King ever did repose such a Confidence in the Cardinal de la Valette, that
he gave him at the very first beginning of his Commission, as he does still at
this time, full liberty and Power to do with his Army whatever he shall think
fit for his Majesty's Service.

We have all along dreaded the sudden changes to which our History informs us,
that the Germans have sometimes been subject. Nothing can be more surprising
than that we find at this time in the Landgrave of Hesse, and the four Millions
that are demanded by the Duke Bernard of Weymar.

We are willing to believe that considerations of Honor, will hinder them from
doing any thing that may endanger the loss of their Reputation, in contributing
to the ruin of the Cardinal de la Valette, and the Army under his Command.
Nevertheless, if the making an unreasonable Treaty, like that of the four
Millions demanded by the Duke Bernard of Weymar, be absolutely necessary to
hinder him from abandoning the King; his Majesty impowers the Cardinal de la
Valette to conclude it, and to sign or cause the same to be signed by Monsieur
Feuquieres, according as he shall think fit.

The Cardinal de la Valette will do well, first, to endeavor to reduce the
said Duke Bernard to a reasonable Treaty. The maintenance of Six Thousand
Horse, at the rate of eight Musters, which is much for Men that never had any,
amounts at Ten Crowns a Man to Sixteen Hundred Thousand Livers a Year.

That of the Twelve Thousand Foot at the same Rate of eight Musters, amounts to
no more.

Therefore it seems, that if the King should give Three Millions, for the
maintenance of Six Thousand Horse, and Twelve Thousand Foot, besides what they
will get by the Contributions in Germany, where they never had any other
subsistence, they should have a great deal of reason to be satisfied.

Nevertheless, if the time and present occasions require more to be given to
the said Duke Bernard of Weymar, the King leaves it to the discretion of the
Cardinal de la Valette, as far as the four Millions demanded.

It is also referred to the said Cardinal to insert in the Treaty he will make,
or cause to be made with the said Duke Bernard, the most advantageous
Conditions he can for the King's Service.

For instance, it is very reasonable to Note, that he will be paid what shall
be agreed upon, on condition that he shall always effectually keep on Foot, for
the King's Service, the number of 6000 Horse and 12000 Foot, which shall be
justified by the Reviews that shall be made every Muster.

If it be possible, it must also be agreed. that the said Horse and Foot shall
keep the Field, the Forces that are in Garrison living commonly on
Contributions, at the expense of the Garrison, and of their Neighborhood, that
in case the King gives his Money, he may be certain of having an Army on Foot,
capable to oppose his Ememies.

In fine, the Cardinal de la Valette is to get the best conditions he can for
the King's Service, though none be prescribed to him, the King leaving him a
full Liberty to conclude the Treaty, as he shall think most fitting, adding and
diminishing whatever he shall judge proper.

Though we do not think, that the Landgrave of Hesse, or Duke Weymar, would be
guilty of an Infidelity; yet we cannot forbear considering and dreading the
condition and place, in which the Cardinal de la Valette is, as well for the
King's Interest, as for the Affection he has for his Person.

Therefore we conclude, like him, that the most advantageous method he can
follow at present, if the Landgrave of Hesse and Duke Weymar will resolve to
Fight, will be to choose a proper time and place so to do, with all the
Circumspections imaginable.

Or, in case he should find, that whatever Negotiation and Treaty he could make
with them, he could not rely on their stedfastness, it will be prudent for him
to consider all means that may enble him, according as he shall think it most
proper to retire to a place, where their inconstancy may not put him in danger
of an absolute Ruin; as toward Metz, under pretense of scarcity of Provisions,
or of putting the Army into Winter Quarters.

Though this Advice be given to him, it is not that he is thought to be reduced
to such a Misfortune; but in point of prudence it is necessary to forecast all
the remedies that can be thought of in such Extremities, though only to make use
of them in the utmost Emergencies.

In the Name of God, give Us a speedy account of your Condition, to put us out
of Trouble. In the mean time an Army will be kept in Champagne, where the King
will be in Person, to advance toward Mets, if you stand in need of it: But it
will be necessary for you to let us have timely notice of it, by reason that if
the said Army be not wanted there, it may be sent elsewhere.

I had forgot to tell you, what may be done to fix the Landgrave, and to engage
him not to leave the King.

I am of Opinion that you might Treat a new with him, promising him, that the
King will never make a Peace, without including, not only his Person, and his
ancient Territories in the Treaty, but also his new Conquests, or an equivalent
for the same to his satisfaction.

Matters may also be ordered in such a manner, that the Duke of Weymar may
engage, to succor the Landgrave, with the Forces the King is to maintain for
him, in case of need, on condition that the said Landgrave shall also assist
the King's said Forces, and the Duke of Weymar in the late case,

One might also give the said Landgrave some part of the Army, which the King
impowers you to give to the Duke Bernard of Weymar, making the said Duke
sensible, that though he would get somewhat the less by it, yet he would derive
a far greater advantage by the correspondence he would have with the said
Landgrave.

We are much at a loss how to divide the Honor of the Command between them.

Yet I fancy, that if you could make them agree about the sharing of the Army,
which the King is to employ in Germany, you might do the same about the
Command, as follows.

That the Duke of Weymar should Command the Forces he is to have, as General of
the Troops granted to the Confederacy.

And the Landgrave those that the King should furnish him, by virtue of the
Command he has from the King.

I am persuaded that your Address, your good Fortune and your Wit, will furnish
you with expedients against all our Evils in your parts.

You may treat of the things above mentioned immediately.

If the War should chance to last, and conquests be made, the King promises
such a share thereof to the said Landgrave, as he shall desire.

At the very instant this Courier is dispatching to you, another is going for
Flanders, to endeavor to dispose the Prince of Orange, to permit Two Thousand
Horse of the King's Army, and Two Thousand Musketeers mounted on Nags, to
march from thence to join the Forces under your Command.

I am of Opinion that it will be fit for you at the receipt of this, to send
some body to the Marshal de Breze, to acquaint him with the Places through
which it will be most convenient for them to march.

Signed, the Cardinal of Richelieu.

Instructions for the said Cardinal de la Valette.
THE King reposes so much Confidence in the prudence and affection of the
Cardinal de la Valette, and His Majesty has received such real proofs thereof,
since his having giving him the Command of his Army in Germany, that he does
not only approve the reasons which have made him take the Resolution of passing
the Rhine, but moreover gives him full power, hereafter to form such other
designs and resolutions as he shall find upon the place, to be most
advantageous for his Majesty's Service, and for the Reputation of his Arms,
being persuaded that he will not Engage them without reason, and that he will
undertake nothing without hopes of a good Success.

His Majesty sends this Courier to the said Cardinal, to acquaint him that,
finding by his last dispatch, as well as by that of the Sieur de Feuquiere, the
demand of Four Millions of Livers, made by the Duke of Weymar, to fix himself
to the King's Service, (unless he had a great deal of confidence in the said
Duke's Sincerity,) he should have reason to believe, that he makes this
excessive demand, either for a pretense to break with him at this very instant,
if refused, or at least to have one to quit his Majesty's Interest at some time
or other, in case the payment of the said Sum should not be performed.

Though by this Means His Majesty, instead of receiving any Assistance from the
Forces of his Confederates, finds himself reduced to bear the whole Burden of
them, and to maintain them at his own Charges; which is very difficult for him
to do at this time, considering the great number of other Expenses he is at in
I^aly, the Grisons, Lorrain, Flanders and Picardy; yet he thinks it so
necessary, for the Good of his Service, to keep the said Duke steadfast to his
Interest, and so dangerous to lose him, that he is of Opinion that nothing
should be omitted in order to fix him in such a manner, that there may be no
Reason to fear his falling off for the future.

To this End, His Majesty impowers the said Cardinal de la Valette to offer as
far as Three Millions Two Hundred Thousand Livres, which is about the Payment
of Eight Musters for Six Thousand Horse and Twelve Thousand Foot, in case he
finds that he cannot come off at an easier Rate, and that keeping him within
the Bounds of a smaller Sum, might induce the said Duke to engage in the
contrary Party.

It will suit with the said Cardinal's Prudence, to husband His Majesty's
Interest in this Occasion, which is of great Moment, as advantageously as
possibly can be, and to yield only by degrees; representing to the said Duke,
that it is much at this time to give him double the Sum that was formerly
given to the Crown of Sweden, which is that as has already been offered to him
by Monsieur de Feuquieres. After that, he is to offer him something more, if
Two Millions of Livres are not capable to content him. In fine, he may go as
far as Three Millions Two Hundred Thousand Livres, if, as abovesaid, he finds
the Refusal of the said Duke's entire Pretentions capable to drive him to an
extreme Resolution, contrary to his Honor and Promises.

The said Sum being sufficient for the Payment of eight entire Musters for Six
Thousand Horse and Twelve Thousand Foot, which is what is expended in the best
paid Armies of Christendom, if the said Duke should make a Difficulty of being
satisfied therewith, there would be great Reason to believe, that he seeks
Pretenses to quit His Majesty's Interest; and that in that Case, whatever
Promises were made to him, would be vain; seeing that, in order to effect his
Desires, he would raise his Pretensions ad infinitum, and would never be
satisfied.

In such an Extremity, evidently known by the said Cardinal; which the King,
nevertheless, is unwilling to fear, of a Prince who hitherto has acquired a
great deal of Honor, and makes a strict Profession of it; the said Cardinal de
la Valette is to use his best Endeavors to secure the King's Army, and to free
it from those Dangers to which it would be exposed, should the said Duke change
Sides. This is only hinted, not to omit any thing that might happen, or the
proper Remedies to be applied in such a Case.

In case he will be satisfied with the said Sum of Three Millions Two Hundred
Thousand Livres, or can be disposed to take less, which must be endeavored as
much as can be, the following Conditions must be agreed on at the same time, if
possible.

First, That he will keep Six Thousand Horse and Twelve Thousand Foot in the
Field, for His Majesty's Service, besides the Garrisons that may be left in
diverse places.

Secondly, That Six or Seven Hundred Thousand Livres shall be given out of the
said Sum, to the Landtgrave of Hesse, for the Maintenance of his Forces.

Thirdly, That the Form of the Command between the Duke of Weymar, and the
Landtgrave of Hesse, shall be contrived, both being joined, or asunder.

Fourthly, That both of them, in consideration of the Sums paid unto them,
shall command their Armies, under the King's Authority; viz. the Duke of
Weymar, as General of the Forces of the Confederacy; and the Landtgrave of
Hesse, as General of the German Forces, maintained at the King's Charge.

Fifthly, That neither of them shall be allowed to quit the King's Interest, or
to hearken to any Propositions of Peace or Accommodation, whether general or
particular, without His Majesty's Approbation.

Sixthly, That in case the Duke of Weymar should not have the said Number of
Six Thousand Horse and Twelve Thousand Foot actually into the Field, the Review
whereof is to be made at His Majesty's Pleasure, and as often as he shall think
fit, it shall be lawful to stop as much out of the said promised Sum, as shall
answer the Failure of the said Number.

It must also be required, since the Duke of Weymar receives His Majesty's Pay,
that he should oblige himself to follow and execute such Orders as shall be
sent him by His Majesty, to the Prejudice and Exclusion of all others that
might be given him to the contrary. Nevertheless, if he should seem too averse
to it, the King will be satisfied with being secured, that whatever ill Event
his Affairs might have in Germany, he will remain steady to His Majesty's
Interest and Service, upon the King's Promise that he will never make a Peace,
without his being included in it; and to fulfill all the Articles of the Treaty
that will be made with him, according to his preceding Memoirs, which are to be
followed in every Point not comprised in this.

After the sending of this Memoir, His Majesty has thought fit still to leave
the said Cardinal the Liberty to promise as far as the Four Millions of Livres,
in case he thinks it impossible to keep the said Duke of Weymar steady to His
Majesty's Interest without it.

This Condition is so unreasonable, and the Sum so excessive, that the said
Cardinal is not to oblige himself to it, till the last Extremity; and to avoid
those Evils he may foresee will ensue, in case he should not comply.

Done Sept. 16. 1635. Signed, etc.

Instructions for the Cardinal de la Valette.
THE King being sensible that there is nothing so pressing and important at
this time, for his Service, as the Furnishing of the Garrisons of Alsatia
speedily with Provisions, His Majesty has already sent two Couriers to the
Cardinal de la Valette, and to the Marquis de la Force, to that effect; his
Desire that no Time may be lost for the Performance of that Enterprise, obliges
him to dispatch this third Messenger.

His said Majesty therefore judges it necessary, forthwith to prepare the said
Provisions, the Carriages for their Transportation, Men to convoy the same, and
the Money for the Musters that are due to the Garrisons of Colmar, Schlestadt
and Haguenau.

Two Thousand Rations of Wheat must be sent, if possible. Monsieur Gangnot, who
went from hence yesterday, has assured His Majesty, that he had the said
Quantity in readiness, and that he would order the Delivery of it to the Person
appointed for the carrying thereof; he will be upon the Spot, to execute the
Orders he has received: And lest he should meet with any Obstacles in an
Undertaking of that Consequence, Six Thousand Livres have been put into his
hands, to be employed for the Sacking and Lading of the said Corn, and other
necessary Charges.

The greatest Impediment in this Business will be, about the Carriage-Horses,
since we are informed, that in this Season Wagons cannot go through those
places that are still open to go to Colmar; so that the said Wheat must of
necessity be carried on the Backs of the said Horses. Orders are already sent,
to employ all the Horses belonging to the Artillery and Provisions of the two
Armies of Lorrain; to borrow as many from the Duke of Weymar as he can furnish;
to hire Two Hundred from Colonel Gassion, who has promised to provide them, in
order to carry at least Two Thousand Rations, at any rate whatsoever.

In case of a Disappointment of those Horses which Colonel Gassion has
promised, and those that Duke Bernard is able to furnish, His Majesty is
willing that the Sieur de Villarseaux should employ all those that are under
his Command for that Service, though they were prepared for Carriages into the
Country.

His Majesty reckons, according to the Information he has received, that 3000
Horses, and 3000 Musketeers, chosen out of all the Forces, will suffice for
the said Convoy; and that, in order thereunto, 1200 effective Musketeers must
be taken out of the Cardinal de la Valette's Army; 500 Foreign Horses, and 150
French, drawn either out of diverse Companies, or otherwise, as shall be thought
most convenient

Out of the Marquis de la Force's Army, 800 Musketeers, 800 Foreign Horses,
and 100 French, in the same Form as out of the Cardinal's.

That 1200 Horses shall be taken from Duke Bernard; and that 1000 Musketeers
and 250 French Horse shall be drawn out of the Army in Champaign, which shall
be taken out of the Forces given to the Sieur de Vaubecourt, out of the
Regiments of the Marine and Vernancourt, which shall be ordered to march
toward Nancy, there to receive the said Cardinal de la Valette's Orders.

All necessary Orders are sending to the Count of -- to Duke Bernard, and to
the Marquis de la Force, for the Preparation and March of the Forces that are
to be drawn out of the Armies under their Command.

The said Cardinal must not forget to distribute to the said Troops as much
Provision at their Departure, as they can carry for their Journey. Their March
not exceeding four Days, from their Rendesvouz-General to Colmar, they may
carry a sufficient quantity for their Journey going; and take as much out of
Colmar, as will be necessary for their Return; sending notice beforehand to the
Inhabitants, to provide a sufficient quantity for them; which will be returned
them out of the Wheat carried into the said Garrison.

A particular Care must be taken of the Beasts of Carriage, and Orders given
for their carrying of Oats along with them, and, if possible, some Hay, to seed
them until they are past the Mountains of Alsatia; which being past, Manicamp
assures us, that they will find Provisions and Forage in abundance; but it is
to be feared that they will find nothing on this side the Mountains.

A Clerk of the Treasury has been sent Post with the 6 and 7 Musters due to the
Garrisons of Alsatia: The said Cardinal is to take care to see the same
delivered to them, even to the Troops of Horse that are there, in case he
thinks they are in want of it for their Subsistence.

He is also, during his Journey, to endeavor to get some certain notice of the
true State Haguenan is in at this time, that in case there be any possibility
to relieve the same, it may be done.

After having put Provisions into Colmar and Schlestadt, the said Cardinal is
to leave such a number of Foreign Horse in each of them, as he shall think fit
to keep the Enemies at a distance from them; and to send to Montbeliard, to the
Count de la Suze, such Forces as he shall stand in need of. The Regiments of
Layn, Harf and Forbus seem to be the fittest for that Service: All the Means
that can be, must be used for their Subsistence there; and they must be
re-inforc'd, if possible, during their Stay there.

As this Dispatch was going to be closed, His Majesty has received some
Intelligence from Manicamp, an Abstract of which he sends to the said Cardinal,
that he may regulate himself accordingly: Nevertheless, though he represents
the thing to be very easy; it is His Majesty's Pleasure, that a strong Body be
sent, in order to effect the Matter without danger. If after the Execution
thereof, the said Cardinal finds Conveniences beyond the Mountains to maintain
Forces there, either by Convoys, or by the Means of Basle, His Majesty thinks
fit to leave some there; and particularly, a greater Number of Foreign Horse.
And if the Fear of not finding a sufficient quantity of Provisions on his
March, for so great a Number, should hinder him from taking all the Foreign
Regiments along with him, it will be necessary, at least, to send them out in
Parties, while he advances that way, to make a Diversion, and to create
Jealousies in the Enemies, another Way.

Done at St. Germain en Lay, January 2. 1636. Signed LEWIS, etc.

Memoire, to the Cardinal de la Valette, Lieutenant General of his Majesty's
Army in Italy, and to the Sieur d'Hemery, His Majesty's Ambassador in Ordinary
in Italy.
From M. du Puy 's Study. M.S. 538.
HIS Majesty received diverse Informations heretofore, that the Spaniards had
some design upon Cazal; but he could hardly have been persuaded, that it was
with the Participation of the Princess of Mantua; whose interest was so
considerable in France, that there was reason to believe, that though her heart
was not well inclined for the King's Service, at least she ought to have
dissembled it, to oblige His Majesty to be favorable to her, and to the Duke
her Son in their Affairs.

Though this Princess's ill designs are sufficiently justified by the
Depositions of Gajis and Monteils, which the said Ambassador has taken very
opportunely; his Majesty is nevertheless of Opinion, that it is not fit as yet
to publish them such as they are, nor to show his Resentment against her;
because His Majesty is able to do his Business without it, and that it is
necessary before, if possible, to induce the Republic of Venice to secure
Mantua, as he has done Gazal. His Majesty commends the care and diligence used
by the said Cardinal and his Ambassador in that affair, and desires them to
continue their said care in keeping a strickt Eye over the said City, the
consequence whereof is sufficiently known to them. They are to take care above
all things, no longer to suffer any suspected Persons to tarry there. And
besides their particular knowledge thereof, they are to confer about it with
Chancellor Guiscardi, who will be mentioned in the Sequel of this Memoir.

Although His Majesty does not think it convenient at this time to accuse the
Princess of Mantua of being concerned in the Treason hatched in Cazal, against
his Majesty's Service, to introduce the Spaniards there; yet His Msjesty is of
Opinion, that it ought to be published without naming the said Princess,
pretending that the Forces introduced by her into the said City in order to
seize upon it, where only sent to protect the young Duke against the pernicious
designs of his Subjects, who have been gained by the Artifices of the Spaniards.

His Majesty highly approves the seizing of Monteils by an Ordinance of the
Senate of Cazal; this proceeding absolutely justifying His Majesty's Actions.
His Majesty's intention is to have the said Monteils brought to his Trial; and
to that end he has sent two Commissions, the one directed to the Sieur d'
Argenson, and to the said Senate of Cazal, and the other to the Counsel of War,
in order that the said Cardinal and the said Ambassador may use that which they
think most proper. In which it is necessary to use a great deal of Prudence,
not to trust the Senate of Cazal with the Trial of Monteils, unless they find
their intentions to be such as are agreeable with the Welfare of their
Country, and the King's Service. And whereas it will be a thing very well
received throughout Italy, if M^nteils be condemned by the Duke of Mantua's own
Judges; so it would redound very much to the King's Reputation if the
wickedness of that man were justified, by reason that what has been done lately
at Cazal, is grounded upon that only. After these Considerations, his Majesty
referrs this Affair to the Prudence of the said Cardinal de la Valette and
Monsieur d' Hemery, being satisfied that they are capable to manage it in such
a manner that his Majesty will receive no prejudice by it.

It is necessary, not only to get a particular account of Monteils designs, but
also to discover all his accomplices, and to secure them: The said Cardinal and
the said Ambassador are likewise to use their best endeavors to get the most
Authentic proofs that can be had, of the share the Princess of Mantua has had
in this detestable Enterprise; but without saying any thing about it, only to
enable his Majesty to make use of it, at a proper time for the welfare of his
Affairs.

The King writes to Guiscardi, Count Mercurin and Prat, to express his
gratitude to them for their proceeding in the said Affair; he is resolved to
reward them, and to acknowledge the services they have done on that occasion.
Therefore His Majesty desires the said Cardinal, and the said Ambassador, to
let him know speedily what they think he ought to do for them, which shall be
performed in^diately. In the mean time they are to assure them of his Majesty's
absolute protection, and of the rea^esteem he has for their Person, and to let
the said Chancellor G^iso^rdi know in particular how much his Majesty p^aises
the Courage and Affection he has shown in this Affair. They are to tell him
that he will repose an absolute Confidence in him for the future, and will
communicate all things relating to Cazal and the Country of Mon^ferrat to him;
and that he has so much value for his Person, that he has commanded them to
assist him with such a number of Soldiers, as he shall think fit, or s^and in
need of, either to guard him at home, or to accompany him up and down the Town,
to secure him against the Evil designs that might be plotted against him. In
fine, they are to give those three Persons all the Demonstrations of affection
imaginable from his Majesty. They are to do the same to Porre, and to the Mayor
of the City, and to acquaint his Majesty what rewards they think fit for them.

The King consents to receive Gajis into some City in the middle of his
Kingdom, to make him Sergeant Major there, and to allow him a perpetual Pension
of Two Thousand Livers, upon a particular receipt of the Tailles; in order
thereunto, Letters Patent shall be expedited for him, the Preamble whereof
shall be, for having secured Cazal from Treason. The said Cardinal and the said
Sieur d' Hemery are to send him away, as soon as he shall desire it, and are to
give him a thousand Crowns for his Journey, out of the money which is due from
Bresme, which shall be reimplac'd if necessary.

As to what relates to the Garrison and Fortifications of Cazal, Monsieur de
Noyers, has taken upon him, not only to get the Bill of Exchange of 30000
Livers accepted, but also to provide for all other things that are necessary.
The said Ambassador, in order to justify his Majesty's Actions, is to give a
particular account from himself, of all the Transactions at Cazal, to the
Marshal d' Estr^, du Houssay, de la Thuillerie and la Tour, because his Majesty
referrs all to him.

The King having Examined the propositions made by the Duchess of Savoy, about
the renewing the Treaty of the Offensive and Defensive League, sends a project
of Treaty with the Preamble to the Cardinal de la Valette and the said Sieur d'
Emery, such as they themselves have esteemed reasonable, and Authorizes them to
pass it immediately. This they are to apply themselves to, to settle the
Dutchess's mind, which otherwise might be agitated by the diverse propositions
that are daily made to her.

The said Cardinal de la Valette, and Emery are to observe, not to give the
said Duchess the Title of Royal Highness in the Treaty, because His Majesty is
resolved not to alter his wonted manner of treating with the Duke of Savoy.
This they are to acquaint the said Duchess with in a very civil manner,
assuring her that if the King does not do every thing according to her desire,
it is only because time and occasions are not fit for it, since he has all the
affection for her she can desire.

The Article which relates to the Princess of Mantua, is worded in such a
manner, That the King does not oblige himself to include her into the Treaty;
which point, it is not likely the Duchess of Savoy will insist upon, by reason
of the sentiments which we may suppose she is in at this time. But in case she
should do it, it might be required of her to include the Duke of Modena into
the League, since the Duke of Savoy has promised to do it by the Treaty of
Rivole; and thus her desire in this point may be evaded.

The King Orders the said Cardinal and Emery, to take care not to engage His
Majesty into new Expenses, for the 3000. Foot and 1200 Horse he is to maintain
for the Duchess of Savoy; and in order thereunto, they are to use their
endeavors to get the 5th. Article past according to the Note in the Nargin.
But in case the said Duchess should insist upon the Effective payment of the
entire Sum of 840000 Livers, they are to consent to it, telling her that the
King makes that Effort out of respect to her only.

As to what relates to the 6th. Article, the King could wish it might pass as
it is worded in the project sent by him; however, if it cannot be done, His
Majesty is willing, that additions be made to it according to the said Cardinal
and said Ambassadors Notes.

The said Cardinal and said Ambassador are to consider the 11th. Article of the
Project annexed hereunto, which obviates the inconveniences, they think may
arise, in case it were drawn in the form desired by the said Durches's
Ministers. It is thought she will make no ma^er of ^ficulty of passing it, as
it is drawn in the Project, since it is much to her advantage.

The Sums that were due for the Years 1636. and 1637, have been retrenched out
of the 13th. Article.

The said Cardinal and Ambassador are to pass the 14th. Article, as it is
worded by the said Dutchesses's Ministers, making her sensible how great a
demonstration this is of the sincerity of his Majesty's Intentions, and of his
desire to give her all manner of Satisfaction.

The King is willing the said Cardinal and Ambassador should sign the secret
Article, as it was agreed on at the Treaty of Rivole. If it were possible to
avoid mentioning the War of Genoa, it would be very proper: But the said
Cardinal and Ambassador, are not to insist upon it, neither are they to make
any overture about it, if they think it may provoke the said Duchess of Savoy.

Done at Compiegne, May. 22. 1638. Signed LEWIS, etc.

An important and secret Memoire sent from the King to Marshal Chastillon.
WHEN Monsieur de Chastillon was forced to raise the Siege of St. Omers,
Monsieur de la Force and he sent the Sieur Pagan to the King, to acquaint him
that it was absolutely necessary to raise the said Siege, and that they were
both of Opinion, at their removal from thence to besiege Hesdin.

The King according to this Advice sent them word, that since they could do no
better, he did adhere to their Proposition; and in order to enable them the
better to put it in Execution, he resolved to advance as far as Amiens.

Saligny came to the King at Amiens, sent by those Gentlemen to acquaint his
Majesty that they were still of Opinion that it was fit to besiege some place,
but only, they were in doubt whither it should be Hesdin or Arras.

His Majesty's Opinion was that Arras required too large a Circumvallation for
the return of an Army, and that there was too much difficulty to carry
Provisions thither; and thus the Attack of Hesdin, was resolved upon.

The Question is now, What is most proper to be done; equally weighing the
Considerations which may induce to do something, and those that may hinder it;
as well as the present State of His Majesty's Forces.

His Majesty's Reputation requires, that the Misfortu^e happened before St.
Omers, should be repaired: The Consideration of his Person, which hitherto has
never been exposed without Effect, seems also to desire it.

The Desire of a Peace, which cannot be expected, unless our Affairs are
successful, is an absolute Obligation to do it; as well as His Majesty's
Engagement with his Allies, who expect some considerable Performance from him,
in order to enable them to do the same. This is so absolutely necessary, that
in case neither of them should do any thing, one of these things will
infallibly happen; either we shall never have a general Peace; or some of our
Allies making theirs separately. France will be involved in an eternal War,
with all the Disadvantages that can be expected of a Kingdom that will be
obliged alone to sustain all the Efforts of the House of Austria; that is, of
all Germany, Spain, Flanders and Italy.

To avoid these Inconveniences, it is necessary to resolve what is to be done;
taking as much Care not to engage in a Design manifestly impossible, as not to
undertake those that are possible, because they are difficult.

Messieurs de la Force and de Chastillon's Armies must not be reckoned to
consist of upwards of 22000 Men, for fear of being deceived.

The Marshall de Breze's, of 8000.

The King, including the Body commanded by St. Prcuil, may have about 4000 Men,
Horse and Foot.

We are raising about 10000 Men for Recruits, which are not to be depended upon
for upwards of 6000.

We have abundance of Warlike Ammunitions, and Provisions, and of all things
necessary for a great Design.

The Enemies having put Men into several Garrisons, as it is represented, cannot
have upwards of 15000 Men in the Field.

The King desires the Generals of his Armies, without showing this Memoir to
any body, under pain of Treason, to send him their Opinion speedily in Writing,
at the bottom thereof.

The Marshall of Chastillon 's Answer to the said Memoir.
SInce His Majesty, by the Advice of His Eminency, is resolved to employ the
remainder of this Campaign on some Design that may maintain his Credit with his
Allies, and be advantageous for his own Affairs; as it is reasonable not to
propose any thing, the Success of which may be uncertain, and bordering upon
Impossibility, as well as not to stop upon Difficulties, which might hinder the
undertaking of some Design worthy of the Reputation of his Arms.

I find that the Opinion of the King's Council, as well as ours, fixes upon
H^sden, which seems at present to be the only important Place proper to
besiege, by reason of the Convenience for the Subsistence of the Army there;
the Convoys for the Provisions and Warlike Ammunitions being at small distance
from each other, without the Enemies being able to obstruct them in the least;
considering also that the quantity of Cannons, Powder and Bullets lies ready,
almost upon the very Spot, and adjacent Frontier-Towns; which is a great
Advantage for that Undertaking, besides our being favored by the Woods and the
River, great Conveniences for a Seige.

We must also consider what is against us. The Place in question is
incomparably well fortified; provided with Ordnance, and all manner of Warlike
Ammunitions; and a Garrison consisting of 2500 Men, chosen out of the best
Forces of the Netherlands.

Therefore I am of Opinion, that this Siege cannot be undertaken with less than
15000 effective Foot, and all the Horse in Marshall de la Force's Army, and
that under my Command.

The Body commanded by St. Preuil, and that which is with the King, joining the
Marshall de la Force's Men and mine, will supply the Loss of Men we have
sustained, either by Sickness, or Deserters, which have weakened us since we
removed from St. Omers.

The Marshall de la Force will acquaint His Majesty by Word of Mouth, with the
Number of Men, both Horse and Foot, under our Command.

By this means the Marshall de Breze's Army will remain free, to succor those
that shall stand most in need of it, according to the Resolution which the
Commanders of the Enemies Armies may take, when they find us engaged in a long
Siege.

In case they come up directly to us, when the new Forces they expect are
joined with them, the Body of Men commanded by Marshall de Breze, not being
far from us, joining our Army in case of need, we shall be able to maintain the
Siege against all the Forces that can fall upon us; and to guard the Frontier
of Picardy, as far as it extends, from Calais to Peronne.

But if the Enemies should attempt a Diversion at a greater distance, drawing
toward Guise, or father toward the Frontier of Champagne, I am of Opinion,
that it will be necessary to detach an Army sufficiently considerable to oppose
the Designs of the Enemies.

In such a Case, a Detachment might be made of half the Horse of the Marshall
de la Force's Army, as well as of that under my Command, to join with the
Marshall de Brez^; which, together with his Foot, may compose an Army
considerable enough to observe the Enemies Motions along the Frontier, being
favored by the chief Towns, which will easily furnish him with all things
necessary.

Thus the General who shall command that Army, may easily hinder the Enemies
from forming any considerable Siege; or from entering into Champagne, to make
any considerable Spoil there.

Some Regiments of Foot, that have been sent under the Conduct of Monsieur de
Bellefonds, may reinforce the Army going into those Parts.

It seems to me, by this means, that all things may be provided for, and the
Siege proposed, carried on: In which, after the Circumvallation is made, 12000
Foot and 2000 Horse effective must be employed, and encamped within our Lines
and Quarters.

We must make two different Approaches, the Guard of each consisting of 1500
Men, considering the Force of the Garrison.

We daily find our Armies weakened by Distempers; therefore we must be sure of
the Arrival of the 6000 effective Men, of the Recruits, by the 15th or 20th of
September, to maintain the Army, and keep it in the Field until the middle of
November; this Siege being likely to employ us till then.

Provided this be done, I am of Opinion, that this Design may be undertaken.

If His Majesty does me the Honor to employ me alone it, or with such a
Colleague as he shall think fit to choose, I will use my utmost Care, Industry
and Pains, to perform it.

But as to answer for the Events which may happen by Accidents unforeseen, I do
not think that any General, having the least Experience, would undertake to
command on such Conditions.

The King, who is very skilful in our Trade; and His Eminency, who is very
clear-sighted in all things, will easily resolve, with the Advice of those that
are about His Majesty, upon what is sit to be undertaken, without losing Time;
and I will always boldly and faithfully execute whatever I am commanded.

Instructions for the Baron d' Oysonville.
THE King having received Notice of the Duke of Weymar's Death, and being
desirous to provide for all things relating to his Service, and the Advantage
of the common Cause, upon an Accident so unexpected, and of such Consequence,
His Majesty has thought fit to dispatch unto Count Guebriant, Marshall of his
Camps and Armies, commanding his Forces under the said Duke's Command, a trusty
Person, well instructed with his Intentions on this Subject; and to that end,
he has chosen the Baron d'Oysonville, Captain of a Troop of Chevaux Leyers, in
his Sereice.

The said Oysonville is to repair with all speed to the said Count Guebriant;
and is to know, that the chief End of his Journey, is, to fix and secure those
Forces into His Majesty's Service, which were commanded by the said Duke of
W^ymar, under His Majesty's Authority and Pay; and the Places by him conquered.

As to what relates to the Forces, I am willing that the said Guebriant and
Oysonville should offer to all the Colonels, both of Horse and Foot, the same
Treatment they did receive from the aforesaid Duke of Weymar; and moreover, a
Pension of 6000 Livres apiece.

And to make them the more sensible that His Majesty is desirous to keep them
for ever in his Service, his Goodness is such, that he is willing to secure
them Revenues in France upon his Demesnes, for ever.

His Majesty does not particularly prescribe to the said Count Guebriant, what
Revenue he is willing to give upon his Demesne, to each of the said Colonels,
because it is fit for him and the said Baron d'Oysonville to discover their
Pretensions, and the Capacity of each of them; there being some who deserve
more than others. His Majesty is of Opinion, that the Counts of Nassaw and
Ohems, as also Colonel Scheumbee, will deserve 12000 Livres a Year upon his
Demesne apiece: and that the rest may be allowed, some six, some 8000 Livres
Revenue, more or less, according as the said Count and Baron shall think fit
upon the place.

After having agreed with the said Colonels, about the Conditions on which they
are to remain in His Majesty's Service, at the time they are paid, an Oath must
be administered to them, to serve His Majesty well and faithfully, toward and
against all.

As to the Sieur d'Erlach, when he was here, he declared openly to Messieurs de
Bullion, Chavigny and de Noyers, that in case the said Duke should be taken
off, he would rather die, than fail to keep his Government for His Majesty's
Service. Moreover, the Answer the said Duke made to the Articles sent to the
said Count Guebriant, after the Negotiation made by the said Erlach, with His
Majesty, in the said Duke's Name, says in express Terms, speaking of Brisac,
and the other Garrisons kept by the said Duke, what follows: In case of His
Highness's Death or Imprisonment, he assures His Majesty, that he will order
Matters so, and take such Care of the aforesaid Places, that his Successors, or
Commanders, shall give His Majesty the same Satisfaction he can expect to
receive, and does actually receive from His Highness himself.

After having assured the said Erlach of His Majesty's Confidence in, and
Affection toward him, it will be necessary, before any Propositions are made
to him, to know which he had rather do, either immediately to deliver the Town
and Fortress of Brisac into the King's Hands, receiving a fair Reward; or to
take a fresh Commission from His Majesty, to keep the said Government for His
Majesty's Service; taking an Oath before the said Guebriant, well and
faithfully to keep the same for His said Majesty, and him therein well and
faithfully to serve, toward and against all; adding what the said Count
Guebriant and Baron d'Oysenville shall think most proper to oblige him the more
strictly.

If he consents to take a reward for it, the King is willing to give him a
100000 Livers in ready money, and even allows the said Guebriant to go as far
as 50000 Crowns.

If he had rather remain in the place, his Majesty will leave him the command
of it on the same Conditions he made with the said Duke; and moreover will
allow him a Pension of 6000 Crowns a Year, during the War. And in order to
secure him a livelihood after the Peace, his Majesty allows the said Count and
Baron to make him a promise in his Name, of the like Sum of 18000 Livers
revenue on his Demesne, which he shall enter in possession of after the
Conclusion of the Peace

If the said Sieur d' Erlach is willing to keep the Government of the said
Place, reason, and his own security require, his receiving so considerable a
number of French Men, into his said Garrison, that in case he should
infortunately be surpised by Death, like the aforesaid Duke, a Lieutenant that
is to be settled under him, and secured to his Majesty like himself, might be
able to secure the said place for his Majesty. And in that case the said Count
Guebriant and he are to agree about a Lieutenant, in whom his Majesty may
confide, and if possible a Frenchman, chosen by the said Count; as also to put
a good French Garrison into it at the same time.

To avoid the difficulties and disturbances that might arise about the
adjusting of this second proposition, in case the said Erlach be disposed to
deliver the said place into the said Count Guebriant's Hands, whom his Majesty
in that case designs to make Governor thereof; he allows the said Count and
Oysonville to grant him, if it cannot be done otherwise, as far as 200000
Livers to be paid to him in ready Money.

The said Guebriant and d' Oysonville are to manage this affair with so much
prudence and address, as not to give him the least disgust, so that whatever he
resolves upon, he may have reason to be satisfied with his Majesty's Affection
toward him.

The said Count Guebriant is also to treat with the Governors of the other
places held by the said Duke; in order to their delivering of the same into his
Majesty's hands, receiving a reward for them, proportionable to the value of
the said Governments; or else taking fresh Commissions from the King, together
with an Oath of Fidelity as abovesaid.

In case the said Governors are desirous to remain in their said Governments,
they are to allow them Pensions, according as they shall think fit, and to
promise them revenues upon their Demean, instead of the said Pensions after the
Peace, proportionable to their deserts.

As to the Garrisons that are on this side the Rhine, as Thanes, Pentarlier,
and others, the said Count Guebriant is to get them immediately delivered into
his Majesty's Hands, and to put such Persons into them, as he knows to be both
Capable and Faithful to Command the same.

And in case after having made the Covenants abovesaid, the Commanders of the
Forces, and Governors of Places should make some difficulty of taking the Oath
purely and only to the King, and should be desirous to add that they well keep
their Garrisons for the King's Service, and for the advantage of the common
cause, the said Count is to show them how the aforesaid Duke himself, by the
secret Article, of which a Copy is to be annexed to this present Instruction,
acknowledged none but the King, and that reason cannot allow their doing less
in this, than he.

The said Guebriant and Oysonville are to acquaint all the Troops of the said
Army, that the King will take so particular care of what relates to them, that
he designs to give them the Duke of Longueville for their General; and moreover
that his Majesty will repair in Person, as far as his Frontier Towns of
Burgundy, which are upon the Saosne to show the particular esteem he has for
their whole body.

His Majesty delivers into the said Baron d' Oysonville's Hands, several Signet
Letters for the chief Commanders of the said Forces, and Commissions for the
Governors of the places, which the said Count Guebriant and he are to make use
of, according as they shall resolve on together, in performances of this
present Instruction; whch is to be common between the said Count and Baron, and
will be a sufficient Warrant for them, for all that is abovesaid. The said
Baron d' Oys^vi^le is to behave himself in all things according to the advice
and motions of the said Guebriant, without deviating from the same in any
manner whatever.

Done at Mezieres, July 27. 1639.
Instructions to the Sieurs de Guebriant, de Choisy, and d' Oysonville, about
what they are to do, after Colonel Flerschin 's having been with the King,
being sent by the Sieurs d' Erlach, Ohem, and Count Nassaw, to whom the late
Duke of Weymar has left the Direction of the Army under his Cammand, until
their having another General.
THE said Colonel has been very favorably received, and has expressed a great
deal of satisfaction at his departure for the favors and caresses he has
received from his Majesty, as well as for the good Treatment he has met with
from the Cardinal, which they will see the particulars of by Monsieur de Noyers
dispatches.

The subject of his Journey is reduced into four principal points, of which the
above named Gentlemen will be particularly informed, by the Copy of the Memoir
he has presented, which will be annexed hereunto.

The first consists in the assurances of the Service and Fidelity of the said
Colonels and Officers of the Army, which his Majesty has received with
particular demonstrations of satisfaction expressed Viva Voce to the said
Colonel, the which are contained in the Letter written by him to the said
Directors, of which a Copy will also be added to these present Instructions.

Whereupon it is his Majesty's desire that the said Gentlemen, do omit nothing
to confirm to this Army, the good disposition his Majesty is in of taking a
particular care of their interest and advantage.

The second Article of the said Memoir contains the demand made by the said
Colonels, of the continuation of the Treaty, and the payment of the said Army;
in the same manner as it was done in the late Duke's time. And upon this point,
and all others that are Essential, his Majesty referrs himself absolutely to
the said Sieurs de Guebriant, de Choisy and d' Oysonville, according as he has
declared to the said Colonel Flerskin, and to the Directors by his Letter;
supposing that those affairs may be adjusted with less difficulty upon the
place, than here. therefore they are to acquaint the said directors, that his
majesty seeing no likelihood that any of them would oblige himself toward him,
for the maintenance of an army of 8000 foot and 4000 horse, together with the
train of artillery, and other things relating to the subsistence and employment
of such an army, as the aforesaid duke had done, since it would not be in his
power to effect it, it will be necessary to think on such means as are most
proper to regulate all things in a due method, for the common satisfaction of
all; and such an one as may produce the same effect of a treaty. whereupon, it
will be fit to add, in order to remove that thought, that the inexecution of
treaties of that consequence occasions more than any other thing, the
discontents which may arise among those whose intentions are the most united in
the same party: that there would undoubtedly arise a very essential difficulty
which is, that his majesty finding himself laden with the same expense the duke
was at, for the maintenance of the garrisons he was in possession of, would be
obliged to make deductions of the payments designed for the generality of the
forces, in order to find the funds of those garrisons, and to separate them from
those of the field; which would occasion abundance of discontents and
confusion, before a reasonable distinction could be made, to satisfy every
body. so that all that can be done, is, that his majesty's said deputies must
determine with the aforesaid directors, what is most proper to be done, to give
every one a reasonable satisfaction.

The Re-inforcement of Men which the said Colonel Flerschin has desired, and is
the Third Article of his Memorial bearing his Credentials, is that which
disturbs His Majesty most: For, notwithstanding he finds in himself a great
Disposition to do it, being sensible of the Advantage his Affairs, and those of
his Allies in Germany, would receive by it; the Number of Armies he is obliged
to keep on foot, as all the World knows; and particularly, the War of Italy,
which has drawn a World of Men out of his Kingdom, and obliges him at this very
time to send a considerable Number of Forces thither, hinder His Majesty from
being able to give them a definitive Answer to this Point for the present. But
he is not out of hopes of giving them a considerable Succor, particularly on
the side of Lorrain; where his Affairs continuing to prosper, as he hopes in
God they will, His Majesty will be able to send all the Forces under Monsieur
du Hallier's Command in their Parts: And in his Progress toward Lions, whither
he is now a going, he will acquaint the Duke of Longueville, who is shortly to
repair into Germany, with his sinal Resolution uopn this Subject; which is what
the said Deputies are to say upon this Article.

As to what relates to the rest of the extraordinary Funds demanded by the said
Colonel Flerschin, mentioned in the fourth and last Article of his Memorial,
His Majesty refers providing for the same, until his being better satisfied of
the necessity of raising the said Funds, in order to do it with more Knowledge:
Which is what may be said at present to the said Directors. And therefore he
will expect an Account thereof from the said Deputies.

After having informed them in general Terms, what Answer they may make to the
said Directors, upon the Demands made by Colonel Flerschin in their behalf, and
that of all the Officers in the Army; it is necessary for them to know, that
the main thing they are to aim at, is, to secure all the Forces, and the
Garrisons, which were under the aforesaid Duke's Command, for His Majesty's
Service; and to establish so good an Order for the Subsistence of both, that
His Majesty may be able to bear the Expense thereof.

That it will be necessary, if possible, to order Matters so, that all the
Forces in the Field, and in the Garrisons, may not cost His Majesty more than
the 800000 Crowns, which he allowed the said Duke: Which seems the more
feasible, by reason that it is most certain, that the said Duke has lest great
Sums of Money, though he drew them out of no other Mine than His Majesty's
Treasury, and the Profits of the War.

That, in order to bring this about, it is fit to examine what the Country
round about Brisac, and the other Garrisons, is able to contribute toward the
Maintenance of the said Garrisons; and in the next place, what the said Duke did
really pay to his Forces, what the Artillery is to cost; and upon those
Foundations, to make a right Calculation of all the Expenses of the said Army.
Nevertheless, if it should chance to amount to something more than the said
Sum of 800000 Crowns, His Majesty is willing to bear it. But at the same time,
it is his express Command, that the said Deputies do use all the good Husbandry
that is possible therein.

His Majesty is of Opinion, that it will be proper, before any Knowledge be
given of this Account to the Directors, to state it with the Sieur d'Erlach,
who shows so much Zeal and Affection for the Service of France, that His
Majesty is confident he will use his best Endeavors to make that Account
reasonable. This, it is thought, will prove the less difficult, because His
Majesty is resolved to use the said Colonels well; and moreover, to secure them
wherewithal to live after the Peace; which the said Deputies are empowered to
do by their Instructions. This, undoubtedly, will induce them to make their
Soldiers submit to Reason.

Although His Majesty has explained himself very clearly in the Instruction of
the said Deputies, as to the manner of the Oath to be taken by the Governors of
Places; Nevertheless, he thinks fit to re-iterate, that they must acknowledge
that they hold the said Governments by virtue of His Majesty's Commissions; and
oblige themselves to keep them toward all, and against all, for his Service;
and never to deliver them to any whatever, without His Majesty's express
Command.

It is likewise thought fit, according to Monsieur Desnoyer's Letter to the
Sieur d'Erlach, of which the said Deputies will receive a Copy, to establish
French Governors in Rinfeld and Newburg, or Friburg. And this the said Deputies
are to contrive with the said Erlach, satisfying the Governors of the said
Places with good Pensions, which they shall enjoy immediately, and with the
Revenue that is to be settled upon them at the same time, which they are to
enjoy after the Peace; or by such other Conditions as the said Deputies shall
think reasonable.

As to the Proposition contained in the preceding Instruction, to sound whether
the said Erlach would be willing to remit Brisac into His Majesty's hands, he
expresses so much Affection for his Service, and he is known to be so well
experienced, and capable of commanding in such an important Place, that in case
he is willing to remain in it, His Majesty is satisfied that he can put no Man
in his room that can serve him better than he. And His Majesty desires the said
Deputies to acquaint him, that if he had several Governments equal to that, he
would give him the Choice of all of them. In a word; His Behavior since the
Accident of the Duke of Weymar's Death, gives reason to believe, that his
future Actions will always answer so good a Beginning.

The said Deputies are so well acquainted with all His Majesty's Intentions,
and are so prudent, that he does not doubt but all things will succeed
according to his Desires, by their good Conduct.

Done at Toinville, this 20 th of August, 1639. The Memorial presented to the
King, by Colonel Flerschin, contained four Points.

First, The Assurance of the Affection and Fidelity of all the Directors, and
the Colonels of the Army, for His Majesty's Service. Secondly, That His Majesty
would be pleased to pay a Second Quarter of the 800000 Crowns granted to His
Highness, and to continue the Third and Fourth in their Turns. Thirdly, To send
a Re-inforcement of 8000 French Foot, and 2000 Horse. Fourthly, To order the
Payment of the Remainder of the Extraordinaries, granted to His Highness.
This will serve instead of the Copy of the Memorial, which could not be sent
to you.



The Directors Demands to the Deputies.
I. THE Officers of the Army do protest, that they are willing and desirous to
serve His Majesty and the common Cause faithfully and constantly, for the
Re-establishment of the Princes and States that are oppressed, and
dispossessed; as they are obliged to do by the Treaties made between His
Majesty, and His Highness, of blessed Memory; which they desire to observe in
all their Points and Clauses.

II. And whereas it is thought, that the Money His Majesty will be pleased to
assign for the Maintenance of that Army, will be distributed to more Advantage
by his Treasurer's Hands, than by any others: The Officers freely agree, not to
meddle with it, provided His Majesty will be pleased to pay them four Musters a
Year, according to the Capitulation made with them during His Highness's Life;
and that the Money be paid without Loss or Deduction, in good Species, and such
as are current in this Country; Pistoles of Weight not passing at a higher Rate
here than four Rix-Dollers, and other Species in proportion to the Pistoles,
all being weighty and good.

III. That His Majesty would be pleased to allow those of the Artillery,
according as His Highness did agree with them, ten Musters a Year; and to
furnish all manner of Warlike Ammunitions, as well as to pay all extraordinary
Charges, which cannot be precisely specified.

IV. They also humbly crave, His Majesty would be pleased to furnish the
Infantry and the Artillery with Bread, in the same manner as His Majesty allows
it for the Subsistence of his Armies; without which, it would be impossible to
make the said Body subsist.

V. That His Majesty would be pleased to allow them good Winter Quarters, in
which the Cavalry may be re-mounted, re-inforc'd, and put in a Condition to do
good Service again.

VI. His Majesty is also entreated that in case the Army should be worsted by
the Enemy, he would be pleased to give them necessary Means and Assistances to
remount the Troopers, and to make Recruits for the whole Body.

VII. That His Majesty would be pleased to allow, that such Towns and Forts as
shall be taken from the Enemies, belonging to any of the Princes or States of
the Confederacy, may be provided with Forces of their own Body, for the Benefit
of those to whom they did belong in the Year 1617, before these Wars.

VIII. The Officers humbly crave, that in case any of them, or their Soldiers,
should be taken Prisoners, His Majesty would be pleased to procure their
Liberty, by paying their Ransom, as His Highness did: As also, to put the
Generals John de Were and Enkenfort into their Hands, in order to exchange them
for Major General Dobald and Schafalischy.

IX. As to what relates to the Command of the Army, the Officers will not sail
to pay all the Deference and Respect to the General His Majesty will be pleased
to appoint to command his Army, as His Highness did to the Cardinal de la
Valette: And crave, that all things may be resolved on by a common Advice and
Consent. As to what relates to their particular Body, they desire to be
commanded by a Chief of their Nation.

X. They also crave, that the Quarter of May be paid to them in ready Money;
and that of August, which is already due, in good Assignments, in order to
their being speedily paid, to put themselves in a Condition to serve.

The Answer of the Deputies to the Directors.
I. AS His Majesty's only Intention is, to re-establish the Princes and States
that are oppressed in Germany, and to promote the Advantage of the common
Cause, the Army which was commanded by His late Highness being maintained and
paid by His Majesty, he never questioned, but that the Officers thereof would
freely promise to serve him faithfully and constantly, toward and against all;
and to lead the said Army in all the Plates and Enterprises he shall desire,
according as His Highness was obliged to do by the Treaty of the 27th of
October, 1635. For the Performance of which, they are to administer an Oath to
all the Forces.

II. And though some hints have been given, that it would be more proper to pay
the Army with a certain number of Musters, the King taking all the other
expenses upon himself, than to agree about a sum for the whole, as his Majesty
did with his Highness. We hope the Officers will do us more justice than to
believe that it did proceed from the least apprehension that the distribution
of the said sums would not be well and duly performed by their order; but on
the contrary, that they will rather consider the reasons which have been
alleged to them, and are most true. They will also be pleased to consider that
the four Musters they desire far exceeding, together with the Ammunitions and
Provisions, and other extraordinary Expenses, the sum his Majesty did allow to
his late Highness, as also that which they themselves have desired of his
Majesty by their Deputies; they do reduce us to the impossibility of granting
them, since our Instructions limit our Power within the bounds of the demands
which the said Officers have made to his Majesty. Nevertheless, in order to
show them what confidence we repose in the particular esteem the King has for
them, and for the whole Army, we are willing to allow them three Musters and a
half yearly, the said half Muster to be employed for the recruits and
reestablishment of the Forces; this is all we can do, and upwards of a Hundred
Thousand Dollers more than what they have desired of his Majesty. The whole
will be paid them in weighty Pistols, at the rate of four Rix Dollers a piece,
or in Equivalent Money.

III. The Artillery will be paid at the rate of Eight Musters yearly, and the
Officers shall be obliged to follow the Orders of the Master of the Ordnance.
Marshall de la Meilleraye, Grand Master of the Artillery of France, who will
take care to provide all the necesfary Warlike Ammunitions of that Army, as
well as the Generality of all the extraordinary Expenses.

IV. His Majesty will furnish the German Foot with Bread, like the French, as
well as the Officers of the Artillery, as it is practiced in his other Armies.

V. His Majesty is more desirous than the Officers themselves, to see the Army
in good Winter Quarters; and will use his best Endeavors to get them the most
advantageous that can be.

VI. His Majesty being also more concerned than any body in the Preservation
and Augmentation of the Army, the Officers may assure themselves, that he will
give them Means to r^astablish their Forces, in case they should meet with any
Disaster of War, or other inevitable Accident; which God forbid.

VII. This Article seems to be superfluous, the King being only engaged in this
War, to procure the Restoration of the said Princes and States, who can do no
less than to hold that directly from His Majesty, which his Armies shall have
taken of theirs from the common Enemies.

VIII. The King will never make the least distinction between the Forces that
are in his Service, but according to their Affection and Valor: And therefore
you need not doubt but that he will take the same Care to procure the Liberty
of such among you as shall be taken Prisoners, as he does in his other Armies.
And as to the Exchange you propose to us, though we are not informed of His
Majesty's Will in that particular, yet we dare assure you, that he has so great
a Value for General Dobald and Schafalischy, that he will refuse no fair and
honorable Means to set them at liberty, and among you again.

IX. The King having pitched upon His Highness of Longueville to Command his
Forces in these Parts, and to show you more and more the Value he has for your
Troops, haying recalled him to that End, from a Place where his Presence was
absolutely necessary, His Majesty, in so doing, was, and is still persuaded
that you will make no difficulty to acknowledge, and receive Orders from a
Prince of his Birth and Merit, and from whom His Majesty is very well satisfied
that you will receive a very favorable Treatment; as also, that he will make
use of your good Counsels and Advice, for the Resolution of all things, without
your insisting over and above to have some other Chief over you, besides those
His Highness has left you by his Will.

X. As for the Quarter of May, and that of August, we must first agree when His
late Highness's Treaty will cease, and when that of the Musters will begin, in
order to make a just Account with the Officers of His late Highness, of what
has been furnished to them this Year, as well for the King's Interest, as for
that of the whole Army.

Articles and Demands of the King's Deputies, To the Directors of the late Duke
of Weymar 's Army.
THE King will yearly cause to be paid into the hands of the Sieur Haeuff, in
Paris, the Sum of...... in four Terms, and equal Payments; of which, the first
will be due on the First of January next coming; to be employed for the
Maintenance of the Army commanded by His late Highness of Saxony of Weymar, for
the Payment of the Loans for the German Garrisons that are to remain in the
Places that are already, and are to be conquered; for the Equipages of the
Artillery, Provisions, Furnishing of Ammunition-Bread, and all other Warlike
Ammunitions that will be necessary, as well as for the Payments of the Works
that are to be done in Sieges, and other Enterprises that shall be thought
necessary.

His Majesty will also immediately pay for the Quarter of May, due to His late
Highness, in performance of the Treaties made with him, the Sum of 550000
Livres only; the 50000 Livres remaining of the 600000 Livres granted for every
Quarter, not being allowed, according to the said Treaties, for the Army, but
for the particular Maintenance of His late Highness.

As also, His said Majesty will pay on the First of January next coming the Sum
of 250000 Livres, which is all that remains due for the Quarter of August, by
reason that His Majesty having paid the Sum of 300000 Livres extraordinary to
His late Highness, to be employed for the Buying of Horses and Provisions, to
enable him to remount his Cavalry, and to raise 4000 German Foot, to be joined
to the French Body; the same not having been performed by him, the said Sum of
300000 Livres must have been found in his Coffers at the time of his Death; and
consequently, his Treasurers must be responsible for the same to the Army. And
therefore His said Majesty paying the said Sum of 250000 Livres on the Terms
abovesaid, is to be discharged of the Payment of the said Quarter of August,
because, as it has been observed already, in relation to the Quarter of May,
His Majesty has the same reason to detain the 50000 Livres which were granted
by him, to His late Highness, every Quarter, for his Maintenance.

Granting what is abovesaid, General-Major Erlach, Colonel Ohem, Rose, and
Count Nassaw, nominated by His late Highness's Will, to be Directors of the
Forces he did Command, under His Majesty's Authority, immediately after the
Payment of the said 550000 Livres, for the Quarter of May, are to pay a Muster
to all the Forces, both Horse and Foot, of the said Army; and two Musters and a
half to all the Field-Officers, and Officers of the Ordnance; the whole
according to the Re-view that will be made of the said Forces by the
Commissaries and Comptrollers that shall be appointed by His Highness of
Longueville.

In like manner, the said Directors are to oblige themselves firmly to His said
Majesty, one for all, to maintain him an Army in a good and sufficient
Condition, composed of 8000 Foot well armed, and 4000 Horse also well armed and
mounted, with a Train of 500 Horses for the Ordnance, 400 for the Provisions,
and...... Pieces of Ordnance, with the Carriages, Chests, Wagons and Carts
necessary for the said Provisions and Artillery, as well as for the Carriage of
Warlike Ammunitions; in order, according to the Treaty made by His Majesty,
with His Highness, on the 27th of October, 1635. to serve him with the said
Army, toward and against all, whatever Order or Command they might receive to
the contrary; and to lead it in all Places and Enterprises His Majesty shall
think fit, under the Orders and Commands of such a General as His Majesty shall
be pleased to send them, since it has pleased God to deprive them of the
Presence of His HIghness of Weymar: For the Performance of which, and all that
is abovesaid, the said Directors, Officers and Soldiers of the Army, as well as
of the Artillery, are to take an Oath before the abovesaid Commissaries and
Comptrollers, nominated by His Highness of Longueville, for the said Review.

The said Directors are also to oblige themselves to pay four Musters yearly to
the Forces of the said Army that are in the Field, giving them the same Pay
they had from His late Highness; ten Musters yearly to the Field-Officers of
the said Army, and the like Number to the Officers of the Train of Artillery
and Provisions: And also, to deduct out of the Money that shall be paid every
Quarter of the said...... such Sums as shall be agreed on for the Payment of
the Loans, and furnishing of Ammunition-Bread, to the German Forces that are to
remain in those Places that are already, and are to be conquered hereafter.

The said Directors are also to oblige themselves, daily to provide for every
Foot-Soldier of the said Army serving in the Field, an Ammunition Loaf weighing
24 Ounces, well conditioned; the same to the Cavalry, when Need shall require
it. Moreover, they are to provide for Sieges, and other Expeditions, as well
for the Soldiers of the said Army, as for such as His Majesty shall think fit
to join with them, such Warlike Ammunitions as shall be thought necessary by
the General His said Majesty will be pleased to send to Command the said Army.
And in case Money should be wanting for some Works, or other Expenses, the said
Directors shall be obliged to provide the same by the General's Order; as also,
for the Maintenance and Conduct of Boats, and Payment of the Watermen, that
shall be necessary for Ports, Passages, or Rowing.

The said Directors are also to oblige themselves, conformably to the last Will
of His late Highness, forthwith to deliver into His Majesty's Hands all the
conquered Places; into which His Majesty is to place such Governors, either
French, or Germans, as he shall think fit; and to leave in the said Garrisons
such a Number of German Soldiers as shall be agreed on between the said
Directors and His Majesty's Deputies.

And whereas His said Majesty would never engage himself to such an
extraordinary Expense, for the Maintenance of the said Army, unless he had a
Mind to have it always in a good Condition to serve: For that Reason, as soon
as the Sums proceeding from the said...... shall be paid into the hands of the
said Haeuff, the said Directors are to give notice thereof to the General who
shall Command the said Army, in order to carry the said Money, by his, and the
said Directors Orders, to the said Army; where, immediately after the Re-view
of the said Forces by the Commissaries and Comptrollers appointed by the said
General, the aforesaid Musters are to be paid, as abovesaid. Out of which
Sums, the said General is to deduct from the said Directors, at every Muster,
at the rate of 12 Livres for every Foot-Soldier, and 40 for every Trooper, that
shall be wanting of the Number of Men the said Directors will oblige themselves
to keep on foot in the said Army, by the four present Articles. As also, at the
time of every Muster, the Musters due to the Officers of tho said Forces, who
shall be absent, without Leave, or lawful Impediment, are to be deducted. And
it shall be lawful for the said General to make a Re-view of the Officers, and
Trains of Artillery and Provisions, as often as he shall think fit, in order to
make the like Deduction for whatever shall be wanting; and the said Directors
shall be obliged to provide anew for the same.

In case any Officers, Soldiers, or Troopers of the said Forces should chance
to be made Prisoners, the said Directors are to take care to deliver them,
paying their Ransom, if need be.

And the said Directors are also to gree, and allow His Majesty to detain, out
of the aforesaid 550000 Livres that are to be paid for the Quarter of May, the
Fund that is necessary for the Payment of the Advance-Money for the German
Forces that are to remain in Garrison in the conquered Places, until the first
of January next coming; and that according to the Liquidation that shall be
made between the said Directors, and His Majesty's Deputies.

As also, His Majesty continuing to employ the Officers belonging to the
Artillery of the said Army, the said Officers shall be obliged to take Letters
of Approbation from the Master of the Ordnance. And to the end that the
Auditor-General, who is at present in Function in the said Army, may administer
Justice in His Majesty's Name, he shall be obliged, in order thereunto, to take
such Commissions, and Letters Patent, from His Majesty, as are necessary,
sealed with his Broad Seal; as it is practiced in all other Armies, by those
who officiate the said Places.

The present Articles are to be signed by the said four Directors, Colonels,
and Lieutenant-Colonels of the said Army, being present at the Resolution
abovesaid, and by His Majesty's Deputies, to be observed and kept by each of
them, according to the Form and Tenor of the same.

and deliver them into his Hands, to establish Governors there: That otherwise,
we had labored long in vain for the composing of all that is abovesaid. Upon
this Point, they desired to have our Intentions in Writing; which we sent to
them in this manner: That the conquered Places should be delivered into His
Majesty's Hands, for him to settle such Governors there as he should think fit;
as also, to put French and German Garrisons there, according to His Highness's
last Will and Testament. Having sent this Article to Major General Erlach, he
sent us word, that it was necessary to communicate it to the whole Army: That
Colonel Ohem, who was going back to his Quarters, would take that Care upon
him; And that after that, he would acquaint us with their Resolutions. Five or
six Days passed without any News; during which, we did not fail to press the
said Erlach; and he, to make perpetual Complaints of the Delays of the March of
the French Forces; which, he said, put a full Stop to the Conclusion of our
Business. Finally, Having received Orders to make the Army, Commanded by
Monsieur du Hallier advance; and at the same time, Letters from the said du
Hallier, giving an Account of the March of his Forces; we gave him an Account
thereof: Upon which, he took Occasion the very next Day to write to the
Officers of the Army, that it was time to assemble again: And we were glad to
have the Assembly kept at Colmar, to the end that the Duke of Longueville's
Presence might advance it. During the first Days of our Conference, renewed at
Colmar, we were obliged to begin all almost de Nova again. They increased their
Demands; and we drew the enclosed Articles, as if nothing had been spoken of
till then. In Answer to our Article concerning the Garrisons, they sent us word
at first, by two Deputies from among them, That all the Garrisons should remain
in the Power of the Body of the Army; and that they would provide such
Governors and Garrisons for them as they should think fit, excepting only
Brisac; in which the King should be allowed to put a third part of Frenchmen,
because His Majesty, by a Re-inforcement of Men, had contributed toward the
Taking of it: And the said Deputies added, That it was the last Resolution of
their Assembly; refusing even to hear our Reasons; which, nevertheless, we made
them hear at last, in a very ample manner, without being able any wise to alter
their Minds. This obliged us, in order not to break with them, to tell them,
That our Instructions did not authorize us to grant their Demands: That it was
necessary that they and we should send to the King, to know his Intensions;
That, in the mean time, to show them in what good Union we desired to live with
them, the Duke of Longueville was ready to join his Forces with those of His
late Highness of Weymar, in order to march together toward the County of
Burgundy, and not to pass the Rhine, since we were certain that His Majesty
would never resolve to do it, without being Master of Brisac. This startled the
Deputies, who were in hopes, that while the Article of the Garrisons was in
debate, we would help them to take their Winter Quarters, which cannot be good
without passing the Rhine. Nevertheless, being parted thus, at Night Count
Guebriant met Major General Erlach, who came from the Duke de Longueville; with
whom having had some Discourse, they renew^d a Conference for the next Day; in
which the Proposition of the Garrisons was something softened; he giving us to
understand, that the Choice of the Governors should be referred to the King,
provided he took them out of the German Body; and that they were willing that
one half of the Garrisons of Brisac and Friburg should be French. We told him,
That this would put too great a Check upon the King's Liberty, in obliging him
to put none but German Governors into the said Garrisons: That we were of
Opinion, that he would sooner choose them, than Frenchmen; but that it ought to
be without Constraint. He withdrew dis-satisfy'd, without expressing it; and
immediately after Dinner, took Coach, and returned to Brisac. All the other
Officers and Colonels returned in the same manner to their Quarters, leaving
only the Auditor-General behind, to desire us to fix our Resolution: With whom,
after several Debates, we drew the Article concerning the said Garrisons, as it
is stated; and put it into his hands, to confer about it with the Colonels. He
sent it to Colonel Ohem, and came the next Day to Brisac; where Monsieur de
Choisy.
I repaired also, to convoy the Wheat that came from Basil. Two Hours after my
Arrival, the General-Major, and the Governor of Rheinfeld came to see me. We
examined all the Articles we send you; upon which he alleged no Difficulties,
excepting that relating to the Garrisons. Finding at the very beginning of the
said Article, that a Sub-Governor was mentioned, he said, That he would have
none; and the Governor of Rheinfeld said the same thing: In the next place,
That he was of Opinion, the Army would persist in desiring an Assurance from
the King, that he would put no Governor into Brisac and Friburg, but such as
should be drawn out of the German Body: and that the Governors would take no
other Oath, than to keep the said Places for the King's and Confederate Princes
Service; and never to deliver them to any body, without the King's Leave. I
told him the Reasons which would hinder the King always from consenting to it
in this manner: To which I had no other Answer, but That it was his Opnion,
that we should never obtain what we desired in this Point. And, in private, he
told me the Obstinacy he had found in all the Officers, on that Subject: That,
for his part, he discharged himself of it, and could not answer for the Sequel.
Within half an Hour afterward he sent me word, that he had just received a
Letter from the Crown of Sueden, directed to the Directors, by which they were
desired to remember that the Army belonged to the said Crown. This obliged me
to write that very Night to Messieurs de Guebriant and d'Oysonville, to
acquaint them with all those Difficulties, and the Reasons I had to conclude as
advantageously as was possible. Two Hours after the Receipt of my Letter, and
their having conferred with the Duke of Longueville, they repaired hither;
where it was their Opinion that I should wait on Major General Erlach, to tell
him absolutely, that we could not go beyond what we had granted by the last
Articles; that our Power was at an end; and that if the Army was not satisfied
with it, it was fit to send to the King again. He repeated with much Disquiet,
as I thought, that it behooved us to take care lest Things should take an ill
Biass before the Return of the Courier we should send; and that afterward we
should fall into the Proverb, Such refuse, who afterward muse. I repeat the
same Words to you: Upon which, I pressed him to tell me what great Reason there
was to doubt. I asked him if he had any Notice of some other Treaty, to the
prejudice of ours: Whether he was afraid of any Treason in the Army, or in the
Governors. He could allege none to me; but that the Army was absolutely
ruined, in case it remained some Days longer without marching. After having
felt his Pulse, he made great Complaints to me against Colonel Fl^rschin; even
so far, that he looked very coldly on him since his Return from Colmar: That he
was a Man that had received 800 Pistoles for a Gratification; for which he
thought himself but little obliged. Whereupon, I replied to him, that it
behooved him to take care, lest he were turned out of his Government: That it
would be a great Affront to him: That he knew what we had offered to him, what
Engagements he had made to the Court: That it behooved him only to speak; and
that he should not want a sufficient Assistance. This produced no Conclusion,
and thus we parted; he saying, that we should tarry for the Answer of Colonel
Ohem, and the other Officers, about the Articles of the said Places. I
acquainted Messieurs de Guebriant and d'Oysonville with this Conversation: We
weighed all the Reasons on both sides, considered the Hardships of the Treaty
they would impose on the King; as also, the hazard we should run, if, in
delaying, the Army should chance to take another Party, and the Garrisons find
Means to subsist without us; as they might do for a while, if having each Wheat
enough almost for a whole Year, at least, for the most considerable; all the
Colonels following the Advice of the Suedish Resident, should make a Resolution
to join their Forces to those of Koningsmark, a Suede: From whence it would
follow, that the Crown of Sueden, in pursuance of the Treaty made with His
Majesty, would oblige him to send another Army into Germany; or would take an
Occasion to make a Peace with the Emperor, without our Leave. I am sensible
that this Expedient, proposed by the Resident of Sueden, is not the most
advantageous for those Forces; by reason that, in the first place, before their
Conjunction, they are necessitated to cross a large Country belonging to the
Enemy; where they would be in danger of a Defeat: Besides, that at the time of
their quitting these Quarters, all the Officers would be obliged to break their
Equipages, to mount their Infantry; which is a thing, German^ would hardly
resolve upon. Moreover, I am of Opinion, that they are not over-fond of the
Suedish Command; that on that side they can draw no Money from them; and that,
since they are so loath to receive the absolute Commands of a potent King, they
will much more unwillingly submit to those of Koningsmark, who is but a
Colonel, like themselves. Propositions have also been made to them to Canton
themselves in this Country, and to make a Republic; which is a mere Chimera:
But we have to deal with such unreasonable Men, that not being capable to know
their own Good, they may chance to be hurried away, following, the Passion of
one Man, who may have a Mind to establish his Authority above the rest. All
these Reasons made (...) among us incline, in case the said Officers did (...)
their Propositions about the Garrisons, to declare unto them, that we had no
power to grant what they desired; and that it was necessary to send a
Deputation to the King. The rest considered, that though, in effect, their
Instructions obliged them to secure the Army in the most direct manner, in the
King's Service, according to the secret Treaty of His late Highness; and that,
by another Article of the said Instructions, it is expressly provided, that in
case any Difficulties should arise on the part of the Governors of the Places,
and Officers of the Army, about the Taking of the Oath purely and simply to the
King; and that they should be desirous to add, that they will keep the said
Garrisons for the King's Service, and the Good of the common Cause; they must be
made sensible, how the said Duke himself, by the secret Article, acknowledged
none but the King: And that Reason does not allow their doing less in this,
than he. Which are Words that enengage the Deputies to suit, as much as can be,
their Negotiation to His Majesty's entire Satisfaction; but yet do not
decisively express, that for want of that, the King will hearken to no manner
of Treaty. Seeing moreover, that by all the Letters we have received from His
Majesty, and Monsieur de Noyers, since the Beginning of our Negotiation, we are
always enjoined not to break it off: And that by a Third Instruction, sent to
us upon the Propositions of Colonel Flerschin, when Mention is made of the Oath
to be taken by the Governors of Places, it is said in express Words. Although
His Majesty has very clearly acquainted the said Deputi^e, by their
Instructions, in what manner he is of Opinion that the Governors ought to take
their Oath of Fidelity. Which Expression, He is of Opinion, shows, that His
Majesty refers it to us, to compose all things as advantageously as is
possible, for his Service. After all; Whether our Instructions do not bind us
so fast, but that we may go beyond the Words of the Oath, therein set down; or
whether we may not exceed them, without endangering our Heads; considering all
the Accidents above-noted, and another which is most certain, That in sending
to the Court without a Conclusion, we must pass at least a Fortnight longer,
before we can receive Orders; and that after the Receipt of those Orders, we
must spend seven or eight Days longer to assemble the Officers again, and as
much to make the Preparations of our Departure: That all this time would lead
us very far into November, and deprive us of the Means of taking our
Winter Quarters; and consequently, that this Army would be infallibly ruined,
or we forced to lodge them in France; considering also, that it is better to
take some Possession of what we desire, than to have none at all: That by the
Means of the half French Garrison in Brisac, Matters being well ordered, the
King will always be Master of it, according to his Pleasure; and that, in case
of Necessity, it were better to venture the Loss of the Army, to gain it. I had
rather, being able to defend my self with good Reasons, run the hazard of being
disowned, and of losing my Life, than to survive the Reproach which the King,
His Eminence, and all France, might upbraid me with, in case the Forces of the
late Duke of Weymar, and the Town of Brisac, the most important in all Europe,
should pass into any Hands besides the King's. Founded upon these Reasons, my
Opinion is, That if those we are to treat with, will not submit to our Terms,
we must agree to theirs; send our French Garrison into Brisac, with some chosen
Officers; and march with the Army. Count Guebriant is of the same Opinion; but
Baron d'Oysonville's Sentiments are different from ours; perhaps they are
better. While the aforesaid Colonel's Answer was expected, the said Count and
Baron thought fit to send me to Colmar, to give the Duke of Longuoville an
Account of all those Transactions, and to receive his Orders, which I found to
be very different from Monsieur Guebriant's Opinion, and mine. Nevertheless,
having made him sensible of the Importance of the Preservation of that Army;
and that it would infallibly perish, if we should tarry for new Orders from the
Court; he told me, that he would agree; and that, instead of marching with the
Forces toward the County of Burgundy, as it had been proposed, he would make
no difficulty of joining immediately with the German Body, and go up the Rhine
again, toward Landaw, Guerinsen and Spire, to make himself Master of them, and
to be in a Condition to pass the Rhine, to take Winter Quarters in the Lower
Pulatinate, as soon as the Oath was agreed on. The Duke of Longueville added
moreover, that by his Advice we might agree in all things except the Oath; That
it would be necessary, before our joining, to send half the French Gai^son into
Brisac; and, in order to facilitate all things, rather to grant them part of
their Quarter of May, or the whole, if it could not be done otherwise. I did
yield to this Expedient, as being very good if it can succeed. We will propose
it; and in case it be not agreed unto, I still persist in my Opinion, to pass
the Oath on the Conditions proposed by the Directors, and the Officers of the
Army, rather than run the hazard of some unexpected Accident. The rather too,
because the last Clause of the said Oath, by which the Governors promise never
to deliver up the Place to any whatever, without the King's Leave, seems to
secure all: And that His Majesty having his Choice, to take what Governor he
shall think sit out of the German Body, it will be very easy to secure those
he will put into the said Garrisons, before he gives them their Commissions.

The Treaty between the King, and the Directors and Officers of the Army of the
late Duke of Weymar.
THE King being acquainted with the Death of the Duke of Weymar, and still
continuing to have the same Sentiments he has always expressed for the
Restoration of the Liberty of Germany, His Majesty has deputed Count
Guebriant, the Sieur de Cholsy, and the Baron d'Oysonville, in order to agree
with the Directors and Officers of the Army Commanded by the late Duke of
Weymar, about the most effectual Means for the Preservation of the said Army,
the Good and Promotion of the common Cause: In Performance whereof, the said
Deputies, Directors and Officers have agreed, that the Treaties made between
His Majesty and the late Duke of Weymar, as to what concerns the said Army, the
Confederate Princes, Towns and S^ates, shall be executed according to their
Form and Tenor, with the Reserve and Augmentation of the following Articles.

First, His Majesty grants, and expects, that the Forces commanded by the late
Duke of Weymar shall remain in one Body, as he seemed to desire it by his last
Will and Testament; and that under the Direction of the Officers that have been
nominated.

That the Artillery shall still be Commanded by the same Officers, who had the
Command of it under the late Duke of Weymar, and commonly joined to the German
Body; and that the French Mareschals de Camp, and the Directors of the German
Forces, shall have the Power to give them such Orders as shall be necessary.

That in case (which God forbid) the said Army, or part thereof, should chance
to be ruined by some ill Encounter of War, or other inevitable Accident, the
King promises to grant the Officers extraordinary Means, to recruit the said
Forces, and put themselves in a Condition to continue their Services.

His Majesty also promises, forthwith to pay the Quarter of May, in ready
Money, amounting to 200000 Crowns; to be employed for the Payment of a Muster
for the whole Army: As also, to furnish in good valuable Assignations 600000
Livres more, for the Third Quarter of this present Year, due on the last Day of
September last. Out of which 600000 Livres of the Third Quarter, the Directors
and Officers of the said Army are to employ 300000 Livres to re-mount their
Cavalry, and to put their Forces in a good Condition.

Moreover, His Majesty promises to allow all the Forces, both Horse and Foot,
of which the said Body shall be composed, three Quarters and an half yearly,
according to the Capitulation they had made with the late Duke of Weymar; of
which they shall be obliged immediately to give a Copy to His Majesty's
Deputies: The said Half Muster to be employed by the Officers, for Recruits,
and for the Re-establishment of their Forces; and the three Musters, for the
Payment of the Officers and Soldiers, according to the Reviews that shall be
made of them by the Commissaries and Comptrollers deputed by His Majesty, for
that effect. The first of which Musters is to begin from this present Day, to
be paid on the last Day of December of the present Year; the two others,
Quarterly; and the Half Muster, on the last of September, 1640. and thus
consecutively. The whole shall be paid in weighty Pistoles, at the Rate of four
Rix-Dollers per Pistole, and no more, or in equivalent Money.

His Majesty is also to pay to the General-Officers, and to those of the
Artillery, eight Musters yearly, in the like Species as aforesaid. As for the
Officers of the Carriages, since there are Difficulties in the Maintenance of
Horses, Agreements shall be made with them, suitable to the Times and Reason;
and that, according to the Sallaries allowed them by the late Duke of Weymar: A
Copy of the Capitulations or State of which is also to be immediately delivered
to the said Deputies.

Moreover, His Majesty is also to furnish the Warlike Ammunitions that are
necessary; and to allow all the extraordinary Charges the Army will be at,
being in Action; of which a particular Account is to be given to such Persons
as His Majesty, or the Grand Master of the Artillery of France, shall depute,
in order thereunto, in the said Army.

His said Majesty is also to allow Ammunition-Bread, both to the Foot and
Horse, whether in the Field, or in Garrisons; without deducting any thing for
the same out of the said Musters.

If any of the Officers, Soldiers, or other particular Persons belonging to the
said Army, shall desire His Majesty to gratify them with the Gift of some
Lands and Houses seated in a conquered Country, His Majesty does promise to
make such Gratifications of the same to them, that every one of them shall have
Reason to be satisfied. Moreover, His said Majesty does promise to ratify and
confirm the Gifts of such Lands, Lordships and Houses, seated in the said
Countries and Towns, as may have been made by the late Duke of Weymar, in
favor of the Officers and Soldiers of the said Army, and other particular
Persons that were in his Service.

In Consideration of which, the aforesaid Directors, and other Colonels and
Officers, do promise, in the Name of the whole Army, to continue to serve His
Majesty f^ithfully and constantly, toward, and against all, what O^der or
Command they might receive to the contrary, conformable to what His late
Highness was obliged to do, by his Treaty of the 27th of October, 1635. and to
march with the Army to all such Places and Enterprises as His Majesty shall
desire; either into France, Germany, Burgundy, Lorrain, or the Low Countries,
for the Restoration of the public Liherty, and oppressed States.

Orders shall be given to their Body, by the said Directors, or one of them,
according as they shall agree by the Day, Weekly, or otherwise. Which Orders
they shall first receive from His Highness of Longueville, General of His
Majesty's Armies; as it was done by the late Duke of Weymar, Lieutenant General
du Hallier, and the Vice-Count of Turrinne, and Count Guebriant, Mareschals de
Camp of His Majesty's Armies. The said Directors are to be called into all the
Councils and Resolutions to be taken for the Good and Promotion of the common
Cause, and Restoration of the Confederate Towns and States. The conquered
Places are forthwith to be delivered into His Majesty's Hands, according to the
late Duke of Weymar's last Will and Testament; in order that His Majesty may
place such Governors as he shall think fit in the Cities of Brisac and Friburg,
with Garrisons consisting, one half of French, and the other half of Germans.
And as to the Governors of the other Places, His Majesty is to choose them out
of the Body of the Army; the said Governors and Garrisons taking an Oath, well
and faithfully to serve the King, totowards and against all; to preserve the
Garrisons for his Service, and never to deliver them into any body's hands,
without His Majesty's Leave, and express Order.

The present Articles have been signed by His Majesty's Deputies, by virtue of
the Power given unto them; as also by the Directors of the Army, in the Name of
all the other Officers. The said Deputies have promised to deliver the
Ratifications of the said Treaty in two Months time, reckoning from the Day of
the Date hereof; and the said Directors to take, and oblige all the other
Colonels, Officers, Soldiers and Troopers of the said Army, to take an Oath,
well and faithfully to observe all that is above-written.

Done at Brisac, this 9 th of October, 1639.
A Secret Article.
WE Count de Guebriant, de Choisy, and Baron d'Oysonville, Deputed by His
Majesty, do acknowledge, That notwithstanding, by the Articles this Day signed
between Us, and the Directors of the Army, Commanded by the late Duke of
Weymar, it is said, that the Cities of Brisac and Friburg are to be delivered
into His Majesty's Hands, in order to his placing such Governors in the same as
he shall think fit; nevertheless, the Truth is, that we have agreed that the
King shall give the the Government of the said Places to the same Persons who
had the Command thereof during the Life of the late Duke of W^ymar, and have it
still at this time; the said Governors taking the Oath, as it is set down in
the said Articles. And the more to express the Considence His Majesty reposes
in the Affection and Fidelity of the Colonels and Officers, of which the said
Body is composed, toward his Service, we do promise, That in case His Majesty
shall think sit to change the Governors and Garrisons of the conquered Places,
they shall both be re-implac'd, at his Choice, with Officers and Soldiers, out
of the said Army: As also, That His said Majesty will leave the free Exercise
of the Protestant Religion in all the said Towns and Armies. For all which, the
said Deputies do promise to procure His Majesty's Ratification in the space of
two Months.

Done at Brisac, September. 29. O.S. Or, October. 9. N.S. 1639. Signed, de
Guebriant, de Choisy, Baron d'Oysonville, d'Erlach, Hohem, Nassaw, Roze,
Flerschin, Thomas Rluge, F. M. Remehingen; and others.

The Oath taken by the Officers and Soldiers of the said Army.
WE promise, faithfully, loyally and honorably to serve His most Christian
Majesty, toward and against his Enemies; to march in all Places, either in
Germany, France, Lorrain, or the Low Countries, according as we shall be
commanded by His Highness of Longucville, His said Majesty's General in
Germany: And that in case we should hear any thing against the King's Service,
we will give notice thereof to His said Highness; and all for the Good and
Promotion of the common Cause, and to obtain a good and lasting Peace. And
whereas we do hope that His Majesty will satisfy us, according to the Treaty
of Brisac, for our Services past, and those we will do him: We also expect, in
case of Nonperformance, to be discharged of our Promise.

A Treaty made between the Cardinal-Duke of Richelieu for the King, and the
Duke Charles of Lorrain.
THE real Repentance the Duke Charles of Lorrain has often caused Assurances to
be given of to the King, for the ill Proceedings he has used toward him these
ten or twelve Years last past; the Petition he is come to make in Person to
him, to remit and pardon whatever Despair might have urged him to say or do,
comrary to the Respect he is sensible he owes him; and the Assurance he gives,
that for the future he will be inseparable from all the Interests of this
Crown, have touched His Majesty in so sensible a manner, that he has freely
given way to the Christian Sentiments, and Movements of Grace, God has been
pleased to give him upon that Subject. In Consideration of which, as he
beseeches the Divine Goodness to pardon his Offenses, so he heartily forgives
those he may have received from the said Duke.

And after the said Duke has obliged himself, as he does by the present Treaty
for himself, his Successors, and such as may be concerned, to be for the
future, and during the Course of the War, and in time of Peace, inviolably
linked to the Interest of this Crown; and to hold no Intelligence with those of
the House of Austria, and other Enemies of this State; nor with any whatever,
that would disturb the Happiness and Prosperity of His Majesty's Affairs: Also,
after the said Duke's having renounced all the Treaties he may have made, any
wise contrary to the Tenor of this.

His Majesty consents to restore him the Possession of the Duchy of Lorrain,
and of the Duchy of Bar, held from the Crown; for which he is immediately to
pay Faith and Homage to the King: As also into the Possession of all the
Territories he enjoyed for the time past, excepting such as follow.

First, The County and Town of Clermont, and all their Appurtenances, and
Dependencies; which are to remain for ever united to the Crown.

Secondly, The Garrisons, Provostships and Lands of St^nay, and of Janets; which
are likewise to remain to His Majesty, and his Successors, Kings, for ever, in
Propriety, with all the Revenues thereof, and all the Villages and Territories
thereunto belonging.

Thirdly, The City of Dun, and the Suburbs thereof; which is also to remain in
Propriety to His Majesty, and to his Successors.

Fourthly, The City of Nancy; which is to remain also in His Majesty's Hands,
as a Pledge only during the War, and to be restored to the said Duke the same
Year a Peace shall be concluded, with the Villages within the Liberties of the
said City of Nancy; which are to remain in the Hands and Dispositions of His
Majesty, for the Convenience and Subsistence of the City of Nancy, as long as
it shall remain as a Pledge.

It is agreed, that the Town of Marsal is to be demolished, before it be
delivered to the said Duke; and that no Fortifications are ever to be made
there again.

It is also agreed upon, That Trade shall be as free between the Territories
the King restores to the said Duke, and those that remain to His Majesty,
either in Propriety, or as Pledges only, as if they did actually belong to him:
And that whatever shall be necessary for their Subsistence, shall not be denied
them by the said Duke and his Subjects, at the rate the said Commodities shall
go at in the said Duke's Territories.

Moreover, That the said Duke shall give a free Passage in his Country to all
the Forces His Majesty shall think fit to send that way, either into Alsatia,
or other Parts of Germany, into the Country of Luxemburg, or into the
Franche-Comte; and shall furnish them with Provisions, the King paying for the
same at the common Market-price of the Country.

It has been farther agreed, That the said Duke shall presently join the Forces
he has with him at this time, as well as all those he may have for the future,
with the King's: That they shall take an Oath, well and faithfully to serve His
Majesty, under the said Duke's Authority, toward, and against all those he is
at present in War with, in such places, and in such a manner, as he shall think
fit: And that for the future they shall receive the same Pay in the Field as
His Majesty's do, on Condition, however, that they shall not be allowed to take
Winter Quarters in France, but only in the said Duke's Territories, or Enemies
Country.

It has also been agreed, That the said Duke shall not be allowed to lodge any
of the said Troops nearer than within five Leagues of Nancy, whilst the said
City shall remain as a Pledge.

And whereas, notwithstanding His Majesty's restoring the said Duke's
Tervitories, as abovesaid, there still remain several Differences that were
undecided before the War, in relation to the said Territories, which are still
to be disputed with France, it is agreed, that they shall be determined
amicably, as soon as can be.

Moreover, Whereas since His Majesty's having conquered Lorrain by Force of
Arms, a great Number of the Subjects of the said Duchy have served His
Majesty, after having taken the Oath of Allegiance he has exacted from them, it
is also agreed, that the said Duke shall bear them no Ill Will for the same;
but on the contrary, shall use them like his good and real Subjects, and shall
pay them the Debts and Rents the State is obliged to pay. Which His Majesty
desires so particularly, that unless he had reposed an absolute Confidence in
the Faith which the said Duke has engaged on that Subject, he would never have
granted what he does by this Treaty, to the said Duke.

It is also agreed, That it shall not be in the power of the said Duke to make
the least Alterations in the Benefices given by His Majesty, to the very Day of
this present Treaty: That those who have been invested with them, shall remain
in the peaceable Possession and Enjoyment thereof, without the least
Disturbance or Trouble from the said Duke, or being dis-possess'd of the same:
And that His Majesty shall continue to have the Disposition of the Benefices of
the City of Nancy, as long as the said City remains for a Pledge in his hands;
without changing the Settlement of the said Benefices. And as for the Offices
of the Criminal Justice, that are in the said City of Nancy, they shall also
remain in His Majesty's Gift, to the end that such as are invested with the
same, may perform the Function thereof independently within the said City, and
the Liberties thereof: His Majesty giving his Consent to the said Duke to
transferr the Bayliwick of Nancy, into such a place as he shall think fit,
there to decide all the Differences, which were formerly judged in the said
Court of Justice of Nancy; excepting only such as are above specified.

It is also agreed, That the said Duke shall not be allowed to send any Person
into Nancy, there to reside in his Name, unless it be to receive the Duties of
his Demesne, for which he shall be obliged to employ a Frenchman, approved by
the King.

It is moreover agreed, That the Consiscations that have been given by His
Majesty, of the Estates of such as did bear Arms against him, shall remain
valid, as to the Employment of the Revenues of the said Estates, until the Day
of the present Treaty; provided those whose Estates have been confiscated, quit
the Service of His Majesty's Enemies: In which Case, they shall be restored to
the Possession and Enjoyment of their Estates; but without being allowed to
profecute or trouble those who have enjoyed them by virtue of the said Gifts in
any manner, or upon any pretense whatever.

No mention is made in this Treaty, of the Difference between the said Duke,
and the Duchess Nicolla of Lorrain, Daughter to the late Duke Henry, about
their Marriage; by reason that the Decision thereof belongs only to the
Ecclesiastical Tribunal; and that His Holiness, before whom the Parties have
brought their Cause, will do them Right, according to the Justice of the same.
In the mean time, the said Duke is to allow her, by way of Pension, 120000
Livres, in French Money, yearly. And in order to make the said Payment
effective, it is agreed, that the said Sum of 120000 Livres shall be taken
Quarterly, out of the Receipt of Bar; and in case that should not suffice, out
of the Salt Pits of Roziers, and the Demesne of Nuncy: And the said Sum is to
be deposited into the hands of such a Person as shall be nominated by His
Majesty, to be delivered to the said Duchess Nicolla of Lorrain.

The Contents above-written have been agreed upon between the Cardinal Duke of
Richelieu for the King, and the said Duke; who promises to perform whatever is
contained in the said Treaty, with so much Fidelity and Steadiness, that he
consents, besides what he leaves His Majesty by the same, in order to remain
inseparably united to the Crown, that all the Remainder of his Territories
which His Majesty does restore, and is to restore after the Peace, may devolve
to the said Crown, in case he does any wise deviate from the Tenor of this
present Treaty.

Done at Paris, March 9. 1641. Signed, The Cardinal of Richlieu, and Charles of
Lorrain. And Lower, John le Molleur. And Signed with the Small Seal of the Arms
of the said Duke Charks of Lorrain.

Secret Articles passed between the Cardinal Duke of Richelieu, and the Duke
Charles of Lorrain, to be of equal Force with the Treaty passed the same Day
between them.
ALthough it be not said by the Treaty passed this Day, between the Cardinal
Duke of Richelleu for the King, and the Duke of Lorrain, that the
Fortifications of the Cities of Nancy are to be rased, before the said Cities
are restored into the said Duke's Hands, after the Peace; nevertheless, this
present Article has been passed, to justify, that His Majesty does not design
to restore the said Cities to the said Duke, until the Fortifications thereof
are demolished; and that notwithstanding the said Duke has made humble
Supplication to His Majesty not to do it, however, he submits the Matter wholly
to His Majesty, to do therein as he shall think fit.

And whereas nothing but Time can absolutely restore the Confidence His Majesty
did repose in the said Duke, and which his Deportments toward him have made
him lose, it has been farther agreed, That whenever the said Duke shall be
absent from His Majesty, or out of his Armies, by his Order, he is not to live
at Luneville, because it is too near Nancy; and that whatever part of his
Territories he shall make his Abode in, he is to behave himself in such a
manner, that those who shall Command in the Places that are to remain in
Propriety, or as Pledges into His Majesty's Hands, may have no Cause to
conceive the least leasousies thereof.

It has also been agreed, That the said Duke shall yearly furnish, out of his
Forests, such Quantities of Wood, as are necessary for the Fires of all the
Corpse du Guard of Nancy, for His Majesty.

The Premises have been concluded between the Cardinal Duke of Richelieu for
the King, and the said Duke; who promises to perform them with so much
Fidelity, that he consents, besides what he yields by the Treaty passed this
Day with His Majesty, to remain for ever insepatably annexed to the Crown, that
all the Remainder of his State, which His Majesty does restore, and is to
restore unto him after the Peace, shall devolve to the Crown, in case he shall
any wise swerve from the Tenor of these present Secret Articles.

Done at Paris, March 29. 1641. Thus Signed, The Cardinal Richelieu and Charles
of Lorrain, And Lower, John le Molleur. And Signed with the Small Seal of the
Arms of the said Duke Charles of Lorrain.

The Act, or Form of the Oath taken by the Duke Charles of Lorrain, for the
Observation of the abovesaid Treaty, in His Majesty's Presence, in the Chapel
of the Castle of St. Germain en Lay.
THis present Tuesday, being the 10th of April, 1641. in the Presence of the
most High, most Excellent, and most Puissant Prince, Lewis, by the Grace of
God, King of France and Navarre, being in the Chapel of his Castle, and Royal
House of St. Germain en Lay, after the solemn Performance of His Majesty's
Vespers; We Charles, by the Grace of God, Duke of Lorrain, Marquis, Duke of
Calabria, Bar, Gueldres, etc. having Assisted at the said Vespers, have Taken
the Oath of the Observation of the Treaty concluded between the Cardinal Duke
of Richelieu, Peer of France, in His Majesty's Name, and Us, the 29th of March
last past: The Tenor of which Oath is as follows.

WE Charles, by the Grace of God, Duke of Lorrain, Marquis, Duke of Calabria,
Bar, Gueldre, etc. do Swear and Promise, by the Faith and Word of a Prince,
upon the holy Gospels of God, and the Canons of the Mass, by Us Touched in
order thereunto, that We will Observe and Perform, cause to be Observed and
Performed, fully and really, and Bona fide, all and every Points and Articles
granted and mentioned in the Treaty cencluded and agreed upon the same day,
between the Cardinal Duke of Richelieu, Peer of France, in the Name of the most
High, most Excellent, and most Puissant Prince, Lewis, by the Grace of God,
King of France, and of Navarre, and Us; without ever swerving from the same
directly or indirectly, or suffering the same to be swerved from on Our side,
in any manner whatever.

And so help Us God. In Witness whereof, We have signed these Presents with Our
own Hand, and have caused Our Seal to be fixed to the same,
in the Chapel of the Castle and Royal House of St. Germain en Lay, this 19th
of April, 1641.
WHich said Oath was taken in the Presence of the most High, most Excellent,
and most Potent Princess, Anne, by the Grace of God, Queen of France and
Navarre, Royal Consort to His said Majesty; as also, before the Cardinal Duke
of Richelieu, the Duke of Longueville, the Duke of Chevreuse, Our Cousin;
Monsieur Seguier, Lord Chancellor of France; the Dukes d'Usez, and of
Vandatour; of Monbason, and of la Force of Chastillon, Marshall of France; of
Cinq Mars, Master of the Horse; Boutillier, Super-Intendent of the Finances;
Phellipeaux de la Vrilliere, Boutillier de Chavigny, and Sublet de Noyers,
Secretaries of State; the Bishop of Meaux, First Almoner to His Majesty,
holding the Book of the holy Gospels, and Canon of the Mass, on which We held
Our Hands, in the Presence of Belmont, Sinri, Count Ligneville, and Berup,
Colonels of Our Forces.

In Witness whereof, We have signed these Presents with Our Hand, and have
caused Our Seal to be affixed to the same on the Year and Day above-written.
Thus Signed, CHARLES. And Lower, Le Molleur And Sealed with the Arms of the
said Duke.

The Act of the Ratification made in the City of Bar, by the Duke Charles of
Lorrain, of the Treaty above-written, and of the Secret Articles.
CHarles, by the Grace of God, Duke of Lorrain, Marquis, Duke of Calabria, Bar,
Gueldres, etc.
To all whom these Presents shall see, Greeting,
Finding Our Self at present in Our Territories, which His Majesty has been
pleased to restore unto Us, according to a Treaty made and concluded at Paris,
on the 29th of March last past; agreed on between His Majesty, by the Cardinal
Duke of Richelieu, having a full Power from him, and Us; We declare, That
having all the Reason imaginable to praise His Majesty's Goodness and
Generosity toward Us, who in the midst of the Prosperity of his Arms, and of
the good Successes it has pleased God to bless him with on all sides, has been
pleased to use Us favorably, Our Intention is, to make him all the Returns of
Gratitude and Acknowledgment We are capable of; and in the mean time, as soon
as We have found Our Self in Our said Territories, among Our good Servants and
Subjects, We have thought fit to Ratisie; as by these Presents We do Ratify,
Agree unto, and Approve the aforesaid Treaty, together with the Secret
Articles, Concluded and Agreed on the same Day, between the Cardinal Duke of
Richelieu, in His Majesty's Name, and Us, according as We have signed and sworn
the whole. Promising moreover, on the Word and Faith of a Prince, as We did
solemnly do on the 2d of April last, to execute, keep, and inviolably maintain
the said Treaty and Secret Articles, according to their Form and Tenor,
without deviating, or suffering the same to be deviated from, on Our part, in
any manner whatever.

In Witness whereof, We have signed these Presents with Our Hand, and have
caused Our Great Seal to be affixed to the same at Bar, the 21th of April,
1641. Thus Signed, CHARLES And upon the Fold, By His Highness's Command, John
le Molleur. And Sealed with the Great Seal of the said Duke, of Red Wax, upon a
double Label.

The Act, or Form, of the Oath taken by the Duke Charles of Lorrain, in the
City of Bar, for the Observation of the Treaty above-written, and of the Secret
Articles.
WE Charles, by the Grace of God, Duke of Lorrain, Marquis, Duke of Calabria,
Bar, Gueldres, etc. do Swear and Promise, on the Faith and Word of a Prince,
upon the Holy Evangelisis, and Canons of the Church, by Us Touched in order
thereunto, that We will Observe and Perform, cause to be Observed and
Performed, fully, really, and Bona fide, all and singular the Points and
Articles granted and set down in the Treaty concluded and agreed on at Paris
the 29th of March last past, together with the Secret Articles also concluded
and agreed on the same Day, between the Cardinal of Richelieu, Peer of France,
in the Name of the most High, most Excellent, and most Puissant Prince, Lewis,
by the Grace of God, King of France and of Navarre, and Us; without ever
deviating from the same directly or indirectly, or suffering the same to be
deviated from on Our part, in any manner whatever:

So help Us God.

In Witness whereof, We have signed these Presents with Our own Hand, and have
caused Our Seal to be affixed to the same, in the Chapel and Royal House of St.
Germain en Lay, the 2d of April, 1641. The which We have since Ratified by
these Presents, in Our City of Bar, the 29th Day of the said Month and Year.
Signed, CHARLES of Lorrain, And upon the Fold, By His Highness's Command, John
le Molleur. And Sealed with the said Duke's Great Seal, of Red W^x, upon a
double Label.

Memorial, sent in August, M. DC. XL. to Count Harcourt.
IT is difficult to give just Measures about the Propositions of Prince Thomas,
because it is most certain, that unless he be reduced to the utmost Extremity,
he will propose nothing but in order to deceive; and that in case he be reduced
so to do, he can make none equal to the Advantages that may be derived by
taking him Prisoner.

Prince Thomas cannot be desirous of staying in Turin, with the Duchess of
Savoy, with any Design, but to deceive her; and to take, under pretense of an
Accommodation, to the prejudice of his Nephew, the same Advantages in his
Territories, which he did pretend to by force.

Therefore whatever Treaty supposes the staying of Prince Thomas in the same
place with the Duchess of Savoy, is not only to be looked on as suspicious,
but is to be absolutely rejected.

It behooves those who are upon the Spot to keep their Eyes and ears equally
open, to penetrate as much as can be into the Miseries of the City of Turin,
and to hearken to the Propositions that the Prince will make to them; which as
soon as we are acquainted with, they will know the King's pleasure.

If Prince Thomas has a good Intention, the Extremity to which he is reduced,
and the Incapacity the Spaniards have been in to assist him, discharge him
sufficiently, both before God and Men, without his being obliged to use any
other pretense to quit their Party.

His Father and his Brother's Prudence has made them do the same out of reason,
with less cause: And when he seems to require nothing but an apparent reason to
retire, he only endeavors to conceal his Ill Will; which is the more evident,
in that he is unwilling to believe he has a lawful cause to withdraw from the
Spaniards; unless he settles his affairs on the ruins of the Duchess, and of
her Son, as he would do for his own advantage.

The Spaniards not having been able to succor him, he may honorably take the
party of France, and of his own Nephew; the King declaring, that he only keeps
the Garrisons he is in possession of, for his said Nephew, and for himself in
case the Succession thereof should lawfully devolve to him; and that he will
most certainly deliver them into his said Nephew's hands whenever he shall be
of Age, and in a condition to preserve them; or to the Cardinal, his Brother;
or to himself, in case that young Prince should chance to die; he has all the
reason in the world to be satisfied.

In case His Majesty should likewise think sit to restore his Pensions to him,
to give one to his Son, and one to the Princess of Carignan, and to entreat the
Duchess of Savoy, to add to the Portion of the said Prince; if, moreover, he
should be willing to employ him in some of his Armies; things that may be done,
and that may be promised to him; he will not only find with the King all the
means that are necessary to quit the Engagement he is in with Honor, but also
all the useful ones he can reasonably desire.

In case he should also require an immediate Proposition to be made by the
King, to the Spaniards, for the restitution of all the places they are in
possession of in Piedmont since the late War, on condition that His Majesty
will do the same; Answer must be made, That the King agrees to this Article,
and will make his Declaration of it after the Treaty; desiring nothing more,
than to find the means to secure all the Garrisons to the Duke of Savoy, in such
a manner as no Inconveniences may arise thereby. But that whereas Prince
Thomas says, he had rather die, than make a Treaty by which his Honor might be
wounded; so likewise the King can no wise consent to have that Article put into
the Treaty, of the Surrender of Turin, since it would look as if the said City
were rather yielded to him on that Consideration, than by the Force of his Arms.

The Declaration the King will make on that Account, is a sufficient Security
to satisfy the Princes, without being obliged to have Recourse to the
Interposition of the Pope, and of the Venetians.

Nevertheless, the King may do an equivalent thing, writing to His Holiness,
and to the Venetians, that he engages for the Restoration of the said places,
on the Conditions above specified.

The King moreover condescends, that the Pope and the Venetians should
interpose in the said Treaty after its being made, if they will engage to take
Arms for the King in case the Princes of Savoy, or one of them, breaking their
Word, should return to the Spanish side.

Besides, If they should require Nice to be put into the Cardinal's Hands for
the space of six Months, during which the said Interposition may be managed, it
shall be granted, provided, as soon as ever the Treaty is made, they put Coni
into the hands of the Duchess of Savoy again, and that Prince Thomas engages
himself into the Party of France, and comes actually to serve there upon the
Account of the good Treatment that is offered to him, and of all the Securities
in writing, he can desire from the King, for the Performance thereof.

In case the said Prince says, That before his coming into France, he must
contrive to get his Wife and Children out of Spain by Cunning; it is another
Blind, to conceal his desire of remaining in the Interest of Spain.

In a word, If the lawful Causes he has to quit the Spaniards cannot oblige him
to do it openly, one must be blind not to see that he persists in the
Resolution to ruin his Nephew; and that his Animosities against France, because
it is the only Power that can maintain him, is unspeakable: And if it be in his
Nature to suffer his Nephew's Reign, he has but too much cause to forsake the
party of those that seek his ruin, for the ill Treatments he has received from
them, and more than enough to side with France, that will save him, for the
advantages they offer him.

This is all that can be said at this time to Count Harcourt: Whereupon, he is
to take his Measures according to his Instruction of the 28th of May, and this
present Dispatch. Giving a speedy Account of all Transactions, he will receive
an immediate Answer.

Instruction, or Power, to the Sieur de Ville, May the 12th, 1639.
SUpposing the Repentance, and the Satisfactions Duke Charles is willing to
give the King, and that he will sincerely join himself to his Interest, and to
that of France, with all the Forces he can get, as he has often given His
Majesty Assurances that he would do, by the said Sieur de Ville, as well as by
several others, with all the freedom imaginable; His Majesty, through his
innate Goodness, may be inclined to one of the following Propositions.

Either to be contented with the Country of Bar, and the Towns of La Motte and
Marsal, the County and Town of Clermont, of Stenay, and Jamets, for ever, in
propriety, with the Liberties of the said places; and Nancy as a Pledge for Ten
Years after the Peace; after which time, the said City is to be returned to the
said Duke, all the Fortifications being first demolished.

Or if the said Duke had rather leave Nancy in propriety to the King for ever,
His Majesty will give him back the Country of Bar, with the remainder of his
Territories, the Towns and places abovementioned excepted.

And whereas, notwithstanding the King's putting the said Duke in possession of
his Country again, the same Differences they had together before the War, and
which Monsieur le Bret was employed about at that time, are still to be decided
with France, His Majesty promises to adjust them so reasonably, within six
Months after the Agreement, that the said Duke shall have reason to be
satisfied.

In the next place, Monsieur de Ville is to represent two things to the Duke of
Lorrain, as being most certain.

The First is, That by a general Agreement, the King will never yield to any
Conditions so advantageous for the said Duke, as those that are contained in
the present Memorial; the which he may the more easily conceive, by reason that
His Majesty will follow the same Method with all his Allies, who are desirous
to keep what they have conquered.

The Second, That by (...) particular Treaty, His Majesty will never yield more
to the said Duke Charles, than what is above specified.

This requires a speedy Answer, attended at the same time with Performances.

Safe Conduct for the Duke Charles.
THE King being informed by the Sieur de la Grangeaux-Ormes, of the great
desire the Duke Charles of Lorrain has to put himself into His Majesty's Favor
again, he is willing to receive him into the same, after having adjusted
several Points that are to be agreed upon beforehand on that Subject: To which
end, if the said Duke is willing to repair to some place about Langres, to
confer with such Persons as His Majesty shall think fit to appoint there, he
promises by the Faith and Word of a King, that the said Duke may come thither,
tarry there, and go back again with all manner of Safety, whether any thing be
concluded there with him, or no, together with all those he shall bring along
with him. In order whereunto His Majesty enjoins the Lieutenants-General of his
Armies and Provinces, Mareschals de Camp, Colonels, Chiefs, and Leaders of his
Soldiers, whether French or Foreigners, to let the said Duke, and all those
that shall come along with him, going toward the said Town of Langres, freely
pass, and repass, going back again, without the least Trouble, Hindrance or
Molestation.

Given at St. Menehoud, the 14th of August, 1693.
Memorial to the Sieur de la Grange-aux-Ormes.
THE said la Grange having acquainted the King with the fresh Trouble the Duke
Charles of Lorrain is in for being out of His Majesty's Favor, and his Desire
of being restored to the same again, His Majesty is willing to permit the said
Sieur de la Grange to go back to the said Duke Charles of Lorrain, to assure
him, that if he be in the Condition and Disposition he has sent him word, he
will freely forget his Behavior for the time past, and receive him into his
Favor again; giving him all manner of Security, from this very Moment, to
confer with the Lord Cardinal of Richelieu, near Langres.

Done at St. Menehoud, the 14th of August, 1639.
Memorial for Monsieur du Hallier.
IMmediately after having seen the Dispatch of Monsieur du Hallier, and the
Credentials of the Sieur Vitelle from the Duke Charles, this Gentleman is sent
to him with all speed, to acquaint him with the King's Intentions.

His Majesty is very willing that the Sieur de la Grange-aux-Ormes should no
longer be concerned in this Affair, having only sent him to the Duke Charles,
because he himself had desired it; which is justified by a Letter of his.

The King approves du Hallier's proceeding, in giving a Pass to the Duke
Charles, to go to, and tarry in safety at St. Avan; His Majesty supposing his
Intention to be good, and that he will treat sincerely, is willing that the
Sieur du Hallier should give him a fresh Security, the most ample, and in the
best Form that can be made, to abide at Espinal, or Remiremont, in order to
make his Treaty with more Convenience.

And whereas he is desirous a Commission should be given to adjust it, to some
Person of Quality, on whom the King reposes a Confidence, His Majesty has cast
his Eyes upon the said Sieur du Hallier to that end; assuring himself, that he
will discharge his Trust with all the Address and Prudence required.

Such a Treaty as the King can make, is sent to the said du Hallier; he must
endeavor to make Duke Charles agree to it, without Modification; and however,
is to insist upon it in such a manner as may not disgust him: And if he finds
that he cannot absolutely prevail with him to accept it, by disputing the
Articles, he must, if possible, oblige the said Duke to demand the things
mentioned in the Modifications, in order to conclude it the sooner, and that
there may be the less difficulty when the said Duke shall be possessed that
those things are granted to him which he desires.

Instructions for the same.
THE Treaty may be softened in two Points.

The First, in leaving him the Country of Bar, not to deprive him of his
Revenue: Which Monsieur du Hallier is to make him sensible of, as of a great
and singular Favor.

The Second, In shortning the Deposition of Nancy into the King's hands, for
the term of three Years after the Peace.

If he should require the Price of the County of Clermont, as it was stipulated
by the Treaty made with him before the War, it must be represented to him, That
having put himself out of the Bounds of that Treaty, by the Breach he made with
the King, he can no longer require the Execution of it. That the War has
altered all things; and that he ought to look upon it as a great Favor, that
the King should return him what he is willing to restore, without asking for
more.

He must add to this, That if the King should demand the Charges of the War, in
returning his Country to him, which he might lawfully do, and is generally
done, they would amount to more than the Price of the State it self.

In case the said Duke should demand a Strong Hold for the place of his
Residence, it must be represented to him, That the King neither can, nor ought
in reason to hearken to such a Proposition, since it would be a means to enable
him anew to revolt against His Majesty, in case he were minded so to do; for
then the King could have no Security beyond his Word, which he cannot look upon
as inviolable, but by a long Experience, considering what is past.

Nevertheless, if he should insist very much upon having la Motte, the only
place to the Restitution of which His Majesty could consent, Monsieur du
Hallier may give him his Choice, to have the said Town again after the War, if
he will consent, by the present Treaty, to leave the Country of Bar in
propriety to the King.

In that Case, the Fourth Article, about the Country of Bar, must remain as it
is set down in the Treaty, putting la Motte out of the beginning of the Fifth
Article, of the places that are to remain in the King's hands; adding after
those Words of the Seventh Article, Unless the said Duke had rather tarry for
the Restitution of the said Places till after the Settlement of a general
Peace, that which follows, Which is particularly agreed upon about the Town of
La Motte, which His Majesty is willing to restore to the said Duke, in order
one day to reside safely in the same; but that is only to be delivered to him
three Years after the Conclusion of the Peace.

Monsieur du Hallier is not to acquaint the Duke with the Particulars of this
Treaty by the Interposition of any Person, but by Word of Mouth; since it will
be much easier for him to prevail with the said Duke personally, than by the
Interposition of any one whatever. And though the said Duke should swear and
protest not to pass certain things, Monsieur du Hallier is not to desist for
that; it being the said Duke's Custom to return from one Extremity to another,
whatever Protestation he has made to the contrary.

It is thought necessary to choose a Newter Place to pass this Treaty, as
Remiremont, or Espinal, or some adjacent place in the Country, where Monsieur
du Hallier is to take care not to go without Safety.

In order to satisfy all the World of the Truth of this Treaty, when it is
made, the said Duke is to come to the King. However, in case he should refuse
to do it so soon, Monsieur du Hallier is not to break off with him for that.
But I am confident that he will make no difficulty about it, upon the Faith of
the Treaty, and the Pass that is sent him; together with all the Assurances
Monsieur du Hallier is to give him, that he will be served and assisted at
Court by my Lord the Cardinal.

If the said Duke represents the extreme Necessity to which he is reduced,
Monsieur du Hallier may grant him 50000 Crowns once paid; which he will receive
when he comes to wait upon the King.

Monsieur du Hallier is to make no difficulty of promising that the Fault
committed by de Ville, in making his Escape, contrary to his Faith, will be
pardoned by the King; and that he will look upon him, as if it had never
happened.

His Eminency writes a Letter to Monsieur du Hallier, in order to his showing
it to the Duke Charles, as from himself.

The Treaty must be delivered to Monsieur du Hallier, counter-sign'd by the
Duke's Secretary officiating at this time, and sealed with his Seal.

Memorial of Cardinal de Richelieu, to Monsieur du Hallier.
From Briare, the First of November, 1639.
THE little Trust that can be reposed in the Duke of Lorrain, makes it very
difficult to make any Treaty with him, without running the hazard of being
deceived in it.

This Consideration will oblige Monsieur du Hallier to take a particular Care
to follow all the Expressions of the Treaty that is sent to him most
religiously, without making any Alterations, because this Prince is captious,
and that it is certainly known that he has not the Intentions he ought to have.

It is moreover known, that he has given an Account of the Overtures of the
Treaty he is about, to the Cardinal Infant; saying, That he is courted to it
against his Will; and that far greater Offers are made him, than the Conditions
the King is willing to grant him.

The said Duke has also communicated this Treaty to all the Princes of Germany,
and particularly to those of Bavaria and Cologne, with the same Suppositions he
has sent into Flanders.

It will be proper to let him know that we are acquainted with all his
Artifices and Levities; and that such a manner of proceeding does almost break
off all manner of Treaty, since he has nothing on his side to give the King,
but his Fidelity, which he does not approve.

Nevertheless, in order to give Monsieur du Hallier means to conclude a Treaty,
if there be any hopes to make a good one, the King has been pleased once more
to answer the three new Demands made by Videl, in the Duke Charles's Name; and
to give the said du Hallier means to satisfy the said Duke, if he be capable
of acknowledging a Courtesy; which he grants him, beyond what he could expect
in Reason.

The said Duke demands the Title of Sovereign in the Treaty: That a Garrison may
be given him immediately in Lorrain: And that those Garrisons the King is to
keep in the places that are to remain in his possession may not be paid out of
the Revenues of Lorrain.

It is thought, that by the first of these three Demands, Duke Charles intends
to oblige the King to decide the Salique Law, pretended in Lorrain, in favor
of him; which His Majesty cannot do, without enquiring farther into the matter;
especially, with a Person who is not as yet reconciled with him. But to show
the King's Goodness, he is willing, that, in the Third Article of the Project
of the Treaty which Monsieur du Hallier has in his hands, instead of these
words, Thus the Duke shall be restored to the Possession of the Dut^y of
Lorrain, these may be inserted, That he shall be restored to the Possession of
the Soverignty of the Duchy of Lorrain.

As to the Garrison he desires, were the King persuaded that he had a mind to
treat sincerely, he would condescend to it; but it is impossible to resolve on
it, without that Assurance: It Is the said Duke's part to give us such an one.

I am of opinion that such an one might be had, by incerting a Clause in the
Treaty, by which the Duke may show that he is willing to deprive himself of the
Means of failing.

The said Clause ought to be as follows:

As to the City of La Motte, His Majesty being moved by the earnest Entreaty
the said Duke has made to him, to have the said City delivered into his hands,
in order to his being the better able to execute what he promises by the
present Treaty, since it will put him in a Condition not to fear those, whose
Ill Will he will incur by making this Engagement, His said Majesty has been
pleased to grant it; the said Duke consenting freely, that in case he should
make an ill Use of this Advantage, by violating the present Treaty, (which he
will be the better able to execute, having a safe Retreat,) His Majesty should
make him resent the Effects of his Indignation, attacking his Territories anew,
and preserving to Perpetuity whatever he shall take there by Force of Arms.
Though this Clause seems to give some Assurance, the Experience of what is
past, which has shown that nothing can hinder the said Duke Charles from
following his Passions whenever he is moved by them, makes us sensible that
this Pre-caution is not sufficient to venture to put a strong Place into the
hands of a Prince, who may chance to do a great deal of Mischief with it during
the War.

Nevertheless, If, after having seen the said Duke, Monsieur du Hallier thinks
that there is more Sincerity in his proceeding than before, His Majesty will
run that hazard, to promote a Peace.

As to the Payment of the Garrisons, the King restoring the said Duke to the
Possession of his Territories, out of his extraordinary Goodness, His Majesty
has no Thoughts of reserving any thing to himself there, besides the places
mentioned in the said Treaty, with the Liberties thereof; insomuch that in case
the said Duke immediately passes the Treaty, coming between this and the Month
of January, to pay his Respects to the King, he shall begin to enjoy his
Territories on the very beginning of the next Year.

It will be Monsieur du Hallier's part to decide the Liberties of the said
Towns very advantageously for the King.

There will be no need of mentioning the Liberties of Clermont, since the
County is to remain in the King's Hands, as well as the Town.

The King desires the said du Hallier to cause a Map to be made of all the
Country round about the said Places, in which the Liberties of the same are to
be particularly noted, according as he shall think they ought to be, and so
send the same to His Majesty, who will acquaint him with his Pleasure therein.

Thus Monsieur du Hallier may acquaint the Duke of Lorrain; That in treating
with him, he will treat as with a Sovereign; and that he does not doubt, in
case the said Duke behaves himself toward His Majesty as he ought to do, that
he will pay the Garrisons of the Towns that are to remain in his hands. In a
word, That he is persuaded, that when he sees him, if he knows how to deserve
His Majesty's Favor, he will be able to give him Satisfaction: But that he
cannot explain himself farther, without having seen the Disposition he is in,
and known the Security he is willing to give His Majesty of his Fidelity.
Moreover, Whenever the said du Hallier sees the Duke, it will suit with his
Prudence to behave himself in such a manner, that in case the said Duke be not
in a Condition to perform his Duty freely toward the King, he may not be able
to say, That he has been willing to restore La Motte to him immediately.

Monsieur du Hallier is to let him make the Proposition about it, saying, that
he has no Order to grant it, and that he does not believe the King will do it;
but that he will propose it to His Majesty: And if he finds all things agreed
on excepting that Point, he is to promise to give him an Answer in seven or
eight Days time; and to dispatch a Courier to St. Germain, where the King will
be.

Memorial of Cardinal de Richelieu, to Monsieur du Hallier.
From Paris, this 20 th of November.
THE diverse Circumstances of Duke Charles's proceeding, who sends to Monsieur
du Hallier upon a slight Pretense, being joined to the Advice we have of an
Attempt he makes upon Nancy, show clearly, that the first End of the several
Journeys and Messages he sends to Monsieur du Hallier, is his Enterprise.

It is impossible to know whether the said Duke intends to treat freely with
the King, in case his Enterprise should fail: But it is certain that he will
never come to the Conclusion of any Treaty while that is on foot, by reason
that the Success of such a Design is, in his Imagination, much more
advantageous than any Treaty he can make.

Upon this Foundation, which is to be held infallible, in my Opinion, the first
thing to be done, is, to break the said Duke's Design upon Nancy: Which may be
done two several Ways:

The First is, By discovering the said Enterprise, if possible; and by
punishing those severely, who shall be convicted of having a hand in the same.

The Second is, In case we cannot discover the particular Circumstances of the
Treason that is projected, that Monsieur du Hallier must plainly acquaint the
said Duke Charles, that he knows his Design, that he ought to be ashamed to
answer the King's good Will toward him by such an Action as that he is
projecting: That having such a Design, he desires him no longer to send any
body toward him, nor any longer to harbor any Thoughts, out of Gratitude for
the Zeal he had to serve him in the King's Service, to make him forfeit his
Life and Honor.

At the same time Monsieur du Hallier is to banish from Nancy all suspected
Persons, without sparing Women, by whose Means one may often insinuate ones
self into Men's Minds; and to remove out of the Garrison all such as he is any
wise jealous of; and finally, to provide against the Duke's evil Designs, by
all manner of Means.

This Proceeding will be so far from spoiling any thing, that, on the contrary,
if the Duke has a Mind to treat, it will put him in a way to do it; and if he
intends no such thing, it will soon appear.

If he has a real Intention to agree in case his Enterprise fails, the
Discovery that will be made to him by Monsieur du Hallier, of his evil
Projects, will not hinder him from prosecuting the good ones; Nothing hinders a
Man from pursuing his Good, when he expects a good Success by his Negotiations.
You must be careful to discover whether the said D. Charles has any Forces
within ten Leagues of Nancy, which he might assemble on a sudden. You must know
where Monsicur de Ville is.
and if he makes no farther Instance about it, it will be a manifest Sign that
he had nothing but Treason in his Mind.

Therefore I am of Opinion, that nothing can be better than to act as
abovesaid. After which, it will behove Monsieur du Hallier to have a strict Eye
over Duke Charles's Actions, and those of his Adherents.

As to the Treaty, I think there will be no need to break the Course of it, in
case the Duke has a Mind to continue it after what shall be written to him; and
for the present, I do not see that any thing can be done in the same, but to
remain in deliberatis.

In the mean time, I am of Opinion that it will not be amiss to acquaint the
Duchess of Lorrain, that the Duke has made new Applications to the King upon
that Subject, in order thereby to put her in a Way to enter on some good
Overture, if she be capable of it; as the Words she has sent by Monsieur de
Chanvalou seem to insinuate that she designs.

Monsieur du Hallier is in no wise to suffer any Stranger to come into the
Town, unless he be known to him; and much less any one belonging to the Duke
Charles. This is the King's Pleasure.

FINIS.

