A VINDICATION, OF THE REFORMED RELIGION, From the Reflections of a ROMANIST:

Written for Information of all, who will receive the Truth in Love.

By WILLIAM RAIT Minister of the Gospel at DUNDIE.

2 Cor. 13. 8. We can do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth.
Cyprianus ad Pompeium epist. 74. Quae ista obstinatio est, quave praesumptio,
humanam traditionem divinae dispositioni anteponere, net animadvertere,
indignari and irasci Deam, quoties divina pracepta soluit and praeterit humana
traditio? Sine causa colunt me, mandata and doctrinas hominum docentes.
ABERDENE, Printed by JOHN FORBES Younger, Printer to the Town and University,
dwelling on the Mercat-place, 1671.

To the truly Honorable, and really Religious, The Lord of HALGREEN Elder,
Grace and Peace be multiplied.
SIR,
The great work of a Christian in the world, is to prefer Heaven to Barth, the
law of the Lord to the law of sin, Gospel concernments to all earthly
interests, when the one comes in competition wi^^* or opposition to the other.
The first fall of man, as the schoo^ terms it, was Aversio a Deo, and
conversio ad creaturam. A turning from God to the creature. Then sin obtained
precedencie to Grace, folly to Wisdom, lust to the law of God. Our health and
safety comes in, by recoverie and cure, our victory by a reserve: therefore
God sent his Son into the world, with the Gospel remedy, to turn us from
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, Titus 2. 12. to wean us from the inordinate
love of the substance, and shadows of the world. 1. John 2. 15. to espouse
our love to himself, that we may be presented as a chaste Virgin to Christ, 2
Cor 11. 2. For this we pray, we preach, we l^bour, we make use of Ordinances,
and go about every duty. This is the scope and course of a Christian, and
whatever, hinders this design is not to be approved by him. Wood, hay, stuble,
is not a Gospel cure. Pure Religion and undefiled, can only better the heart,
mortify corruption, subdue the body of death, subject the whole man to the
soveraignety of Jesus Christ, mend the world, and make men live holily,
righteously and soberly. When this salve was rightly applied in the primitive
Church. O how wonderfully did the Lord bless the cure, and proved the medicine
to be good by great success. How were men bound to their duty, by the awe and
love of GOD on their hearts: that the very Heathens and Jews ^^eto amused and
forced to give testimony to the doctrine, that it was of GOD. But when men
afterward did begin to mix the wine with water, and handle the word of GOD
deceitfully: They then became lovers of pleasure more then lovers of GOD* then
fell they in dotage with the pomp and pride of the world. Which disease did
break forth notoriously first at Rome, thence it spread and infected many
Churches (Vrbs rea stagitiies, urbs le^^i causa putanda es. Vrbs fera, Tibrinae
cui famulantur aquae.) As heathen Rome usurped dominion, so Rome now being
animated by the Pope, and his Accomplices taking advantage by the division of
Princes, and increasing her wealth by their wrack, like some who live near the
Sea, as if there had been no law of Christ, to deny our selves take up our
cross and follow him, turned the Gospel-sim^^^citi^ into state policy, and the
Ppoe degenerating from the ^hristian carriage of primitive fathers, sought
secular greatness chiefly, put on a triple Crown, followed the pomp of the
world. And all this is done under the name of Christ, pretense of Religion, and
in ordine ad spiritualia, which makes the sin more sinful, and their way
irreconcilable with the dog^atick says of a Christian who believes the
Scripture. The Church of Rome was once famous for Gospel profession. Her says
was spoken of through all the world in Tertullians time who lived in the second
centurie, Rome has this character from him, lib de praescript. adversus
Haeretico^, Felix R^m^, cui totam doctrinam, Apostoli cum sanguine suo
profuderunt, legem and Prophetas cum Evangelicis and Apostolicis literis
miscet, and inde potat fidem eam, aqua signat, Spiritu Sancta vestil,
Eucharistia pascit, martyrio exhortatur, and adversus hauc institutionem
nominem recipit. Happy Rome to whom the Apostles poured forth their doctrine
with their blood, who mixeth Law and Gospel together, and drinks in says
that way, takes on the Baptismal seal thus, cloatheth her self with the graces
of the Holy Ghost, feeds by the Sacrament of the Supper, confirms the
doctrine by martyrdom, and receives none but on th^se terms. Quantum
mutatur! O how great an alteration is there? Rome is not like that which is was
once. For then they were made martyrs for the faith, now they make martyrs for
the same faith, then they had pure ordirances, now they pollute them all with
superstition and humane inventions. Bernard lib. 4. de consid. ad Eugen. Invisi
Terrae and Coelo impii in Deum, temtrarii in sancta, seditiosi ad seiuvicem,
simplicissimi dissimulatores, malignissimi proditores quos nominem amantes nemo
amat. etc. The p^imitive Fathers studied modelty, humility, and Gospel
carriage. Cornelius to Cyprian in his Epistles, breaths forth much
self-denial. Cyprian tha^ holy Martyr at the Council of Carthage, says, neque
euim quisquoe^ nostrum, se Episcopum Episcoporum constituit i. e. None of us
makes himself an universal Bishop. And divine Augustine writing to Hierom^pist.
97. utters, himself thus, in multis reb^s Augustinus Hieronymo minor est,
this was Gospel like. But now the Pope is the Prince of pride, naming himself
infallible, consequently incorrigible, and by the same reason impeccable,
^amom^is peccans in eo quod peccat errat. Every man erreth in as much as he
sins, says the school. If our hope were in this life only, and no
retribution hereafter; or if the Alcoran were our rule, this deportment being
full of carnal wisdom, proclaims them witty politicianes. But seeing the
cont^a^ is sure by the undoubted word of GOD, this their way is so^^ly, and it
is admirable how understanding men appro^^ their sayings. This their way has
wronged Christianity highly, and many sad effects have followed upon this
pompous alteration of the Primitive frame. First, It has turned many Italians
who live near the Court of Rome, void of all true Religion, and dyed them with
Atheism. So that as it is reported of them in Print, they will call
proverbially their Idiots Christians, and when they would name a fool, they say
he is a Christian, as if Christianity were a fable, and high folly. A
discerning person who traveled through Italy many years ago, told me, that he
heard some of them publicly blaspheme Jesus Christ, by words which should not
be repeated, and yet go unpunished. This is the fruit of their state way. For
now it is far more like to the state of Rome, no^ the old Church of Rome.
Secondly, It exposes Christian Religion to reproach, and stumbleth many. The
Jews are hindered to come in by their superstitious worship. The Eastern Church
which is the most ancient, agreeing almost with us in all doctrinals, (as their
Confession of Faith emitted by Cyrill the Patriarch of Constantinople
testifies,) is much offended at their Church dividing way. We are vexed with
their plots, blots, underminding courses. They sow cockle amongst our wheat,
and tares in our field, while men sleep. Of all men on Earth in any visible
incorporation pretending to Christianity, they have made the greatest breach in
the Catholic Church, and taken the tittle to themselves contrar to all reason.
The Paganes perceiving our breaches are hardened in their blind way When their
were not so great breaches in the Christian Church, Chrysostom on the
Galatians, brings in the Gentile speaking thus, Vellent fieri Christianus,
sed nescio cui adhaream, multae sunt inter vos pugnae, seditiones, and
tumultus; nescio quod dogma eligam, quod praeseram, singuli enim dicunt, ego
verum dico i. e. I would be a Christian but know not to whom I shall adhere,
there be such differences amongst you, I know not what to choose, what to
prefer, every one says he has the truth on his side. For this we are
derided by Jews and Gentiles, and the Church of Christ is divided. This
ob^^^tion may be soon solved, by these who adhere to the Scrip^^re, sensed by
sound antiquity: But to them who are without, it makes a great muster, and is
a mountain in the way, which none have towred up more then the Romanists, by
craft and might they have stated a faction, and fixed a Schism in the universal
church. Is it not high arrogance, that a town in Italy, and a petty Prince
there should make a monopoly, and obtrude their ware, pro arbitratu and
imperio sub poena anathematis, upon all the Christians in the world, what have
we to do with an Italian Prince, and who gave him right over us? Albeit these
rents made in the church by secular interests, be matter of mourning, yet there
be a providence in it, and this is permitted by the wisdom of GOD, that these
who are approven may be made manifest. 1. Cor. 11. 19. Vt sides habendo
tentationem, habeat probationem, as says Tertull. contra Haeres. cap. 1.
Divina veritas calida oppositione agitatur, ut adversus illos adversarios
desendi possit, considerari diligentius, intelligi clarius, praed^cari
constantius, and ab adversariorum motis quaestionibus discendi existat occasio.
Divine truth is cunningly opposed, that it may be defended more vigorously,
considered more attentively, understood more clearly, preached more instantly,
and that from the questions of adversaries, we may have the more occasion of
learning truth. Says Aug. de civit DEI. lib. 16. cap. 2. It is noted by
Historians, that in the tenth Centurie, called the unhappie Age, there were no
Heresies started not opposed, they were then asleep, and cared neither for
truth nor error. Setiousness about these matters was at that time suspended.
Yet it was infelix seculum, and it had been better for some that the tares had
appeared, and then trysted with speedy opposition. Albeit evil be not good,
yet sometimes, bonum est malum esse, as Aug: tells us in his Enchiridion, it
is good that evil be, qui bonus est non sineret malu^ esse, nisi omnipotens
etiam de malo faceret been. He would not suffer evil to be, if he being
Omnipotent, could not bring good out of it. We are not therefore to cast away
our confidence, nor become despondent, albeit Popery increases, and Papists
way hold. The only wise Lord knows why it is so, and how to order this broken
condition for good. When they like the old Pagans at Rome [who fathered
Portenta Gnosticorum and aliorum Haereticorum, the absurdities of Gnostickes,
and other Heretics upon the orthodoxe Christians, as Church History tells
us,) blot our doctrine and worship with all the reproaches which malice can
devise: who can tell but the holy providence of GOD may bring us out amongst
the pots, with our feathers like yellow gold. And he who works many of his
works by mean instruments, may put such to it, that his strength may be
perfected in weakness. I have contrar to my design, engaged into this debate,
and do acknowledge that I am a weak sinful man, my inclination is averse from
janglings, and I have had more satisfaction in going about the work of my
Calling, in practicals of Religion, nor ever I had in penning or publishing
this debate. But what could I do? Adversaries invaded the flock, pursued me
within the ports, when my back was at the wall, and I had no purpose for war,
stealed the sheep out of my bosom, and averred considentlie that they were sed
with rot-grasse in stead of wholesome food. Should I not in this exigence defend
with such weapons as the Lord would afford? It may he said that the adversary
is strong at home and abroad, but the Lord on high is more mighty then the
noise of many waters. So far as I am concerned, I rather would choose to fall
in the field, nor turn my back, or by sinful silence suffer the truth to be
over-laid and stifled. To some this may seem a light matter, and needless
work, yet, if all be well understood it will not be found such. The found of a
testimony for the truth in the case of subversion, is an ominous du^ie, if it
were for no other end but this, to leave a vvitness, and not to be involved in
the shout. Eveti^ Minister of the Gospel is bound within his station, to
promove Gospel intorests, to which Popery is highly prejudicial: to convince,
convert, confute gainsayers, to confirm the weak, and undeceive the simple, I
am much mistaken if this be superflous work. seeing it is one of the ends of
our Calling. It is to be r^^^sited indeed, that by debates for our just
possession, past prescriptio^, we should be diverted from more comfortable and
edifying work; seeing ordinarlie this way is so unsuccesful that few
adversaries once engageing use to yield, and will rather act their parts to
defend one error with another, ne videantur ^rrasse, nor with divine Aug: make
a retractation. Which evidenceth much pride, and unmortified self-love, but
very small respect to the Gospel. Yet cura officii i^ ours, and our^ even^us
belongs to the Lord, who will make a good account of all his affairs, and
cause the f^ot of adversaries slidalin due (...). Now Sir, seeing I resolved
upon these considerations to publish this Vindication, following the custo^, I
have sheltered i^ under the Patro^iny of your Name, so much valued for Religion
and Virtue. When Hiero^ wri^teth to Dardanus* he calls him Christianorum
nobilissime, nobilium Christianissime. I will not make use of that compellation
to you, I know ye love not so well words to proclaim you good, as those which
may make you better. It may be said without any assentation, that ye are a
serious lover, and diligent practiser of those Gospel verities which have been
from the beginning. And it will appear by proof, as Tertullian speaks,
antiquum nihil aliter suit quam sumus. This makes me consident, that ye will
entertain this Tractat for the truth. To speak of your descent and ancient
extract, it belongs to Historians and Heralds, not to me. Ye^ if any doubt
of that, let them read Hector Boethius history concerning the reign of
Alexander the third, anno. Chr. 1208. fol. 300. And again about the reign of
King Robert Bruce, anno Chri. 1320. fol 317. in both which, famous mention is
made of your Relatives, Beside the Rudera of that old Castle in Murray called
yet by your Name, proclaims this much, fuimus Trees. Neither shall I insist
upon the constancy and frequencie of your fervent devotion these seventie
years and upward. And how ye preveen the morning watches in the coldest season,
this commends the grace of GOD in you. Your Anteluc^na is such, well backed
with the practice of righteousness, holiness, peaceableness, meekness,
temperance, patience, zeal, and abundance of spiritual fortitude, if any will
deny this, they either know you not, or love you not. I intend not by this to
fire your corruption, that were not friendly breath, but to further your faith,
and that others may learn of you to be religious indeed. Go on worthy Sir, in
your Christian exercise, well may ye flourish in old age, well may ye finish
your course with joy, O that all descended of you, may learn to follow your
steps, in holiness, and righteousness, this will be the mercy of your family,
which is daily desired by

Your well Wisher and Servant in the Gospel, W. R.

A Preface to the READER.
THE Congregation of DVNDEE, Christian Reader, was by the good hand of GOD, for
the space almost of an hundred years bygone, preserved from the infection of
Popery; but of late some have been perverted by seducers, to the prejudice of
the Gospel, and great scandal of the incorporation: amongst whom, one young
woman descended of Religious and Honest Parents, being led away with the error
occasioned this debate. For after conference she seemed to be much affected,
and least that which then appeared to take impression on her mind, should
slip out of her memory, some grounds by way of a Dialogue were shortly
written down, with several wholesome Christian admonitions; this short dialogue
was by her put into the hands of a traffiquing Romanist, and in stead of her
Conversion so much desired, eight sheets of paper are stuffed with reflections,
not only on it, but on the Gospel-doctrine, which is according to Godliness,
and all the professors thereof. Ere I heard any such thing, this pamphlet was
spread with artificial insinuations, and quickly convoyed from hand to hand for
a time, at last a well wisher to the truth sent a copy to me, with this desire
that I would re^iev^ and refute it. At first I inclined to pass it with
silence, because I thought discerning men would easily espy its weakness.
Thereafter hearing that some Popishly inclined did magnify it, least the
reformed Doctrine should suffer prejudice, I was advysed to pen a Reply with
this resolution, that except some new arguments be brought forth, which are not
answered by reformed Divines, or here by me, I will not trifle my time so much
allotted for better work, as to debate more on the subject here contained. What
is said, may (to my uptaking) satisfy such as love the truths of the Gospel,
and in reason convince gainsayers. But if men will undervalue the word of GOD,
right reason, and shutting their eyes, declare them selves unsatisfiable, an
evil humor has caused them to err. And I have other employment, not to
wrestle with such. Wisdom will be justified of her own children. And in this
time when prophanness and Popery walk on every side, blessed is he who keeps
his garments clean, and does nothing against the truth, but for it. Seminary
Priests are very diligent, sowing their cockle amongst us in this land, they
have their own abettors, proxies, and procutors. Is it not then the duty of
good Christians, to arm themselves with the sword of the Spirit, which is the
word of GOD, and keep their ground against adversaries? The face of truth is
beautiful, and the salvation of souls precious. This short Tractat is claiefly
calculated for the Meridian of Dundee; and for any single sincere Christian,
who seriously labor for Gospel truths, and to work out their own Salvation.
All such cannot have leisure to read voluminous books, written by more able
pens, nor will they be at the expenses to buy them; and it may be also that
some would not comprehend or relish them, mediocriter docta, mediocriter doctis
placent, says the writter of the life of Pelicanus. Books are like meats, and
somewhat of suitable sympathy, contributeth to make them edifying; if this
convince, convert, or establish men in the truth, it is the blessing of the GOD
of truth, for which I shall bless his Name. If not, it is my testimony to that
truth wherein I have lived, and hope in the strength of Jesus Christ to die. So
far I Will endeavoure to serve my generation, this will be my peace whatever the
event be; and my conscience is witness that I hazard to publish this debate for
no selfish end, or any other respect whatever.

The Romanists for upholding their faulty fabric, have forged many
unwarrantable devices, some of which I shall b^i^fly touch here, that by these
as a tes^e, ye may discern how they build which wood, hay, stuble, and daub the
work all along with untempered mortar.

Their first engyne is Matchiaveelian, calumniare audacter. If any man appear
for truth in the gate, they bend their tongues and pens as bows with
reproaches against such: like that persecuting Roman, who would first have the
Virgins whom he minded to condemn, deflowred by the hangman, that they might
not be heard, but die without regrate. And as the primitive Christians were
sometimes put into beasts skins by their persecutours, to the end that dogs
might devour them greedily: So deal they with reformed Writters, that truth be
not heard from them. How sinful is this way contrar to that Scripture, Titus 3.
2. speak ev^l of no man? This is most like to the course which the adversaries
of truth have still kept; So d^^y they of old with the Prophets, Psalm 69. v.
10. 11. Yea with Jesus Christ himself, Matthew. 11. 19. Matthew. 12. 24, and all
his Apostles, 1. Cor. 4. 13. that they might overlay the truth, and m^ke them
the more easy prey to the teeth of obloquie and prejudice. What is this
bauling to the cause before any discerning person? Quid ad rhombum? Michael the
Archangel disputing with the Devil, durst no bring against him a railing
accusation, Iud. v. 9. Let not this hinder men from hearing truth, nor terrify
any from giving testimony to it. We are bound as Christians not only to bear
the scourge of tongues, but more also for the Gospels sake when called to it.
Augustine said to Petilian, his tongue was not the fan. I am a man in the floor
of Christ, and if good grain will be laid up in the Garner, blow the wind as it
will. So we may say to such r^ilers, yea, if the adversary would write not
only pasquils, but a book of this kind, we may bind it to our shoulders, and
wear it as our crown; For the Lord will in due time, wipe of the rebuke of his
people, (Is. 25. 8) which they bear for his Name. That saying of Bernard is
sweet, Cimbae me comitto, in tanto discrimine confidens in Domine, qui pro illo
recte l^quentibus, pro illo laborautibus dicit, Adsum. (...) run the rea^k
trusting in the Lord, who has promised presence to all, who speak and act
rightly for him. And heroickly Luther to the same purpose, if truth be on my
side, quidni pro viribus agam, why should ^ ^ot do my uttermost, sim homicida,
sim adulter, ^^^do silentii non arguar, dum Christus patitur. Let them call me
what they will, if I be not guilty of sinful silence, when Christ suffers in
his truth. It is a very small matter, upon this account to be judged of men, 1.
Cor. 4. 3. these things are light and heavy as we ordinarily take them. If this
strain of reproaching did siste at us it were not so much, but they reproach
the written word of GOD, and sentence it boldly of imperfection, contrar to
Psalm. 19. 7. 2. Tim. 3. 15. 17. and of obscurity, as if it were not a light
and lantherue to our paths, Psalm. 119. 105. Yea, they shamelesly aver, that
the authority of the Church, and Pope of Rome, is greater to us nor Scripture.
Is it not lamentable, that men called Christians, for pompous selfish
interests, should laboriously study to cast aspersions upon the un^ported word
of GOD, and depretiate it so in the world! May not this render Popery
suspicious to any knowing man, that the abettors thereof decline the written
word of GOD, to be the sole umpire of faith and manners, and endeavor to
discredit it before the Nations, which is the touchstone of truth, and best
fence we have against Satan and all his accomplices; such non sunt audiendi,
says holy Aug. Confess. lib. 6. cap. 5. they should not in this be heard far
less obeyed.

Their second device, when they are pressed with the truth, is to coin evil
grounded distinctions, and with this ley money to make merchandise of poor
simple souls. Needle*headed men have strangely acted their inventions herein,
and cru^bled Gospel truths thus, that he is now thought the best and most
learned Papist, who can findout subtle subterfugies, and receptacles against
plain Scripture verities. So that the Romanists are the great foxes which eat
up the tender vines. Other Sectaries who separat themselves from the Church
builded on the foundation, Ephesians. 2. 20. and deface the doctrine which is
according to Godliness, are of lesser magnitude. That ye may know what sort of
proppes uphold their rotten building, take these five instances. First, When we
prove that the Scripture is the rule of faith, this they grant in part, but say
they it is a partial, not the total rule; they must sowder somewhat of their
own tradition to it, err they acknowledge it for a rule. This is a reasonless
shift. If the rule be not total and perfect in its own kind, for its own ends,
it is no rule at all, but a semi-rule, regula nec appositionem nec ablationem
admittit, says Theophilact, on the 3. chap. to the Philip. Nothing can be
added to, or taken from a rule; the law of nature, the law of reason, are
sufficient for their own ends; so is the written word of GOD for salvation.
When we say, Secondly, that the word of GOD cannot have authority from men,
therefore the Scripture is judge of the Church, and not the Church of the
Scripture. They answer by a leaden distinction, that it has authority from the
Church in respect of us, but not in respect of it self. This is a reasonless
evasion, for all authority is an act, quoad extra, and relative to us. The
Scriptures have excellency and dignity internal, but all its authority is
external and relative to men. So that distinction is null. If the Scripture
has its authority from the testimony of their Church, then their faith must be
ultimatly resolved into their Church testimony, as more authoritative nor the
word of GOD. Propter quod unumquodque est tale, illud ipsum est magis tale.
Therefore Popish faith by this maxim is not divine, but ecclesiastic and
humane: Now the Church and faith of Believers should be builded immediately upon
the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the chief
cornerstone, Ephesians. 2. 20. Therefore the Pope with his traditions cannot found
the Church, nor the faith of Christians; other foundation can no man lay, then
that which is laid. 1. Cor. 3. 11. To this they return a distinction, that
Jesus Christ is the principal, and the Pope the secondary foundation; seeing it
was said to Peter, upon this rock I will build my Church. This subterfuge in
like the rest; if this was said to Peter personally, as Tertul. de praescrip.
thinks, then not to his successors, suppose the Pope were the man, a
personal individual prerogative is inco^municable. If it was not personal, but
to him and his successors, then if the Apostle Paul were living, the Pope
behoved to be above him in dignity and Church prerogative, by reason Peter was
above him, and he succeeds to his superiority. This to any discerner may
appear absurd. Beside the Church is builded on the foundation of the Prophets
and Apostles, Ephesians. 2. 20. then not upon one Apostle, take the words as ye will.
The true meaning of these words, upon this rock I will build my Church is this,
the confession of Peter concerning Jesus Church, the Son of the living GOD, was
a ^ock on which the Church was builded. This interpretation is authorized by
Augustine. who interprets the words thus, Tract. ult. in Johan. and sermon. 13.
de verbis Apost. he gives also strong reason for it, lib. 1. retract cap. 21.
non enim dictum est Petro, tu es petra, sed tu es Petrus. which reason Valentia
challenges in vain, disp. 1. to 3. quaest. 1. punc. 7. Further, there c^nnot
be two foundations, if we speak properly. If no man can lay another as the
Scripture speaks, why should it be asserted? Christ Jesus alone set forth in
the doctrine of Prophets and Apostles, is that solid foundation on which we
build all our salvation; he is that sure foundation laid in Zion, and no ways
can this without blasphemy be applied to the Pope, seeing the Apostle Peter
makes application of it to Christ only, 1. Peter 2. 6.

Thirdly, When we assert with the Scripture, that Marriage is honorable
amongst all, therefore they should not forbid it. Their answer is, that all
should not be taken here absolutely, for then a brother might marry his sister,
but only of persons not prohibited, and their votaries are such. Is not this a
fig-leaf covering? Incest is forbidden by the law of GOD. But where are Church
men forbidden by GOD to marry, it is honorable among them says the written
word; who can bind men to the contrar of that which the Lord has permitted and
commanded? The evasion about the Sacrament of the Supper is of the same kind;
when it is objected that Christ said expressly of the Cup, drink ye all of it.
By all say they, is meaned all Priests, but not all Christians. Is this to be
endured with patience, to see men tear so the sense of Scripture with sophisms.
If (all) relate to them as Ministers of the Gospel, then they should have the
bread only, and all private Christians should be barred: for he who said drink
ye all of it, said likewise to the same (all) take eat.

Fourthly, When they are challenged of Superstition and Idolarrie, by breach of
the second Command, here there is a distinction not lacking betwixt the worship
called (...) reserved for GOD; and (...) which they avowedly say, should be
given to images, Saints, etc. And this they father on Augustine. But these two
words are promiscuously taken in Scripture, and both of them given to GOD, as
shall be proved in its proper place. Papists give (...) to Images, Relics, and
Cross of Christ; Thus they confound themselves. When John the divine would have
worshipped the Angel, does he not forbid him, Rev: 22. 9. and say worship GOD?
Belike he knew not this distinction. Is it not called will worship, Col 2. 23.
Then it is not (...) but (...) Neither does Augustine make use of that
distinction in the Popish sense, he was far from thinking that Religious
worship should be tendered to Saint or Angel, for he says, lib. de vera Relig.
cap. ult. Honorandi sunt propter imitationem, non adorandi propter Religionem.
And epist, 44. se^as inquit a Christianis ^ullum coli mortuorum. He bids us
praise the Martyrs, honor their memories, follow their footsteps, sed DEVM
Martyrum colite, worship the GOD of Martyrs only. This distinction then is
groundless. Is it not lamentable that men professing Christianity, should so
hazard upon Idolatry, Superstition and will worship, with a deceitful
distinction, which can neither satisfy reason nor conscience? And dare any
tender Christian think that such juggling work will be his peace in the day of
distress and death? What is this but a lie in the right hand? Therefore let all
who love and fear the Lord bewarre of that worship, which stands on such
cogling distinctions.

Fifthly, Their great refuge when they cannot mantain these absurdities, is,
that we calumniat them, and mistate questions. And if neither of these can
serve, then they allege, that these are the opinions of some private Doctors,
and not the judgment of their Church. But in this vindication, let all be
assured, that to my best uptaking, nothing is fathered on this Adversary but
what he says directly, or co^sequentially, nothing brought against him but
that which is either literally, or interpretatively in the written word of GOD,
or human Authors. Albeit it he notoriously known that Papists uphold their
tottering Babel by lies, murders, treasons, deluding wonders, by corrupting,
mutilating, foisting, embezeling diverse testimonies divine and huma^^, as shall
be made out hereafter, yet we have not so learned Christ. The truths of Christ's
Gospel need not such proppes, and we are not allowed to lie for GOD. It is a
mere evasion to cast over what they cannot make good on their private Doctors.
For the decrees of the council of Trent to which now they profess adherence,
are purposly contrived in many particulars, like the Delphian oracles, and when
they lurk under ambiguities, what way shall they be found out but by their
Doctors, who are the expositors of their tenets: Beside there be few or none
of them cited, whose books are not approven, by Censurers appointed for that
effect, the tenor of whose testimony is, that such books contain nothing
contrar to the Catholic faith of the Church of Rome. Is not this equivalent to
a Council statute? Do they not impu^^^ ^ur Doctors, Calvine, Luther, etc,
notwithstanding of (...) Confessions of faith, whereof they cannot be ignorant.
They deal not only so with their own writters, but also with the Fathers, as
some hard Masters use their servants, if they ^lease their humors they will
keep them, if not, they will dismiss them, it may be with a stain betwixt
terms. Yea they deal worse with such testimonies as relish nor their taste,
for they dispatch and gelde them also. Their Monastries have not occasioned the
murder of more infants, nor their Golders by the index expurgatorius have the
death of true testimonies, which now being overlaid cannot see the light. Shall
not the GOD of truth make inquisition for these crimes in due time? Surely he
will arise and have mercy on Zion, for some are yet living. who take pleasure
in her stones and favor the dust thereof

Thirdly, The third Engyne, which th^se Engyneers use, is, the color of
antiquity, and pretense to closs walking and austerities. The Church of Rome
to which the Apostle Paul did write is indeed ancient, whose faith was spoken
of through all the world. But Popery as it is now dogmatised, is a late
invention, plastered with antiquity, like the Gibeonites bread. And so far
from rendering men closs walkers, that it is highly prejudicial to Gospel
interests. For ex natura operis, it turns men loose and unfaithful to souls,
yea its pompous secular way is very unsuitable to the simplicity, and
self-denial required in the Gospel, this is soon proved. The great pillar of
the Romish Religion, is the Popes pompous supremacy and infallibility: In
this says Bell. prefat. de Pontifice, the sum of their Religion consists.
Consider Reader, which of the Apostles did so empire it Not Peter, that he
forbids and calls himself a fellow Elder, 1. Peter 5. 1. Not any Church
man for many Centuries thereafter. For Gregory who was Bishop of Rome anno
600. curses the name of universal Bishop, which John Bishop of Constantinople
usurped and says, epist. lib. 4, Rex superbiae prope est. he means Anti.
Christ, Et sacerdotum ei praeparatur exercitus, in this he prophesied truly.
Estius in lib. 4. sent. did. 47. being puzzled with this testimony, says,
that by (universal Bishop) Gregory meaned only (sole Bishop) who excluded
others. This is a mere forgerie, for there were many Bishops at that time, in
the Greek Church beside John of Constantinople, so he was not solus Episcopus.
But giving, not granting this to be the sense of the prophecy, it will make
against the Pope of Rome, who gives himself out for sole Bishop, and all
under him his Vicars only. This is clear from the history of the Trent
Council lib. 7. page 599. Father Simon the Florentine, there speaks after the
same tenor. When it is demanded whither any Bishop be Jure Divino? One must
answer affirmativelie, One only, the Successor of Peter. And thus the famous
saying of Cyprian must be expounded, there is but one Bishopric, and every
Bishop holds a part thereof, in solidum; otherwise it cannot b^e defended
that the government of the Church is the most perfect of all, that is
Monarchical, but must necessarlie ^all into an Oligarchie: All the Popes
Prelates did speak then the same language, will not this make him solus
Episcopus, so that in Estius sense, he must be concluded to be Rex superbiae,
because he is sole universal Bishop. The primitive Fathers studied modesty,
charity, humility. But Head of the whole Church, Prince of Priests,
infallible, universal Monarch, were names unknown to them. Yet this is the
Popes motto, summarei, the great foundation, sine qua corruit Ecclesia, says,
Bellarmin in the forecited place. Further worship in an unknown tongue, was not
heard in the Church, till it was commanded by Witalianus, in the 7. Cent. says
Platina, and Aquinas on the 1. Cor. 14. tells that the worship in the
primitive Church, was performed in the vulgar language. The mutilation of the
Sacrament of the Supper by withholding the cup from the people, was unknown to
ant quitie. For Valentia de legitimo us^ Eucharistiae, cap. 10. says that the
receiving of the Sacrament under one kind came into the Church by no decree but
by the custom of the people, not long before the Council of Constance, at which
time the custom was made a law. The withholding Scripture from people was
detested in the primitive Church. Was it not decreed in the Council of Nice,
says Agrippa, that no Christian should be without a Bible, espcially if he
could read; in Augustine, Chrysostom, and Hieroms days, the people are required
to search the Scriptures according to the rule, John 5, 39. Tutius ambulatur
per Scripturas, says Aug. lib. 3. de doct. Chri. cap. 28 nor by humane
traditions or glosses. Some names of things occurring in antiquity, are
preserved in the Roman Church; but it will be found that the Fathers understood
them not in that sense, nor made use of them as they do. The nature of things
new in Popery is unanswerable to the old names, as snal afterward appear. By
this we may perceive, that Popery was not from the beginning. The mystery of
iniquity increasing, vain men set their posts beside the Lords posts, their
thresholds beside his, Ezekiel. 43. 8. And making up a body of superstitious
inventions, have placed Religion in these, which they hold forth to the world
as eldest, and have so fallen out with Scripture truths, that they are not
ashamed to accuse them, and their professors of noveltie, heresy, etc. But be
it known to all, that we will have no Religion to be called ours, younger nor
the Apostles and primitive Christians; It shall either be sixteen hundred years
old, it shall be founded on the Scripture, sensed by pute antiquity, or else
not outs.

Beside this their foistery, that which is foisted poysoneth souls, and fills
them with the East Wind. For by their merits and mediators, they derogat from
the honor of Christ, and from the faith of Christians; seeing he is is so
precious to them who believe, 1. Pet. 2. 7. It is not strange, that contrar to
Scripture they will deny the imputation of the righteousness of Christ Jesus to
the blessed Elect, and that imputed righteousness of Saints, is affirmed by
them to profit others, and relieve them from temporal punishment. As if the
death and merits of the Mediator, were not of sufficient value, to save us
from all evil. They say that no man can have certainty of Salvation by faith,
and yet without any revelation, they will canonize others as Saints Can any be
more certain of the salvation of another, nor his own. Their doctrine
concerning the Priests intention, takes away all certainty of faith; if the
Priest do not seriously intend what he professes to do, there is no Sacrament,
no consecration, no ordination. And who but the Lord searches the heart, and
knows human intentions? By making the Body of Christ now in Heaven, to be
corporally present in the Sacrament of the Supper, when it is administered, they
deny many articles of the Christian Creed, they strengthen the heresy of the
Valentinians, who said that his Body was fantastical, not real, they
contradict the Scripture which calls it the fruit of the vine after
consecration, Luke 22. 18. And Aug. tract. 5. in John, who says, that the
bread remains bread after the consecration, and the Body of Christ a real
Body after the Resurrection. By their doctrine of Free Will, they make free
Grace to stand at the beck of the will, whither it shall be operative or not.
Yea, they make providence in its acting dependent on the will: For this is
their tener* GOD works because the will consents, not e contra, see Bellar
de gratia and libero arbitrio, lib. 4. cap. 15. Will it not follow then, that
we should thank our will for our Conversion, and entreat it to make grace
efficacious, and providence effectual? Seeing it has a negative voice in all
these matters. And what is more prejudicial to the providence, and worship of
GOD, or to the efficacy of grace, nor this tener which Aug refuteh well in his
Enchrid. cap 32. By invocation of Saints, the worship of Relics, and the
whole house of their imagerie, they give the glory of the Lord to another, and
are reproved, Is 42. 8. Yea there be many whom they invocat, of whom they are
not certain if either they were Saints, or lived in the world. Cassander who
lived in communion with Rome, acknowledges, that much superstition is sostered
by this way, Consult. ^1. Is it not then soul-damning? By their distinction of
mortal and venial sins, by Purgatory, by prayer for the dead, by their
absolution under so bare a degree of contrition, they make people sin securely
for under the name of v^nial sins, they comprehend grievous crimes, as
sivearing by the wounds of Christ, Per Membra Christi est venialis
irreverentia, and si reverenter juretur null^^s videtur esse peccatum, says,
Valentia tom. 3. disp. 6. quast. 7. punct. 3. Legerdemaine in vendition, ubi
quantuns and quale mutatur, may be venial, si materia sit levis, says Tolet.
de 7. pecc. cap. 49. whereas diverse measures, without exception, are declared
abomination, Pro. 20. 10. All these remedies which they apply after death, make
men less diligent in duty while they live. And if Purgatory be the Popes
peculiar, as they call it, he must have little love to Souls, and too much to
his own gain, who will not release those Prisoners sooner, and sill some rooms
in Heaven faster? How ready are we to delay duty from time to time? And does
not this bait our humor? How jejune and bare is their contrition, which goes
before confession and absolution? Yet may prove sufficient. Hear Suarez. tom.
4. disp* 4. who says a slender grief is sufficient. And Tolet. lib. 3. de
instr. Sacerdot. a small degree of grief, can wipe away a great degree of sin.
What is this but daubing with untempered mortar, and putting kercheifes under
arm holes, a strengthening of the hands of the wicked, that he should not
return from his evil way? By toleration of Brothels, and preferring in votaries
fornication to lawful marriage; Is not a wide door opened to ob^cene
sensuality? Agrippa de vanit. witnesses, that the Pope has tribute paid to
him by all the whore-houses at Rome. Therefore Pope Sixtus builded the nobile
l^pan^r, a notable Brothel house. Bell. de Monach. lib. 2. cap. 30. says, that
fornication in such is a less sin nor marriage. What will debauch the chastity
if this do not? Tolet. lib. 4. de instr. sacerd. tells us, that a man is
bound to sanctify the Sabbath, but is not bound to sanctify it well, for he
may hunt, travel, and make market on that day. Is not this infectious doctrine?
Now Christian Reader, if thou be serious for salvation, I charge thee to pause
here a little, and consider if this can be the way of holiness, wherein the
Prophers, Apostles, and primitive Fathers walked to Heaven? Therefore as thou
tenderest thy own salvation and consolation, bewar of it, this leads to the
chambers of death. Has fallen man who enclineth naturally to wickedness need of
such incentives to sin, and lenitives when he has sinned? Or can he who is of
puter eyes then to behold iniquity, approve such as break his Commandments, and
teach men so to do? Can the tree be good where the frui^ is so b^d? None will
believe it who have understanding, unless they be willing to be deceived. It is
the stain of any Christian, to desert the good old way in which they are
commanded to walk, Ier. 6. 16. and to be fooled out of their Religion, by some
groundless distinctions, and ingenious devices of subtle men, who stent
snares, and lay themselves in wa^te to deceive the simple. If a man born and
trained in the Reformed Church shall hanker after Popery, he is foolish in so
doing, if he purpose not to swallow the whole bulk of it. For Bellarmin says,
they cannot quite one ^ota, otherwise their Church were not to be reputed
infallible; and if he resolve to do this, I must say he has an
Ostrich-stomach, and is a great latitudinarian. Further it is to be feared that
at the next alteration, if tempted, ^e fall into Atheism, and total
infidelity. For the weapons by which the Papists wage war with the
Scriptures, and the Reformed Church built thereon, are the same which Celsus
used of old against Christianity it self, which Origin refuteth at length, he
impeached the Scriptures, and quarrelled the Christians for their rents, for
the calumnies of the world, etc. If these have beat thee from the Reformed
Religion, have thou not to fear, that they may shake thee in all, and turn thee
at last Nullisidian? As they make use of Pagan arguments, so of the Jewish, for
they reasoned just so against Christ Jesus and his Apostles. By what authority?
where is your visible succession? have any of the rulers, Scribes or Pharisees
believed on him? etc. It has pleased the Lord to furnish us with good
defenses, but it is strange, that they drawing many of their shafts from Pagan,
and Jewish Antichristian quivers, should not be ashamed of their way. And it is
more strange, that knowing men if conscientions, should be ensnared by them. It
is known to such as are not ignorant of Church history, that when Christianity
came first into this Ysle, they had nothing to do with Rome, for a long time
they were strangers and adversaries to her sovereignty, and would not exchange
the diet of Easter for her commands, nor have communion with these messengers,
who came from her. Bid called Venerable tells lib 2. hist. cap. 4. that in
the beginning of the 7. cent. after Augustine the Monk came to Britain, he
found them no way like the Romanists, no^ could he prevail with them, to
conform to Rome, not so much as in the administration of Baptism, or
observation of Easter. And when one Laurentius his successor endeavored the
same, and thought the Scots would be more tractable, he found the plain
contrare: as he writteth to the Abbates in Scotland, for Dagamus the Scottish
Bishop, who came to speak with them, refused to eat or drink with Laurentius,
or stay in the room where he was. So little communion would they here have
then with Romanists. Now that Church is far more corrupt, then it was in
Gregory's days, and ours more pure and enlightened then it was at that time.
What phrenesie must it be therefore in them now who are members of this Church,
to enter into communion with Romanists, or tamper with, or haunker after their
way. Let all who love the Truth stand in awe thus to sin, we have a safer surer
way for Salvation nor Popery, wherein if we walk, peace and mercy shall be on
us, Gal. 6. 16.

Least this Preface swell disproportionably, I will offer four advyees to my
Contrymen, that they may be persuaded from Popery; and then close with a
word more particularly to the Inhabitants of this Place.

First, If ye would guard well against Popery, have a full persuasion of the
Truth, from the ground of divine revelation, in the holy Scriptures. 2. Tim. 1.
13. 14. Hold fast the form of sound words, which thou have heard of me, in
faith and love, which is in Christ Jesus, that good thing which is committed to
thee, keep by the holy Ghost which dwells in us. For men not persuaded by
divine faith, like to young scholars, evil grounded in their principles are
easily put from their grounds, and tossed to and froe with every wind of
doctrine: Persuasisti mihi Domine says Aug. lib. 6. confess. cap. 5. this
kept him fast. When once divine Truth sinketh into the heart, ye will have a
sincere love to it for it self, and not for any by respects or worldly
advantages. Otherwise when truth florteth only in the head, and men are bated
with worldly temptations, and selfish interests, they are soon drawn away from
the truth, which in their affection is postponed to that which they love
better. And GOD in his holy justice gives them up to strong delusions for
their hypocrisy, and want of sincerity, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. 11. the Lord has
promised the spirit to them who ask him, Luke 11. 13. If ye love the truth,
seek the grace and strength of the holy Spirit to lead you into all truth, and
labor to grow in grace, and the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, following
diligently the means appointed thereto by GOD himself, to wit, reading, hearing
the Word preached, receiving the holy Sacrament of the Supper, as GOD shall give
opportunity, meditation, prayer, spiritual conference, Hosea 6. 3.

2. Peter 3. 17. Beware of looseness and all prophanness in conversation, for
it is righteousness with GOD to punish practical Atheists, by giving them over
to speculative Atheism, whereby they are hardened in their wicked courses; And
silly women led away with diverse lusts are easy led captive, and detained in
error by seducers, whose doctrine has compliance with their loose way of
living, 2. Tim. 3. 6.

Secondly, Bewarre of prejudice against reformed Ministers or Prosessours,
where this enters it makes the evil eye, and if the eye be evil, the whole
body is dark, Matthew. 6. 23. Some allege that the pupil of a Witch eye is
inverted by malice. Certainly the understanding of any man is in hazard to be
thus perverted. That which made Porphyre, Julian, and other Apostats fall away
from the truth, was (...) prejudice and passion. It is reported of an Indian,
that being wronged by the Spainard, when some were instructing him about
Christianity, and the way to Heaven, he refused to be a Christian, because he
heard that the King of Spain was walking in that path; in this he was Pagan
like. Let Christians be ashamed to speak or do so. If men in this controversal
age, have done or suffered injuries, for the Lords sake let none of these
things make you wrong the truth of GOD, your own consciences, or the Mother
Church, which did bear or foster you. Alace, what evil has the Gospel of
Christ done to you? Wherein has it weatied you, whose Ox or Ass has it
taken, testify against it if ye dare? Why then will ye wrong the Master for
the Servants sake, and hate the truth, because ye love not some who profess to
adbere to it? Is it imaginable that such backsliding courses will afford you
comfort in the end of the day, when the silver cord is loosed, and the pitcher
broken at the well? Were it a good defense for treason, to say to a King, some
fellow subjects have wronged me. How easily might he return this, shall ye
therefore wrong my law? It may be your wrong is supposed not real, and admit
it be so indeed, two blacks makes not one white, ye should remember the oath of
alleag^^nce. So will the King of Kings challenge Apostats, and say, why
departed ye from the truth? Was this the way to right your wrongs, whereunto
was ye baptized; Why gadde ye abroad to change your way? This is baseness
below a Christian or any man of honor.

Thirdly, Let all lovers of truth love one another dearly, and entertain the
unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace; This is a sense against foes, forbear
and forgive one another, let the strong bear with the weak, and if in all
things ye cannot be like minded, (which is rather to be w^shed nor expected
here) yet be kindly aff^ctioned. And whereunto ye have attained walk by the
same rule, and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, the Lord will reveal
that in due time, and teach you that which ye see not. When breaches are
amongst sincere Christians, who fear the Lord and his goodness, the adversary
who waits for their halting, casts oil on the flame, and with jeering
warmeth his hands at the fire. All the wild beasts of the wilderness, enter in
at those breaches, and are ready to take away the wine press, and devour with
open mouth the tender Vines. Josephus de Bello Judaico, tells us, that the
Romans of old overcame Jerusalem easily, because the chief Captains within the
walls fought eagerly amongst themseves, and were so divided by the wrath of
GOD, that their animositie was greater against other, nor the common
adversary; this prepared the way for their sudden overthrow. And when the
Roman Eagles did slay to BRITAIN, the Historian Tacitus shows, how they in
this Isle were vanquished, dum singuli pugnant universi vincuntur. Little was
left undone to the adversaries hand. So the new Romanists take the same
advantage against our Jerusalem; therefore we should be the more diligent to
endeavor by all Christian ways, that peace may be within her walls, and
prosperity within her palaces. It would be well adverted that the enemy is at
the gates, therefore should be watchfully eyed in all our deportment. Every
time has its own trial and temptation, the dispensation of this sinful time
calls for much consideration; and they who understand the language of it, may
excel amongst their brethren, and serve the generation best in the fear of the
Lord. The Christians in Persia says Theod lib. 5. h^st. cap. 38. understood
not the times wherein they lived, therefore became a prey to their adversaries,
let not the enemy ger advantage, least it be told in Gath and Askelon. It was
said of old amongst Pagans, behold the Christians how they love one another,
and their adversaries were forced to commend them, for sweet harm: less
carriage. This is an ornament to profession, and a guarde to the truths of the
Gospel. Therefore as ye tender the honor of the Lord, and preservation of his
truth, live in love; love the truth and peace, follow peace and holiness, this
will at least damp adversaries.

Fourthly, Labor to know experimentally the power of Christian Religion,
nothing will more solidly refute Popery to you, nor the kingdom of grace in
power. Popery is a humane device, full of pompous shadows, which has no
concord with the light and life of the Gospel. For the more shadow the less
light. The Northern-people from whom the Sun is remore, are circled with
shadows: but these who have the Sun perpendicularly over them, and are under it
at the Noone-tyde, have little or no shadow. So, if ye would decline the Popish
groves, live near the Sun of righteousness. The Popish trash cannot please a
reformed Christian. Holy Augustine ep. 119. complains that in his time the
Church was pressed, contrar to the merciful institution of Christ, with such a
servile burden of ceremonies, that the state of the Jews under the Law, was
more tolerable nor the condition of Christians. seeing they were subject to the
ordinances of GOD, and not to humane presumptions. If he had now lived and seen
their gadie way, what would he have said? Surely this, that the Romish Church
is full of shadows, therefore, far from the Sun. The best refutation of some
points of Arminianisme, is the power and efficacy of Gospel grace on the
heart. Will ever that man believe Free Will in its extent, as it is taught by
them, to whom the Lord has spoken with an high hand, and determined for his
duty? No verily! Or will any of the Circumcision who worship GOD in spirit,
rejoice in Christ Jesus, and put no confidence in the flesh; Be delighted with
a burdensome bounde^ of humane inventions, or place worship in these? It cannot
be, such will consider Matthew. 15. 9. and so acocunt that worship vain. The
Merchants have not always the best shops who hang forth pompous signs. Nor is
she reputed a chaste woman who is fearded in the face, and clothed with the
attire of an harlot. The whorish garb of Rome, will not reactily please souls
espoused to that one Husband Jesus Christ, therefore live like the Gospel. And
if ye be sealed by it to the day of Redemption, with the holy Spirit of
promise, the Scripture truths will be precious to you. That which renders many
unstable is a notional Cartesian way of Religion; but sincere Christians have
not so learned Christ. If thou once taste how good the Lord is, and if he has
given thee songs in the night, his testimonies to thee will be more then thy
necessary food. Irreligious prophanness and Popery are practically so sibb to
other, that the one ushereth in the other. Nothing makes me fear the growth of
this bitter root in the Land more, then the deludge of prophanness, which
overfloweth all the banks. When men belie their Christian profession, being
abominable, disobedient, and to every good work reprobat. Is it not to be
feared, that the Lord make such like Shiloh, Ier. 7. 17. live then holily and
righteously. If ye do his will ye shall know the doctrine whither it be of GOD
or not, John 7. 17. Godliness has the promises of this life, and of that which
is to come; it is nor much to be feared that many (if any) who have tasted of
the power of Religion by the ordinances of the Reformed Church, will turn away
to Popery; That seal on the heart will prove a notable preservative.

I shall conclude this Preface with a word of advertisement to the Inhabitants
of Dundee, whom I dearly love, and have in my heart frequently before the Lord.
That seeing the Lord has made you one of the considerable incorporations in
this Nation, ye would consecrate your gain to him, by proving valiant for his
truth on earth, it is not unknown how the Lord honored this place, by making
an early profer of the Gospel to it, by that faithful Servant and Martyr of
Christ, Mr. George Wishart who preached the Gospel here, and edified many by
his powerful preaching. One Robert Milne who had then sway in the Town, to
please that Cardinal Beton, by whom he was corrupted and biased with bribes,
as our Ecclesiastic Historians ^ell, discharged the faithful servant of
Christ, from preaching in the Town any more, to whom he replied, I shall
remove, but if it be long well with you I am not led by the spirit of Truth:
and if unexpected trouble fall on you, remember this is the cause of it; Turn
then to God by repentance, for he is merciful. This word was verified, for
within four days after his departur, the plague of pestilence break up here.
Then sent they for him as sick men do for a Physician, who returning comforted
the unthankful people who shut him out; Preached on the East-port, on that
text Psalm 107. v. 20. he sent his word and healed them, shortly thereafter the
plague ceased. The Word of GOD backed by prophecy, and providence did take so
deep impression on the people, that they became eminent promoters of the work
of Reformation. And for ought that I can learn from that time or thereabout
Popery decayed so in this place, that none avouched it till the year 1662.
then some three or four did break out to the great scandal of the Congregation.
Now the case and stare of the question being the same which was then, if ye
fall out of love with the truth, wrath will be upon you, and as ye would
not meet with a vvrathful stroke, cleave to the Gospel with full purpose of
heart. If any shall do otherwise (which the Lord forbid) such will degenerate
from their vvorthie Predecessors, and vvandring from mountain to hill, will
find no resting place. As no place in the Land, has been more free of Popery
for a long time, so none have suffered more for loyalty to our Sovereign the
Kings Majesty. Was not your blood spilt like water? Your houses rifled and
possessed by usurping strangers? Yet ye who survive the rest, are a^ brands
plucked out of the fire, preserved by the Lord. If after such strokes,
messages, messengers, deliverances, preservations, ye do countenance or foster
Popery, and fall away from the truth of GOD. Will it not be bitterness in the
latter end? Who incline so, let them read Ezra 9. 14. and make application. A
word is enough to the wise. There have been sundry faithful Messengers of
Christ here since the Reformation, who warned the place frequently, who
battered Babylon, and builded Zion. And if the tares of Adversaries should
pester this field again; these Messengers now at their rest, will stand up and
witness against this place in one day. And this testimony shall be indorsed
against you. That ye are lawfully warred to save your selves from the evil of
this generation. Reader where ever thou dwell, consider well what is said
here, buy the truth and sell it not. And the Lord give thee understanding in
all things which belong to thy Peace in this thy day; this is heartily desired
by a lover of the truth and doctrine which is according to Godliness.

FAREVVEL. Sithence our Confession and the Grecian Confession of Faith is here
mentioned, I thought it expedient to prefixe the Greek, because every Reader
will not probably have it at hand. That therefore it may appear to all, what
consent our doctrine has of old and of late, and how numerous the Professors
thereof, be at home and abroad this is adjoined. So that Adversaries can
neither justly load us with noveltie of tenets, or paucitie of adherents: and
he who will peruse both Confessions, may easily convince them of their error.
I thought to have set down the entire Confession in the Greek language, but the
Printer finding a defect of typs, the beginning of each Article and distinct
period is set down in Greek. And a faithful translation of it in the English
language is subjoyned, this translation was Printed at London diverse years
since.

(...). The Eastern Confession of the Christian faith. (...). In the Name of
the FATHER, and of the SON, and of the HOLY GHOST.
_(...) etc. We believe ou^ GOD Almighty and infinite, three in Persons, the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; the Father unbegotten, the Son begotten of the
Father before the World, consubstantial with the Father: the holy Ghost
proceeding from the Father by the Son, having the same essence with the Father
and the Son, we call these three Persons in one essence, the holy Trinity, ever
to be blessed, glorified, and to be worshipped of every creature.

(...) etc. We believe the holy Scripture to be give^ by GOD, to have no other
author but the Holy Ghost, which we ought undoubtedly to believe: for it is
written, We have a more sure word of Prophecy, to the which ye do well to take
heed, as to a light shining in a dark place. Besides, we believe the
authority thereof to be above the authority of the Church. It is a far
different thing for the h^ly Ghost to speak and the tongue ^f man, for the
tongue of man may through ignorance err, deceive, and be deceived; but the
Word of GOD neither deceieveth, nor is deceived, nor can err, but is always
infallible and sure.

(...) etc. We believe that the best and greatest GOD has predestined his
Elect unto glory before the beginning of the world, without any respect unto
their works, and that there was no other impulsive cause to this election, but
only the good will and mercy of GOD. In like manner before the world was made
he has rejected whom he would: of which act of reprobation, if you consider
the absolute dealing of GOD, his will is the cause, but if ye look upon GODS
orderly proceeding, his justice is the cause, for GOD is marciful and ^ust.

(...), etc. We believe that one GOD in Trinity, the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost, to be the Creator of all things visible and invisible: Invisible things
we call the Angels, visible things the Heavens and all things under them. And
because the Creator is good by nature, he has created all things good, and
cannot do any evil: and if there be any evil, it proceeds from the Devil and
man: for it ought to be a certain rule to us, that GOD is not the author of
evil, neither can any sin by any just reason be imputed to him.

(...) etc. We believe that all things are governed by GODS Providence, which
we ought rather to adore then search into, since it is beyond our capacity,
neither can we truly understand the reason of it from the things themselves;
in which matter we suppose it better to embrace silence in humility, then to
speak many things which do not edisie.

(...) etc. We believe that the first man created by God, fell in Paradise,
because neglecting the Commandment of GOD, he yielded to the deceitful counsel
of the Serpent, from thence sprung up Original sin to his posterity, so that
no man is borne according to the flesh, who does not bear his burden, and feel
the fruits of it in his life.

(...) etc. We believe that the Son of God our Lord Jesus Christ has made
himself of no account, that is, has assumed man's nature into his own
Subsistence, that he was conceived by the Holy Ghost, that he was made man in
the womb of Mary always a Virgin, was born and suffered death, was buried, and
glorified by his resurrection, that he brought salvation and glory to all
Believers, whom we look for to come to judge both quick and dead.

(...) etc. We believe that our Lord Jesus Christ sits a^ the right hand of
his Father, and there makes intercession for us, executing alone the office of
a true and lawful Priest and Mediator: and from thence he has a care of his
people, and governs his Church, adorning and enriching her with many
blessings.

(...) etc. We believe that without Faith no man can be saved, but that we call
Faith, which in Christ Jesus justifies which the life and death of our Lord
Jesus Christ procured, the Gospel published, and without which no man can
please GOD.

(...) etc. We believe that the Church (which it called Catholic) contains
all true believers in Christ, which being departed, are in their Country in
Heaven, or living on earth, are yet traveling in the way* the Head of which
Church, (because a mortal man by no means can be) Jesus Christ is the Head
alone, and he holds the sterue of the Government of the Church in his own
hand: but because on earth there be particular visible Churches, and in order
every one of them has one chief which chief is not properly to be called a
head of that particular Church, but improperly, because he is the principal
member thereof.

(...) etc. We believe that the Members of the Catholic Church be the Saints,
chosen unto eternal life, from the number and fellowship of who; Hypocrites are
excluded, though in particular visible Churches, Tares may be found amongst the
Wheat.

(...) etc. We believe that the Church on earth in the way is sanctified and
instructed by the Holy Ghost, for he is the true Comforter, whom Christ sends
from the Father, to teach the truth and to expel da^kness from the
understanding of the Faithful. For it is very certain, that the Church of GOD
may err, ^^king f^lshood for truth: from which error, the light and doctrine
of the holy Spirit alone f^eeth us, not of mortal man, although by Mediation of
the labors of the Churches Ministers, this may be done

(...) etc. We believe that a man is justify by ^ai^h, and not by works but
when we say by Faith, we understand the correlative or object of Faith, which
is the righteousness of Christ, which Faith apprehends and applies unto us for
our salvation. This may verily be, and yet without any prejudice to good
works: for Truth it self teaches us that works mu^^ not be neglected, that
they be necessary means, and testimonies of our Faith, for confirmation of our
calling; but for works to be sufficient for our salvation and to make a man so
to appear before the Tribunal of Christ, that of condignity or merit they
confer salvation, humane frailty witnesses to be false, but the
righteousness of Christ being applied to the penitent, does only justify and
save the Faithful.

(...) etc. We believe that free will i^ dead in the unregenerate, because they
can do no good thing, and whatsoever they do is sin; but in the regenerate by
the grace of the holy Spirit, the will it excited, and indeed works, but not
without the assistance of grace; to effect that therefore which is good, grace
goes before the will, which will in the regenerated is wounded, as he by the
thieves that came from Jerusalem, so that of himself without the help of grace,
he has no power to do any thing.

(...) etc. We believe that there be Evangelicall Sacraments in the Church,
which the Lord has instituted in the Gospel, and they be two: we have no
larger number of Sacraments, because the Ordayner thereof delivered no more.
Further more we believe, that they consist of the Word and the Element, that
they be seals of the promises of GOD, and we doubt not, but do confer grace.
But that the Sacrament be entire and whole, it is requisite that an earthly
substance and an external action do concur with the use of that element
ordained by Christ our Lord, and joined with a true faith, because the defect
of faith does prejudice the integrity of the Sacrament.

(...) etc. We believe that Baptism is a Sacrament instituted by the Lord,
which unless a man has received, he has not communion with Christ, from whose
death, burial, and glorious Resurrection, the whole virtue and efficacy of
Baptism does proceed. Therefore in the same form wherein our LORD has
commanded in the Gospel we are certain that to those who be Baptized both
Original and Actual sins are pardoned: so that whosoever have been washed, In
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, are regenerate
cleansed and justified. But concerning the repetitio^ of it, we have no command
to be Re-baptised therefore we must abstain from this inco^venience.

(...) etc. We believe that the other Sacrament was ordained of the Lord* which
we call the Eucharist. For in the night wherein he was betrayed, taking b^ead
and blessing it, he said to his Apostles, Take ye, ^at, this is my Body: and
when he had taken the Cup, he gave thanks and said, Drink ye all of this, this
is my Blood which was shed for many; do this in rem^mb^ance of me. And Paul
adds, for as often as ye shall eat of this Bread and drink of this Cup, ye
do show the Lords death: this is the pure and lawful institution of this
wonderful Sacrament, in administration whereof we confess and profess a true
and real presence of Christ our Lord, but yet such ^^ one as Faith offers ^o
us, not such as devised Transubstantiation teaches For we belive, the faithful
do eat the Body of Christ in the supper of the Lord, not by breaking it with
the teeth of the Body, but by perceiving it with the sense and feeling of the
Soul since the Body of Christ is not that which is visible in the Sacrament, but
that which Faith spiritually apprehends, and offers to us: from whence it
is true that if we believe, we do eat and partake; if we do not believe, we are
destitute of all the fruit of it. We believe consequently, that to drink the
Cup in the Sacrament, is to be partaker of the true Blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ, in the same manner as we affirmed of the Body: for as the Author of it
commanded concerning his Body, so he did concerning his Blood: which
commandment ought neither to be dismembered nor maimed according to the fancy of
man's arbitrament; yea rather the institution ought to be kept as it was
delivered to us. When therefore we have been partakers of the Body and Blood of
Christ worthily, and have communicated entirely, we acknowledge our selves to
be reconciled, united to our head of the same Body, with certain hope to be
coheires in the Kingdom to come.

(...) etc. We believe that the Souls of the dead are either in blessedness, or
in damnation, according as every one has done: for as soon as they remove out
of the Body they pass either to Christ, or into hell; for as a man is found at
his death, so he is judged, and after this life there i^ neither power nor
opportunity to repent. In this life there is a time of Grace, they therefore
who be justified here shall suffer no punishment hereafter: but they who being
not justified do dye, are appointed for everlasting punishments. By which it is
evident that the fiction of Pargatory is not to be admitted, but in the truth
it is determined that every one ought to repent in this life, and to obtain
remission of his sins by our Lord Jesus Christ, if he will be saved. And let
this be the end.

(...) etc. This compendious and brief Confession of us we conjectur will be a
contradiction to them, who are pleased to slander, maliciously accuse us, and
unjustly persecute us: But we trust in our Lord Jesus Christ, and hope that he
will not relinquish the cause of his faithful ones, nor let the rod of
wickednessly upon the lot of the righteous.

Da^id in Constantinople, in the Month of March, 1629.

CYRILL, Patriarch of Constantinople.

Courteous Reader, thy favor is desired in some escapes of the Press, these
which are but literal not altering the sense, pardon and pass by; these which
are more gross amend as follows.
In Epist. Ded. Page 5. Line 10. Read callida* l ^0 for way hold, Read, wax
bold. In the Epistle to the Reader, p. 8. l. 2 for Church r. Christ. p. 16. l.
ult for the, r. the^e. p. 18. l. 12. for calumnies r. calamities. page 19.
line. 27. for persuaded, read, dissuaded. page 21. line. 17. for d^ r. (...).
p. 26. l. 5. for 17 r. 14. In the Debate, p 8. l. 13. for, although all, r.
Apocryphal p 19. l antep. del. lay. p. 33 l. ult. r. proceed, p. 34. l. 17 for
Paliner r. Parmen. p 37. l. 21 for a r. the. p. 46 l. antep. r. Praxeam. p. 48
l. 6. r. conjuncta. p. 69. l. 25. for tradition r. citation. p. 88. l. 23. r.
lament. p. 103. l 20. del. Thirdly. p. 107. l. ^. r mortalitate. p 121. l. 13.
r. were made. p. 129. l. 18. r. breasts. p. 130. l. 19. for of r. in. p. 138 l.
19. r. statue. p. 160. l. 9. for according to, r. accordingly. p 161 l. penul^.
r. non continentur. p. 175. from l. 10. to 17. read all that period in () p.
177. l. 1. for, that r. not. p. 234. l. 20 add, or as some, 23. p. 268. l 23.
r. let them testify. p. 270 l. 25. r. comminations. p. 284. l. 17. r in
company. p. 284. l 5. r. none can.

In some copies though but in few, there will be found these errors, in Ep.
Ded. p. 2 Peope for Pope. p. 3. l. 9. Sacraments for Sacrament l. 20. modestly
and humbly, for modesty, humility. p. 4. l. 17. underminding for undermining.
l. 18. tears for tares, in pres. of the Greek Confession, twice d for (...).

If any testimonies be repeated, that is to be imputed to the Impunger, not to
the Defender.

A DIALOGUE, Betwixt a Papist, and a reformed PROFESSOR, who protests
against the Errors of Popery; written for information of the Simple, who love
the truth, that they be not ensnared, by the temptations of the time.
SEEing this Age is so controversall, how shall it be discerned who has the
Truth?

Earth all ^^^eals should be made, Is. 8. 20. To the ^^w and the Testimony.

To this Answer, a Papist replyeth, that it is not satisfying; and rendereth
five reasons, why the Scipture cannot be the determiner of faith and manners.
First, Because the chief and greatest Controversy is about scripture it ^^lf,
viz, What (...) scripture, what not? Now if it be the determiner of faith, as
you speak, in (...) is the Catalogue of Canonical books (...)? How may it be
proved against Luth^^* that St. James his Epistle is Canonical (...) against
others that Nicodemus and S. Thomas Gospells are not? Or, if you reject Tobias,
Judith, the books of Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus and the Maccabees, because the
Synagogue of the Jews did so, why ^o ^ou not also deny Christ to be the
Messiah with them?

Answer. This return is rather an evasion, then solid reply, and is satisfied
in the resolution the Precognita of other science have, ex terminis, their own
notoreiety, (and We should not argument, contra negantes principia, against
them who deny known principles) how can this be denied to Theology? seeing, if
we rest not on some principles we must run our selves out of breath, and not
know where to sist. Basil Basil on Psalm. 115.
tells (...), as in every science, there be unque^^^able principles, which
are believed without ^^rther demonstration, so in the science of (...)
Theology, This is amongst (...), (...) scripture is the word of God, if any
(...) this controversall, he is an Antiscripturi^^ and Paganish. Secondly,
There be no Controversy, betwixt us and the Papists, in that wherein we are
agreed, but both are agreed that all the books which we receive for Canonical
scripture, are the word of God, Ergo, this is no Controversy. If all the
books of scripture which we mantaine be the word of God, our Adversaries being
judges, then i^ must determine faith and manners, or else our faith is humane,
for Bellarmine Bell. de verbo Dei lib. 1. ^. 2.
says, that Scriptura est regula credendi tutissima and certissima, the
written word is a most sure and certain rule of believing. So says Aquinas
Aquinas in Tim. 6.
. This is sufficient for confirming the first Answer, and refuting the first
Exception^ Yet, to follow your impertineut digression, from the power of the
scripture-bench, to the number of the books. I Answer Secondly, that the
doctrine, concerning the number of the scripture books, or the names of all
them who penned these, if comparatively considered, that is, if you compare the
present number with that of the Jewish and ancient Church in p^^mitive times of
Christianity, is not expli^^^ known and believed by all, Fide divine (...)
first; but we come to the knowledge of ^^e number, which the primitive Church
mantained, as we do to the names and number of other books, seeing the
Catalogue of Canonical books is not set down in scripture. All this we
attain, without the aid of Romish Councills. For the Jews to whom were
committed the oracles of God, Romans 3. 1. 2. whom holy Augustine on Ps. 40.
calls Capsarios and librarios Christianorum, these who kept the books of
the old Testament for Christians, and fulfilled, as he says, that word in
part. The elder shall serve the younger, divide the books of the old
Testament, according to the letters of their Alphabet into two and twenty,
sometimes into four and twenty, as Eusebius shows, yet never added to, nor
Lib. 3. cap. 10.
altered a book of the Canon; only they would su^me up now and then the book of
Ruth with the Judges, the book of the Lamentations with the Prophecies of
Jeremy, and at other times again, reckon them by themselves: So they sometimes
made but one book of Samuel, one of the Kings, one of the Chronicles, in some
editions the whole Minor Prophets were reckoned but one book, by them. As the
scription and writting of the bible is, and has been diverse, yet the doctrine
contained therein, is still the rule under every character: so the Canon of the
old Testament finished by the Prophet Malachy, was ever the same in the Jewish
Church, what ever way they calculated the number of these books. Hierom
translated the books of the old Testament from the Hebrew, and he did admit all
the books admitted by us. So did the Greek and Latin Church, neither for ought
we can learn from Authors, was there any alteration or add^tion till the third
Council of Carthage then Can. 47. they reco^mended other books as profitable to
be read, which are Apocryphal. The Canon of the New Testament was finished by
John the Evangelist, who out, lived the rest of the Apostles, and the number,
we have not disclaimed, In universa ecclesia Christiana, says Hierom ad
Dardanum. And, according to the Council of Laodi^^a Can. 59. these books were
numbered is Canonick only, and appointed to be read in all the Churches of
Syrla, this Council was holden Annno Dom. 364.

Although Luther cast at the Epistle of James we receive it. Secondly, Luther
by some Learned, is said to have made a retractation of that error. Thirdly,
In his Preface to his works he desires that men would read his books with some
commiseration, and remember that once he was a Monk. Fourthly, Your own Cajetan
said as much against the Epistle of James as Sirtus Senensis tells us
Biblioth. lib. 6. will it therefore follow that ye have no Canon? Fifthly,
Stapleton says, Princ. doct. lib. 9. cap. 14. and in Defens. Ecc. Author: that
it is not as yet peremptorily defined by your Church, whither ye may add more
books to the present number? but, we of the reformed Church are agreed in this,
that these books of the Old and New Testament number them who will, were the
Canon received, read, and exponed in the Primitive Church, and none can add to
or alter the doctrine therein contained, under the pain of Anathema, Rev. 22.
19. It is an admirable providence that the Jews such enemies to Christianity,
kept these Prophesies of the Scripture uncorrupted. So says holy Augustine
lib. de Consensu Evang. cap. 26. yet you deride that, as if the Lord could not
keep that holy Canon in the Jews hand which is a witness against them, and
testifies of him to their confusion. Jo. 5. 39. so your consequence ^s bad and
impertinent.

Answer. Third. Although the numbering, or penning of the Scripture books,
(comparatively considered) be not simply necessary to be known, or believed,
fide Divina. But we come to the knowledge of these as to the number or penner
of other books: yet absolutely considered, to any discerner the books of
Scripture father themselves. Lege in facie (...) Divina, read in the face of
them divine approbation, as in the Firmament we may see the singer of GOD, so
here See Barron against Turnbul tract. 9. p. 643.
we may behold divine Majesty, Heavenly efficacy, the consent and harmony of
parts the fulfilling of Prophesies, see August. lib. 6. Confess. cap. 5.
Persuasisti mihi non qui crederent libros tuos, quos, tanta in omnibus fere
gentibus authoritate, fundasti, sed qui non crederent, esse culpandos: nec
audiendos esse, si qui forte mihi dicerent, unde scis illos libros unius very
Dei spiritu esse humano generi administratos? id ipsum maxim credendum erat.
The Scripture it self then testifies whose it is, holy men of GOD did so speak
and writ that ye may know the certainty of these things, Luk 1. 4. and believe
them, Jo. 19. 35. this is taken from the very Scripture, and not from any
distinct Tradition from i^. Beside all this, we have miracles wonderful
providence sealing this word; the testimony of adversaries, Jews and Gentiles
to the doctrine therein contained, the testimony of old and late writters to
our whole Canon. And seeing the Lord has sealed it* and it is called his
Testament, none should add to it, or alter any point contained therein. This
is expressly forbidden Deuteronomy. 4. 2. 12. 32. Pro. 3. 6. how grossly Papists make
void the Testament of the Lord by new datives, and in that are like the
Pharisees, Matthew. 15. 3. 6. shall appear hereafter.

Answer fourth, Although all books The Papists reject some of these Apocriphal
books from the Canon of Scripture, a^ Esdras, the book of Baruch etc.
are not rejected by us upon this account only because the Jews did so, but for
many other good reasons; for, self-murder is commended in Razis there, contrar
to the 6. Command, etc. The authors crave pardon for that which is spoken
amiss, whereby it is acknowledged that they had not the spirit of
infallibility; in all ages, exceptions were made against them as is well proved
by our Divines, S. Thomas and Nicodemus Gospels have approbation of none, so
need no refutation. Now I refer it to any Reader whither this first reason be
sufficiently refuted, or if this reflecter understands Logic, or himself who
thus reasons, The number of Scripture b^oks is controverted, therefore that
which on all hands betwixt PROTESTANTS and Papists, is acknowledged to be
Scripture is not the determiner of faith. Who will not perceive here a
mis-stated question and gross non-consequence? Yet no greater not that
concerning the Messiah which deserves no answer, being so absurd, and
bordering with blasphemy.

The second Reason, Why Scripture cannot be the rule of faith, is, because
PROTESTANTS believe many things whereof the Scripture makes no mention at all,
as the keeping holy the Sunday for the Sabbath, or Saturday, the procession of
the Holy Ghost from the Father and the Son, the Trinity of Persons in God, that
there is one person although two natures in Christ: for the Scripture makes no
more mention of Persons then of Papish-tran substantiation: that Baptism of
Heretics is not to be reiterat, against the Donatists: that Ordination of
lawful Ministers should not be reiter^t against Marcion: that Baptism and the
Lords Supper are Sacraments, which are the very fundamentals of your Religion.

I answer to this, that error is broodie, for ere it be confessed by some men,
they will on Scripture, which is most abominable to utter. What, is not the
Trinity, the Sacrament of Baptism and the Supper scriptural truths? Let not
this be heard in Gath. This gives the Council of Sess. 7 Can. 1. de Sacr. in
genesis
Trent the lie, so the author is anathematized by them. Let Papists read such
as writ positive Divinity, these points are abundantly proved by them from
Scripture, Catechists will teach them to speak better, and it they be not
founded there, why do your own writters prove them thence?

Secondly, The mystery of the Trinity is directly in Scripture. 1. Io. 5. 7.
there are An. 2.
three which bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Spirit, these
three are one. The Word Person is in Scripture, Heb. 1. 3. we indeed make use
of words in the doctrine of the Trinity which are not Scripture words, but all
the things are there, otherwise our foundations would soon dissolve. This is
Augustins answer against the Arrians, Contra Max. lib. 3. cap. 5. and Naz.
Orat. 5. de Theol. yea your own Bellarmin lib. 2. de Christo. cap 2. says,
Quadam verba sunt utilia ad explicanda mysteria Scripturae, quae licet in
Scripturis non habeantur, eorum tamen aequivalentia and semina ibi habentur. i.
e. Some words are necessar for explaining the mysteries of Scripture which
though they be not contained in the Scriptures yet their parallels and seeds
are contained there. This he proves by instances, cha. 3. 4. 5 which I need
not to translate. So that the Tenets which we mantaine concerning the Trinity
and the two Sacraments, being Scripture truths, it is gross to say, we have no
Scripture warrant for these and seeing we may make use of words for explaining
divine truths any may behold the weakness of this Reply. The name Trinity and
Sacrament is not in Scripture; therefore the thing is not there. As for the
Sabbath, we once prove from Scripture that Saturday is no Sabbath to us, Col.
2. 16. 17. then from Scripture that one day of seven behoved to be observed by
reason of the fourth Command which is Moral. Secondly, That the seventh in
number ^^ Moral, and the seventh day in order, only ceremonial. Thirdly That
the Lord's Day by right succeeds See Palmer and Candrey about the Sabbath
as is here made out. And what day can be more sit then that on which Christ
Jesus arose, and put an end to the work of Redemption? Then our Lord came in
amongst the midst of his Disciples. Io. 20. 26. which M^ldo^at on the place
confesses to be some proof to show that the Lord's Day has its origin from the
will of Christ. Acts 20* 7. The Disciples conveened to the worship and the
breaking of bread that day, and 1. Cor. 16 they had their collections that day:
Hierom contra Vigilantium says, that per una^ Sabbati is understood the
Lord's Day. And Rev. 1. 10. There is express mention of the Lords day, on which
place Ribera the Jesuit remarketh that in the Apostles times, the solemnity of
the Sabbath was changed to the Lord's Day, and consecrated by the Lords
Resurrection. Esthius on Gal. 4. v. 10. refuteth you fully by saying, Diei
Dominicae observationem Apostolicam esse constat ex Scriptura. i. e. It is
clear from Scripture that the Apostles observed the Lords day. How then can you
say that we have no Scripture for it? Thirdly, That the holy Ghost proceeds
from the Father and the Son, is clear in Scripture, Io. 14. 16. 17. Ioh. 15.
26. Io. 16. 7. Gal. 4. 6. Fourthly, That there be two Natures in Christ, is
clear, Io. 1. 14. The Word was made flesh and dwelt amongst us. And Augustine
who refuteth Rebaptization mantained by Donatists, makes no use of unwritten
Traditions, against that error, but of that Scripture, Ephesians. 4. 5. One Lord,
one Faith, one Baptism, for he says, re^urrantus ad fontem, viz. Scripturas:
let us return to the Scriptures which are the fountain; then citeh that text
mentioned Tom. 7. lib. 5. cap. 26. and Ordination is expressed in that Tense,
which by virtue of the word, excludes Reiteration. It being a matter of Order
if it be once done according to the rule, 1. Tim. 4. 14. it is enough; neither
should this be debated here, for all that we assert is, that all points
necessar to salvation are comprehended in Scripture, either expressly or
cosequentially, by general or particular precepts, Perinde sunt ea quae ex
Scriptu^is Colliguntur, atque ea quae scribuntur, says Nazianzen, Naz. de
Theol. orat. 5.
i. e. These things which by necessary consequence are deduced from Scripture
are of the same force with these which are written in it. Let the Reader judge
whither Popery be a safe way, which builds our main foundations upon humane
testimony, and derogats so much from the Scriptures of GOD. Yea, ere they will
give them their due, rather will they strengthen Anti-Trinitarians, Arrians,
Anti-Sacramentarians, Anti-Sabbatarians, Donatists and Separatists. The Lord
grant repentance to such, who leaving the truth have a massed a body of errors.

Thirdly. For that amongst many Versions, yea and corruptions of Scripture,
which all do acknowledge, and each sect imputes to its adversaries, it seems
very hard to discern authentic Scripture, many of the originals being lost,
and the extract coming to the hands of very few, and few understand the Hebrew
and Greek tongues wherein they are written, and yet, of this first of all we
must be understood and assured, if we will not waver in matters of f^^th.

Answer first, This is a digression to another Version: for I would ask, if
there be any right Version at all? this will not be denied, for the old Latin
translation is acknowledged by you, then it is the rule of faith and no humane
testimony. What does this arguing prove against the point? there be some
corrupted Versions, Ergo, the Original rightly translated must not determine my
faith; some men are evil clothed, therefore a man should not be well clothed
against the cold; there is no consequence there. Further, this objection makes
the word of God useles to men. Now, is it like that all should be commanded to
go to the Law and Testimony, to, search the Scriptures, if they could not be
had by any? Yea this Objection spoileth Providence, of its rent of praise which
has appeared so visibly in the preservation of the Scriptures. And we bless
his Name for it that we have the Originals in Hebrew and Greek, and so pure a
translaon, that if any will compare them they will find great faithfulness and
skill in the translators.

But to answer this impertinent Objection An. 2.
more fully, we say that the Version is a Commentary be way of interpretation,
and we make neither the translation of the 70. nor of the vulgar Latin
authentic; but when we find errors in either, we go ad judicem incor^uptum
hoc est primaevam linguam: to the uncorrupted Judge that is the first language,
so much speaks your Acosta. lib. 2. cap. 10. and in this rightly. But ye
Romanists have preferred the vulgar Latin to the Hebrew and Greek, whereas it
is a corrupt translation, as some of your own testify, and corrupts the
doctrine, witness that one text for many, Genesis 3. 15. Ipsa conteret caput tuum.
She shall break thy head, which is contrar to the Hebrew (hu). to the 70 (...).
and puts the Virgin Mary for Christ, so overturneth a foundation. Pag^^n. in
his Preface to the Hebrew Grammar, says, Optarem ut ostenderent mihi Germanam
translationem, quae enim p^ssim legitur non est Hieronymi incorrupta
translatio. i. e. I wish they would show me the Genuin translation, for that
which is commonly received is not Hieroms pure translation, and Sixtus Senensis
Bib. lib. 8. sub finem, says, Multa ibi sunt parum accommodate versa. There
are many things in it not fitly rendered: so that our Version will be found as
good as any. And we are not hindered to run to the fountains in case of
doubting, we make use of these streams as helps, and the Version is an humane
instrument leading us to the wellhead of the Original tongues. Dei verbum non
est linguased doctrina: The word of GOD is not the language but the doctrine,
says, Rivet in his Isag. cap. 1. and we need Grammar more then Tradition for
understanding thereof.

Reason fourth. Many cannot read Scripture, and more as yet do not understand
it, the Scripture then or written word cannot be the Rule of Faith to these
poor ignorants, but their Churches or Pastors authority. And so it seems the
Scripture cannot be the rule of faith to all persons, or in all points, or of
any point contained in it self, until I be first assured of some infallible
rule, that this translation I rely upon is conform to the original in all
points, and this Bible I am reading is the authentic word of God.

Answer First, This makes nothing against Regula regulativa to all, apt and
meet to decide all controversies, if men have ears to hear what the Spirit
says to the Churches: if it be not Regula regulans to some who are ignorant
and unstable, Vitium ost in Organo, the fault is in the Organ. It is ill argued
to say the Sun shines not, because blind men see it not.

Secondly. They who cannot read the Scriptures An. 2.
can hear them read, and it is more easy for dark ignorant ones to hear the
word read and explained in their own language, then to travel from Scotland to
Rome to hear the sentence of the Pope, for they could not understand the
language in which it is delivered, they cannot travel through their decretals
and acts. They know not if it be a lawful Pope, who pronounces the sentence.
And by their Confessors here they may be and are deceived.

Thirdly, It is the privilege and promise An. 3.
of God to open the heart, to enlighten the eyes, by the word read and
preached, but no where has the word of man this prerogative. See Is. 32. 3. 4.
and Is. 35. 5. 6. 7. 8. These are Gospel prophecies. The Roman Trash may well
make seeing men blind, but will never make blind men see the right way.

Fourthly, We do not deny ministerial An. 4.
helps to unlettered people, for such are commanded, Heb. 13. 7. and 17.
provided always their faith be resolved into the word of God, at least
interpretative and virtualiter. What ever means be used, this milk of the Word
is the authentic instrument which begets faith, and it must be received not
as the word of man, albeit the treasure be in earthen vessels, and the milk in
a wooden pape. The difference of assent betwixt the learned and the unlearned
is only accidental and modal, the one being more express then the other; we
Catechize and instruct the ignorant, and require them to hear the Church and
follow their guides, so far as they follow Christ. 1. Cor. 11. 1. we hold forth
co^munia fidei motiva, interna (...), inward testimonies, the common motives of
faith, reasons and testimonies of old and late, and what ever may help their
edification: but we dare not lead them from the Scripture to men, neither will
the interpretation of the Scripture permit us to admit of an other determiner.
And it may be well enough known by them who understand these languages, that
these Greek and Hebrew words do thus signify as they are translated, without
the help of an infallible decree of Pope or Council thereanent. Without this
also, GODS word can discover it self to be from GOD as has been showed already.

Reason 5. Reading of the Scripture with the private spirit, and taking it up as
every one thinks, makes all the controversies in Christendom, daily
multiplying both Heresies and sects. Luther no sooner swerved from the Church,
and denied her authority, but as soon he broached this principle, That every
man might take the Bible and follow that interpretation which after due
diligence used, he thought best, whereupon presently did spring up an
incredible number of different sects, Antimon^ans, Osiandrians, Majorists,
Synergists, etc. Now hear what Luther himself said of Calvin's heresy, Tom. 7.
fol. 380. I scarce ever read, says he, of a more deformed heresy, which
presently in the beginning was divided into such variety of sects, as so many
Toads, and such disagreement of opinions not one like to another. You see then
how the word cannot be the determiner of faith, which all these sects take with
you for their rule, yet alone will never agree them. As for that you say, the
scripture has Divine authority, Heavenly majesty, and makes Spiritual
impressions on the soul, all this I grant, if once a man know or believe it to
be the word of GOD.

Answer First, All this is answered to the fourth or fifth question, and should
not be Az^^i^s confesses, Just, mor. p. 1. lib: 8. c. 26. ^he Scriptures in
the Primitive Church were to be published throughout all Nations, and therefore
made common in the most famou^ languages. In Hierom and Chrysostoms days the
ley people were exercised in reading the Scriptures. Espencaeus says, Comment.
on Tit. 3. 2. it is manifest by the Apostles doctrine, Col. 3. 16. and by the
practice of the Church, that the publies use of reading the scriptures was then
permitted to the people. The Council of Nice decreed says Agrippa, that no
Chri^tian should ^e without a Bible. Augustine allows, de Doct. Christi. the
use of scriptures to all, for he says, they are not so hard, but every one by
his use making of them may attain to so much knowledge of them as may further
him in his salvation. Chrysostom. hom. 3. de Lizaro. exhorts all men and women,
yea Tradsmen to get Bibles. Now I pray you to what purpose if they dare not
search for the sense of them?

Secondly, It is denied that when private It may be private respectupersonae
which is public ration^ modi and medii and e contra.
for such may pray, and have the spirit of grace and supplication poured forth
on them, according to the promise, Zach. 12. 10. and none call that a private
spirit, so they may interpret Scripture by Scripture, and have the gift of it.
Hear your own Gerson prim^ part. de ex. doct. Si aliquis non authorizatus sit
excellenter in sacra scriptura eruditus, plus credendum est ejus assertioni
quam Papae declarationi. i. e. If any not ordained be well instructed in the
holy Scriptures, his assertion is more to be believed then the Popes
declaration. Secondly, Our Divines distinguish well three sorts of
interpreters, the first is extraordinar and miraculous. 1. Cor. 12. 30. The
second is ordinar and ministerial. 1. Cor. 14. 32. The spirits of the Prophets
are subject to the Prophets. The third is of private persons who are commanded
to ^ry the spirits, and are commended for so ^^ing. A^t. 8. 28. 29. A^t. 17.
11. The first kind of interpretation is gone, the two next are in use as yet,
but the one is subservient to the other. Thirdly, ^he different sects that lay
claim to Scripture, cannot deprive us of the privilege to search it and make
use of it. Will any man approve this argument? Meat and drink is abused by some
therefore none should eat or drink. If the matter be indifferent and subject to
abuse, then we are to restrain our selves of liberty in the use of that in
different thing. V^tandum estlicitu^ non necess^riu^ propter vicinitatem
illi^^ti. Aug. de c^v. Dei lib. 15. But when it is necessar necessitate
precepti and medii, by necessity of precept and mean, who can forbid the use of
a necessar mean? Now it is most necessar to improve the Scriptures by reading,
understanding, application, meditation, and blessed is he who does so day and
night, sitting or standing. De^t. 6. 6. It is absurd to say (^lbeit Luther and
Calvin did differ in some points) that he fathered the sects of Germany on
Calvin, who was as free of Munster malady as the man unborn, and was malleus
haereticorum as his learned writtings testify abundantly. In that place
cited, he speaks of the swarms of sects, which were indeed monstrous like, at
that time, but never imputed it to the use making of Scripture, for then he
would not have understood himself, nor could he blame Calvin for it upon that
account, seeing it was his own tenet. Now Reader, stay and impartially consider
the weakness and impertinency of these 5 reasons, why our faith should not be
resolved into the Scriptures and determined by them. For the sum of all is
thus concluded. The word of GOD is not well understood by some, is evil
translated by others, and Heretics and Schismatics have abused it: therefore,
we should not make use of it as the rule of faith and manners. This is a
Paralogism and confused rapsodic, but I pass it; for sons of Babel must daub
with untempered mortar, and be Babel-like in their way.

Although these 5. Reasons be answered 1.
sufficiently, yet for further satisfaction to the Reader, these two
particulars shall be discussed. Question 1. Whose it is to interpret Scripture.
R. In the first place it belongs to the Ministerial Church. Pastors and
Officers called of GOD to that employment, are ordinarily better gifted for
that work then other men: I say ordinarily, because in some cases it may be
otherwise, and the Lord may raise up extraordinary interpreters, this appears
from 1. Cor. 14. 29. And the judgment of a pure Church in dubious cases,
should weigh much with private Christians. Secondly, Private Christians may read
the Scriptures, search for their sense, improve them privately for edification,
and examine what is said by others, for they have the promise to attain, Jer.
31. 34. a precept to improve, 1. Pet. 4. 10. and a privilege to try Acts 17.
11. 1. Cor. 10. 15. this judgment of discretion no man can take from them, Io.
10. 4. Matthew. 7. 15. more then the taste from a man. Is not that spirit which
dyted the scripure the best interprerer of it? But private men may have that, 1.
Cor. 2. 15. This their judgment is not authoritative nor judicial, yet binds
themselves, and he is a better Christian who follows, then he who stiffleth
it, so speak all Casuists. Chrysostom. hom. 13. in act. Apost. reproves such as
professed they would be Christ^ans, yet doubted to whom they should adhere^;
have ye not judgment says he, and have ye not scriptures? Aug. Confess. lib.
13. sub sinem cap. 22. and cap. 23. explaining that place, 1. Cor. 2. 15.
says Quisque fidelis est spiritualis, every believer is spiritual and has a
judgment of discretion. Picus Mirandula Theor. 16. says, If the greatest part
of a Council conclude against the word of God, Si rusticus, if a rural man
have the Gospel for him, he is most to be believed and adhered to. This shows
that the scripture should be read and searched by such, and private men having
this privilege, should make use of it in a Gospel way, for edification, not
for destruction.

Question second, How shall Scripture be interpreted? Answer first, Not by the
Pope,. 2.
for people are commanded to search the Scriptures, before there was a Pope in
the world. John 5. 39. therefore, that cannot be a necessar mean. Secondly, Nor
can all make use of General Councills, seeing these are more hard to be
understood then the Scripture. Thirdly, Not by carnal reason. For the natural
man perceives not the things of God. 1. Cor. 2. 14. But first by Prayer and
Meditation, for the Lord gives the Spirit to them that ask him, Luke 11. 13.
and this mean is practiced by experienced believers. Ps. 119. 18. Secondly, By
a docile cleanly frame of heart. Ps. 25: 9. 10. Matthew. 5. 8. Thirdly, By
comparing Scripture with scripture, obscure places with these which are clear,;
ex Gr. who can interpret Ps. 8. v. 2. so well as the Evangelist, Matthew. 21. 16.
or the 4. and 5. verses, so as the Apostle to the Heb. 2. 7. 8. or these words
Matthew. 26. 28 so as the Evangelist Luke 22. 20. with Mat. 26. 29. where after
the consecration of the Cup it is called the fruit of the vine. Or that text,
Matthew. 19. 23. A rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of Heaven. so as
the interpretation of the Evangelist, Mark. cap. 10. 34. How hard it is for
them that trust in riches to enter into the kingdom of God. Fourthly, By the
Commentats of ancient and late writters, by the preaching of those who are
called of God to that work: with this caution that we try the spirits, whither
they be of God or not. 1. Io. 4. 1. Fifthly, For the exact interpretation of
places, which should be propounded to others for edification, the knowledge of
the Original tongues, History, Chronology, Topography, is in measure requisite.
This is the way by which the ancient Fathers expounded Scripture. Chrysostom. in
Genesis hom. 13. (...) Socra Scriptura cum nos tale quid docere vult, serpsant
exponit, and auditorem errare non sinit. i. e. The holy Scripture when it will
have us to teach any such thing it expounds it self, and suffers not the
hearer to err. Yea a Jesuit Acosta, lib. 3. de Christo revelato. chapter 25.
confesses so much, being overcome with the truth. Nihil perinde scripturam
mihi aperire videtur, atque ipsa scriptura, itaque diligens attenta frequensque
lectio, meditatio, oration, and collatio scripturarum, summa regula ad
intelligendam scripturam mihi semper visa est. i. e. Nothing seems to me more
useful, for opening up scripture, then scripture it self: therefore the
diligent, attentive, and frequent reading of the Scriptures, meditation,
prayer, and comparing of them together, has ever seemed to me the best rule
for understanding scripture. Aug. de doct. Christi lib. 2. cap. 9. In his enim
quae aperte in scriptura proposita sunt, inveniuntur illa omnia, quae continent
fidem, spem, charitatem, moresque vivendi: de quibus libro superiore
tractavimus tum vero facta quadam familiaritate, cum ipsa lingua divinarum
scripturarum, in ea quae obscura sunt aperienda and discutienda, pergendum est*
ut ad obscuriores locutiones illustrandas, de manifestioribus su^mantur
exempla: and quaed^m certatum sententiarum testimonia, dubitationem de incertis
auferant.

Question second, How can the Scripture be judge seeing it is the rule? ^a. Qu.
^.


Answer first, It is a speaking rule, the Spirit of God speaks there. The
Acts of Parliament are both the law and judge of a determination is from the
word alone, for humane testimony can add no weight to the Divine.

To this it is returned, that the second answer is no better then the first.
The Scripture say you is a speaking rule, and may be both rule and judge. But
the Acts of Parliament and civil laws be as well speaking laws, in matters of
temporal government, as the scripture is in spiritual: and yet parties should
never agree, if the Lords of Council and Session did not expound them, and
pronounce sentence from them, not as heralds, but as judges: albeit they be
tied to conform their sentence both to Acts of Parliament customs, and laws.
Even so, scripture is indeed our law book, but the Church is our judge, for
this our experience may prove, that there has been no agreement amongst them,
who make any other judge then the Church, as all Sectaries commonly do. Beside,
it would seem to me against our oath of supremacy, not to acknowledge any
other judge in matters of controversy then scripture. Seeing there his
Majesty is said to be, and we sworn to acknowledge him, supreme judge in all
cases, as well Civil as Eclesiastick, and I pray God that Preachers and
Ministers, to whom only you ascribe the power of herauldry, had not taken on
the coat of arms, these years bygon, to publish any other sentence, then that
which did proceed from the mouth of that supreme judge.

Answer first, The Scripture we call a rule, Tim. 3. 16. as a rule does a line,
and the Duply. 1.
doctrine therein is termed a judge, Metonymically, (properly a judge is a
person) because it is the voice of a supreme judge, who is our lawgiver. This
we speak with the Scripture, Io. 12. 48. Io. 7. 51. and Heb. 4. 13. It is the
descerner of the thoughts of the heart. Where (...) is given to it. You grant
here, that it is our law book, Ergo, Metonymically our judge and determiner it
must be, for we appeal to the law for judgment. To this the Apostle Paul
appealeth, Act. 26. 22. Then there be many cases incident to a Christian in his
spiritual exercise, which none on earth can judge. The spiritual one is judged
of no mam, 1. Cor. 2. 15. yet this will discern the thoughts of his heart. The
divine doctrine now written is the only impartial infallible determiner, he who
hears not Moses, the Prophets and the Apostles, will not hear one risen from
the dead. Conscience is a rule, Romans 2. 14. a witness, Romans 2. 15. and a judge,
1. Io. 3. 20. 21. It is to be considered, that there is a difference betwixt
humane Courts and this work: the one concerns temporals wherein we may be
ruled by reason, but here in matters of salvation we must have an infallible
rule by revelation; albeit in humane Courts the rule the witness and the judge
are different, for guarding against corruption to which fallen man is subject*
yet in foro divino, in the court of GOD one may be witness, judge, rule,
accuser, such is the scripture. The Spirit of GOD speaks there. Is it not the
law, the testimony the canon or rule? Gal. 6. 16. is it not a witnesser a
warner? Ps. 19. 11. does it not speak to men? Romans 9. 17. and will it not judge
us hereafter? The word which I speak to you will judge you in the last day. Io.
12. 48. if then, why now is it not our judge? Further, the judgment of
discretion, is but a discretive faculty, no proper bench, and liker a watch
then a judge, for it has no authority over others, the Ministerial authority
is subordin^t, and more like the office of a steward nor of a proper judge. 2.
Cor. 1. 24. Only the written word is the determiner, and the Lord speaking
there, is absolute supreme judge, from whom there is no appealing.

Answer second, If the second be as good as the first it is well, for
notwithstanding of all that we should go to the law and testimony with all our
cases, and that the scripture to any believer and right discerner has divine
authority, Heavenly majesty, and makes spiritual impressions on the soul. If
it have divine authority is it not judge? was there any more asserted in the
first answer? we hold the same similitude; the King is head of Council and
Session, the law ratified by King and Parliament is the rule, and the officers
of Council and Session are administrators. So our Lord Jesus is the head of his
Church, the written Word is the law, and the Ministers of the Gospel are
administrators, by whom the people are directed and instructed. But if the
officers go contrar to the will of the King and his law, the subjects may
appeal from their administration to the acts of Parliament, and hear the Kings
pleasure, when subjects wrong their inferiors and neighbors. See Ps. 85. 8.
Hear what the Lord will say, and who has ears to hear, let him hear what the
Spirit says to the Churches.

Answer third, Ministers of the Gospel are called Messengers, Rev. 2. 2. Cor.
8. 23. So Mal. 2. 7. and does not the Greek word (...) often used for Preacher in
the N. T. signify a crier or herald? Why then do you scoff at Scripture? As
for your prayer, it seems you pray all by the book, and here you are beside
it: present or future things are the object of prayer, but that factum should
be infectum, to pray that a thing done should be undone, is an unwarrantable
petition; what has been wrong in us heretofore should be regrated, what is or
has been right, is the object of praise, but your prayer is unwarrantable and
impossible.

Answer fourth, Albeit our Sovereign Lord Pet. 2. 13. and ex officio a nursing
father to the Church, Is. 49. 23. to whom every man civil or Ecclesiastic does
owe subjection, Romans 13. 1. Yet it will not follow, that the word of GOD is not
the supreme determiner of all controversies in Religion. Whatsoever primitive
Fathers gave to Constantine the great, Theodosius elder and younger, etc. that
we give to our Sovereign Lord the King: And* there be no Church on earth, which
by their confessions of faith honor the Magistrate more then we. Yet
notwithstanding of this prerogative asserted, and mantained against Papists by
our Viz. Bp. Bilson de Subject. Usher. Dr. Strange.
Divines. Our Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty will not deny, that the
scripture is the determiner of all the Articles of our faith: seeing he
mantaineth the 39. Articles of the Church of England, whereof this is one.

Answer fifth, How comes it to pass that calling it ours) seeing the main scop
of that oath was, to renounce the Pope his jurisdiction in the Kings dominions,
you must either have a dispensation for this, that you here subscribe a
renunciation of the Popes supremacy, or else you will be declared apostar at
Rome. And no Papist keeping his principles, can aver that which is here set
down under your hand.

Question third, If the Scripture be judge, why be there so many controversies
undecyded?

Answer, The perverseness of men is to blame for this. Unstable, unlearned ones
wrest the Scripture to their own perdition, Pet. 3. 16. and make difficulties
where there be none. As much as contains the way to salvation is plain in
Scripture, so that he who runs may read and learn.

Reply, In your third answer you please me well, and it confirms all I have
said, but refuteth your former answer to the full. For if the unlearned as well
as the unstable wrest the scripture to their own destruction, then Scripture
can neither be the determiner of faith nor the judge of controversies to them,
and so they must have another, both to instruct the ignorant and settle the
unstable; as we must all have some infallible judge to know who wrest the
Scripture who not: otherwise we may well agree in the letter, but we will never
agree in the sense and meaning thereof. But as much (say you) as contains the
way to salvation is plain, so that he may run who reads it. Sir, does it
not belong to salvation that there be three persons in God, one in Christ, that
Baptism is a Sacrament, etc. Now, where find you this in Scripture either
running or siting? Or if Scripture be so plain and clear as ye make it, why be
there so many Comments on it among your own men and so different? Why is there
amongst Protestants 200. expositions upon these four words, This is my Body? As
Cusa^us in his holy court observes.

Answer first, I am glade that the written it refuteth what was said formerly.
This cannot be made good, for still I said it was the rule of faith, to right
discerners, and sometime you grant this, as in the latter part of your fifth
Reason, whereby indeed you refute all you have said, and yields the cause
fully. Now what contradiction can be here? The scripture is the rule to all
right discerners, and as many as walk according to this rule peace shall be on
them: but men who wrest the word, unlearned, unstable souls, fall into
perdi^ion for abuse of the word, and destroy themselves; hence proceeds many
controversies. Is it not a strange consequence to infer thence, that these
unlearned, unstable souls should have another rule and another judge? In the
19. of Luke v. 27. it is said by our Lord, that his enemies who would not have
him to reign over them, should be brought forth and slain before him: will it
therefore follow, that he should not reign over them? Or that they Jure should
have another King? The case is just alike here. It is granted that many have
their consciences seared, 1. Tim. 4. 2. are (...) 2. Tim. 3. 8. self-condemned.
Tit. 3. 11. under strong delusions. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11. Is the Scripture to blame
for this? You have many faults to that which you like not. Hear Optatus
Milevitanus adversus Paliner Donatistam. Vos dicitis licet, nos non licet,
inter licet vestrum, and non licet nostrum, nutant animi populorum. If you seek
a judge (says he) a Pagan cannot do it nor a Jew, they are enemies: Christians
by their discerning faculty cannot, they being impeded studio partium Then upon
earth there can be no judge: shall we go to Heaven for one? Quorsum, cum hic
habemus i^ Evangelio testamentum. i. e. To what purp^se seeing we have the
Testament here in the Gospel. If there be a contention among brethren, (says
he) quaritur Testamentum, the Testament is sought. So we must decide our
controversies by the Old and New Testament, etenim praesentia quae modo facitis
futura conspexerat Christus. i. e. For Christ did foresee these things as
future, which ye make to be now present, and has he foreseen it, and will he
not provide a remedy for it?

Secondly, These unlearned unstable ones,

Thirdly, We do not deny M^nisterial

Fourthly, Albeit some places be hard to Pet. 3. 16. other places are not so
difficult. In the scripture an Elephant may swime, and a Lamb may wade. And the
same particulars you again object are clearly holden forth in scripture as is
formerly proved, in the vindication of my, answer to your 1. Qu. in answer to
Rea. 2. Yea the way to salvation is fair and patent there, and if we perish,
our destruction is of our selves, seeing that book is not sealed to us.
Commentaries, Church-canons, Ecclesiastic sentences, are helps and means for
edification: but scripture is the authentic instrument, and all the authority
is originally from it. And different expositions, according to the analogy of
faith, may be, and will be, so long as there be diversity of gifts. But I ask
why ye make use of Commentars, Seeing ye resolve all into the sentence of the
Pope? And why do your Commentators differ so amongst themselves? If this hinder
not your Ecclesiastic supremacy, why should it be brought to weaken scripture
authority? It is hard to find where you are, for sometimes ye would have a
judge to authorize scripture to you, sometimes you would have only one for the
sense of scripture, then at last, you are for one only to the unlearned and
unstable, such is your instability in this matter, that I wish the word of God
may determine you aright in the point.

Question fourth, Were it not better to establish a man or an assembly of men
judge of Controve^sies, seeing the Church is the pillar of truth, 1. Tim 3. 15.
and has the promise of presence Matthew. 28. 20. then the (...) Sect should be
laying claim to the Scripture and yet taking sundry ways.

Answer, The promulgation of the law is pillar of it. But the Church of Rome is
not such being a very strumpet, and making the Kings of the earth drunk with
the cup of her fornications. Rev. 17. 2. tha^ promise of presence is made to
the universal Church, but no particular Church such as Rome, can claim the
measure or duration of it; who of these can say that they shall last to the end
of the world? Albeit Sects lay claim to Scripture, yet their abuse cannot take
away our lawful use of it.

To this a Papist replyeth, That the question is not directly answered by me,
whither on man or many should be judge of controversies? To this he says I
dare not answer, because I will not grant the power either to the high Bishop
or general council, nevertheless, he finds this to have been the constant
practice of the Church, both in the Old and New Testament established by the
express word of God, and received by the Fathers in all ages: for in the Old
Testament, from Deuteronomy. 17. from 8. to 13. we read that GOD did command the
people in matters of controversy to go to the Priests, Levits, and judge, who
should be in those days appointed by him for that end, saying, and thou shall
do according to the sense of the law which they shall teach thee, and according
to the judgment which they shall tell thee. Remark, he says not according to
the sense of the law which thou shall read, but which they shall teach thee, not
taken according to the private judgment and spirit, but according to the
judgment which they shall tell thee, where God promises out of their mouth
judicii veritate^ truth and verity in judgment, or as you turn it, sentence of
judgment. See for this also 2. Chr. 19. 8. where Jehosophat established what
was first instituted. Viz. a council of Levits, Priests, and chief fathers of
Israel, to judge not only between brethren and brethren, blood and blood, but
also betwixt law and co^mandments, statutes and judgments. Not leaving law and
commandments to the peoples private reading, and interpretation, as you do in
your rule of faith. In the 11. verse, he concludes thus, Amaziah is over you
in all matters of the Lord; where it is evident that the council and chief
Priest is established judge of controversy, and not the written Word, as every
one reads and expounds. In the New Testament again you have this practice
clearly set down, Acts. 15. Where Paul and Barnabas though Apostles themselves,
go up to Jerusalem about the question of circumcising the Gentiles converted to
the faith. And there was holden the first council in which this is decided, not
out of Scripture, but by the authority of the Council it self. It seemed good
to the Holy Ghost and us, said they, having the assured promise of the
assistance of the Holy Ghost, as the Church has at all time. Wherefore after
the Apostles, councils have decided with the same authority, and upon the same
infallible ground of the Holy Ghosts assistance promised to the Church. Many
controversies are acknowledged by Protestants for points of faith, without
express passage of Scripture. Marcion teaching that Baptism should be conferred
more then once; and Donatists that Baptism conferred by Heretics should be
reiterated, as invalid, are condemned, in the council holden at Rome under
Melchiad^s Pope in the year 313. now what passage of Scripture I pray you is
for this? S^bellius putting one person only in the Godhead, is c^ndemned in
the council of Alexandria under Pope Cornelius in the year 319. but scripture
makes no mention of persons, Nestorius putting two persons in Christ is
condemned in the General Council holden at Ephesus under Pope Caelestin the
year 434. Yet neither does the Scripture speak of th^^. The Monotheli^s giving
to Christ one will in two Natures, are condemned in the third general C^uncil
holden at Constantinople under Pope Agathon the year 679. albeit there be no
formal scripture for this. So you see it belongs both in the Old and New
Testament, to the high Priest and general Council to decide controversy,
either by Scripture if there be any passage clear for that point, or without
Scripture, by Apostolic tradition conserved in the Church which scripture it
self warranteth. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 15. Hold fast the traditions which ye have
learned either by word or our epistle; but it seems you care not who be
condemned, or by whom, if you take away all power on earth to condemn your
selves. Every Protestant will be condemned by none but Scripture, and yet will
make none judge of the Canon, Version, and sense of Scripture but himself. All
your answer is, that we grant the Promulgation of the law to the pure Gospel
Church, but you show not what is this pure Gospel Church, neither can you
infallibly prove the purity of the Gospel it self, or that there is a Gospel,
or the true sense of the Gospel but by the Catholic Church her authority. Hear
Aug. contta Ep. fund. cap. 5. Where he says, I my self would not have believed
the Gospel, were it not that the authority of the Church moved me to it. Now
the Catholic Church is, that whose faith is spread through all the world in
the Apostle Paul his time, which makes her to be justly called the Catholic
Roman Church: and whose faith has been in all ages since Christ, which all the
records of the Protestant writters witness of the Roman Church; wherein the
succession of Popes, Bishops, Councils, is made conspicuous to all who have
written Chronology or Church history in every age, none whereof make mention of
your Church, or of men professing your tenets before Luther and Calvin, from
whom ye dissent in many things.

Answer first, This is a prolix reply, the Index, and cast in here to fill the
page. For the answer was, That the promulgation of the law is not denied to the
pure Gospell-Church, which is not the Roman-Church, for it is impure. Is not
this a direct answer? You prove, that there has been a Ministerial-Church in
the old and new Testament, which we do not deny; but this is the point, did
they so pronounce sentence, and decide Controversies, that all discretive
judgment was taken from people? or called they themselves infallible, whether
they had scripture warrant or not? Or, will the promise of presence, to the
Apostles, Prophets and penners of Scripture, in measure and duration agree to
any Church Officers now on Earth? Or, should promises made to the
Universal-Church agree to any particular Church such as Rome? Or will promises
made to the collective body of the Church agree to the representative? unless
these be proved you fight with your own shadow. For we are much for the
authority of Christ's Church, and think that her judgment of old, and late,
should sway private men, unless they can prove by scripture, or sound reason,
that she erreth. We are much for the authority of all lawful Councils, and we
give them all reverence in regard of the authority of their constitution, but
if they depart from the scriptures we owe them not active obedience. Well
speaks our learned Camero, tom. 1. tract. de infallibilitate ecclesiae, So
often as any thing is decreed by a Council, or assembly of men, appointed by
lawful autharity in the Church, it should have this weight with us, that
rashly, without grave and diligent enquiry after the truth, it should not be
rejected by us. And whereas it is alleged, there will be no effectual way
against Controversies and divisions in religion, unless some one supreme and
infallible judge be appointed on Earth, in whose judgment and decision,
parties controverting should ^^st and acquiesce. It may be well answered in
your own Bellarmin his words, lib. 2. de Council. cap. 19. It is no wonder if
the Church remain without any humane remedy, seeing the welfare of it does not
primarily rely upon humane industry, but upon divine protection; seeing its
King is GOD: therefore may and ought the Church to pray unto God, and it is
certain, he will care for the welfare of it.

Answer second, Albeit I cannot comprehend the purpose of this laxe discourse,
yet Augustia, non credidissem Scripturae etc. is to be understood. For the
first, by the Church, all the Jesuits, who are the Popes lifeguard, understand
the Pope. So Valentia disk. Theol. tom. 1. disp. 1. qu. 1. Coster Enchir de
sum: Pont: Gretser. Colloq. Ratis. Ses. 1. Bell. hanketeth in the point, for
once he says, that the Pope without the Council may determine matters of
faith, De Christo. lib. 2. cap. 28. and de Council. lib. 2. cap. 17. Against
this de verbo Dei lib. 3. cap. 3. he says, the Pope with a Council is the
judge of the true sense of Scripture. So speaks this reflecter. The
Sorbonists, Jansenists, and others of the Popish party understand by the
Church, the present Romish officers assisted by the Pope, and stand by the
Canons of the Councils of Constance Sess. 4. 5. and Basil. Sess. 2. wherein it
was decreed that the Pope should obey the Council. The Council of Trent
according to its manner is ambiguous herein Sess. 4. decr. 2. And says, that
the Church should judge the true sense of Scripture, yet tell us not what they
mean by the Church. Now, whatever way it be taken, whither for Pope or Council,
there must be another judge of controversies, otherwise the Church wanted a
judge 300 years, for there was no such judge then pretending to the infallible
supremacy now claimed. Secondly, The Romish Synagogue headed by the Pope
cannot be our judge, for they are party partial against whom we have just
acception. Thirdly, Is not this a juggling trick, that when controversies
occasioned and raised by them, are in the Christian Church, they will have none
to be judge but themselves: so they would be sure of the sentence, and must
suspect their own cause. Fourthly, If by the Church they mean the Pope, as now
they mantain, it is hard to call him judge of controversies, seeing it is a
great controversy whither there should be any Pope at all, and beyond
controversy with us that he is an usurper. Fifthly, According to the Popish
tenet, the intention of the Priest is necessar in his ordination, in his
Baptism; succession without interruption is necessar; and Simony makes him no
Pope, as Gratian tells from the Canon law, causa 2. qu. 1. Now if so, he may
be a Pagan, for who knows the Priests intention who baptized him? He may be a
Laick, and yet without ordination upon the same ground; if one be such, it
marreth uninterrupted succession, and so cease the Pope. Then by your own
writters it is clear, that many Popes entered by Simony, as Barronius
testifies, Annal: tom. 9. ad annum. Christi. 912. And Alexander the 6. was
notorious that way. This un Popeth all, for it breaks the chain of
succession, and leaves the Church collective without any judge. It is clear
hence, how slipperie the Romish Church is in its foundations: seeing he whom
they call the Church may be a Pagan Secondly, As to the second thing proposed,
viz. Whither Church officers since the days of the Apostles are infallible* The
Church whither taken for Pope or Council, or Pope and Council is not
infallible. When the Councils condemned heretics of old, they did it not pro
arbitratu and imperio: but judged by the Scriptures which is indeed an
infallible rule, but the church taken whither for Pope or Council, or Pope and
Council is not infallible. First, If the Jewish-church erred in matter of faith
and worship, then may the christian-church err also. For they had statutes,
judgments, and promises: to them were committed the oracles of GOD. Romans 3. 2.
But Aaron and the people erred grossly, Ex 32. So did Uriah the Priest, 2. Kings
16. May not then Popes err? Seeing Aaron the saint of the Lord was not
infallible. Yea, both Priest and Prophet erred in judgment, see Is. 28. 7. on
which words Sanctius the Jesuit says, Priests, Prophets, and people were
spiritually drunk. Did not the Church rulers while the Levitical Priesthood
lasted, procure the death of Christ? Secondly, Under the Gospel Popes and
Councils have erred, Ergo, they are not infallible. Tertullian tells contra
Praxetam, that Eleutherius the Pope approved Montanus heresy, and obtruded it
on the Church as his Irenicum. Your own Barronius tells ad ann. 302. that
Marcellus the Pope sacrificed to Idols, Athaudsius Athanasius in epist. ad
Solitariam vitam agentes.
testifies, that Liberius the Pope was Arrian. Honorius was condemned in the
sixth General Council as a Monothelit, Anastasius the Pope says Alphonsus, de
cast. lib. 5. cap. 25. was Nestorian. Now can Monothelism, Nestorianism,
Arrianism, Montaaism and Idolatry, be ^nherent to a man infallible? Or can a
chair make that man who is Arrian Orthodoxe, or him who sacrifices to Idols
unerring, who will believe this?

Councils may err adversaries being judges, Occam asserteth so much, and
Petrus Alliaco Cardinalis qu. vespert. art. 3. for he says, that this promise,
the gates of hell shall not prevail against the Church, is made universo catui
fidelium, to the whole number of the faithful, not to the representative Church
which may err. Panor: sup. 1. part. sib. decret. Dicit Ecclesiam quae non
potest errare esse totam collectionem fidelium, nam ista est Ecclesia quae non
potest errare, that is, the whole company of believers which cannot err. Nic.
de Clemang. in his disp with the Parisians, says, the promise Matthew. 18. as
likewise that John 16. The spirit of truth shall lead you into all truth,
belongs only to spiritual ones, and it were better to be much in fasting and
prayer for direction, then to brag we cannot err. So then I reason, the Pope
may err, Councils may err, Ergo, the Pope and Council may err. The argument
will hold here, a divisis ad conjugata. as well as thus, the Magistrate may be
diseased, and his council infected, therefore both Magistrate and Council are
subject to sickness. It is a deluding evasion, to say, that the Councils
confirmed by the Pope cannot err, for the Jesuits place the infallibility in
the Pope, the Parlsians in the Council, and they are not agreed in this amongst
themselves* In the sense of the one, a Church Session confirmed by the Pope is
as infallible as a Council. And in the sense of the other, a Council confirmed
by a private Bishop is at infallible as if it were confirmed by the Pope. Thus
then we argue, that must have no entity which can find no subject, but Papists
cannot agree upon the subject of this infallibility, therefore it is not ens.
Further, General Councils have been of this judgment, that the Popes consent
is not requisite for making their decrees right. For in the Council of Chalcedon
where were conveened 630. fathers in the year 454. where Martianus the Emperor
was present, it was contrar to the desire of the Popes Legates, appointed, that
seeing the seat of Rome had no divine warrant for its supremacy,
Constantinople should have alike privileges with it. This was as full a
Council as we read of, and yet all these fathers thought the Popes consent not
necessary for their statutes: Yea they declared his supremacy not to be Juris
Apostolici in the first Council of Constantinople which was the second general
Council. The Councills of Constance and Basil, judged the Council to be above
the Pope. In the first three general Councills the Pope did not so much as
preside in them, either by himself or by his legates. For in the first, presided
Hosius Bishop of Corduba. In the second Necta^ius, Bishop of Constantinople.
And in the third at Ephesus, Cyril Bishop of Alexandria, in which Councills,
Controversies were deterrained by the plurality of suffrages, and every one of
the fathers there, did subscrive their name to the constitutions and
conclusions of the Council. The council of Trent again did all Proponentibus
legatis, therefore, either it or they were in an error, so not infallible. And
indeed it is above dispute that the council of Trent was erroneous, and not the
council of Chalcedon, in that, which Gregory the Great and all ancients so
extol and commend.

This is said not in the least to derogate from lawful councills which we
judge necessary helps, for ordering the effaires of the house of God in diverse
exigencies. Yea, we give more to the four General Councills then Papists do,
for they cast both at the second and fourth. But we have another judge and
determiner, the Scripture of God. Augustine confirms this, Nec ego nicaenum,
nec tu debes Ariminense, tanqua^ prajudicaturus Aug. contra Maxi. Arrian.
Episcop.
praeferre consilium; nec ego hujus auctoritate, nec tu illius detineris.
Scripturarum auctoritatibus, non quorumcunque propriis, sed utrisque communibus
testibus, res cum re causa cum causa, ratio cum ratione consentiat. i. e.
Neither would I prefer the Nicen, nor ought you as prejudged to prefer the
Arimin council, I am not holden by this, or thou by that, but by the authority
of the Scriptures which are witnesses common to all, appropriat to none, let
one thing agree with another, cause with cause, reason with reason.

Thirdly, As to the third thing proposed, The Church is not appointed to be
obeyed, James 4. 11. The word of God is the law, and all churches are subject
to it. Thirdly, The Text you cite the 17. of Deuteronomy. from the 8. v. to the 13,
where the people are commanded to go to the Priests for decision of
controversiies, has this expressly in it, v. 11. According to the sentence of
the law which he shall teach thee. Cajetan upon the place says, That in the
Hebrew it is super o^ legis, ideo doctrina eorum esset conformis divinae legi.
There doctrine of decision should be warrandable by the law. Glossa ordinaria
explaineth the place thus, non dicitur tibi ut obedias, nisi ^uxta legens
docuerint. i. e. thou art not commanded to obey if they teach not according to
the law: Lyra is of the same judgment, si dicant falsum non sunt credendi, if
they speak false they are not to be believed: In Mal. 2. 7. The Lord shows
that the Priests lips should preserve knowledge, where he declares not what
was, for they had gone out of the way at that time, but what should be. Ribera
says, the words are not to be read in the present, but in the future tense,
and according to Cyril, he is called the Messenger of the Lord, because he
should give men of the oracles of God, as he has received them from the Lord.
Also that place Matthew. 23. 2. where Church rulers are appointed to be heard
when they si^ in Moses chair. Theophylact expounds i^ quando docent ea quae
continentur in lege, when they teach the things contained in the law. O if your
Scribes and Pharisees would do so, they might be better heard. That place 2.
Chr. 19. 8. 11. concerning Amaziah, who was over them in all matters of the
Lord, holds only forth this, that Magistracy and Ministry are distinct
offices. And in the church of Jerusalem, albeit the Apostles were infallible,
yet they proceed according to the word, and built their sentence on the
Prophets, Acts 15. 14. these places prove, that implicit obedience is not to be
given to any Church rulers. And the B^reans were commended for searching the
Scriptures, when the message was delivered to them. How gross then is
Bellarmin, who says, Bell. lib. 4. de ^ont. cap. 5.
S^ Papa erraret praecipiendo vita, and prohibendo virtutes, tenetur Ecclesia
credere, virtutes esse malas and vitia b^n^. If the Pope says he, should
commend vice, and call it good (which they grant he may do, notwithstanding of
his infallibility) then people were bound to obey and call vice good. Valentia
says more, that the people are bound without any enquiry, Valent. Tom. 3.
disp. 1. and disp. 7. qu. 3. Punct. ^.
to err with their rulers, and errores little in tali causa sunt actus
Christianae obedientiae, their errors are acts of Christian obedience,
Aeternae vitae meritoriae, deserving eternal life. When Papists speak so great
absurdities, what will they not do for their interest?

Fourthly, As to the fourth thing proposed, Matthew. 18. 17. If he will See Bish.
Laud. against^ Fisher.
not hear the church, let him be to thee as a publican; Now it is absurd to
say, that this should be the sense of it, tell the Pope, for in no language the
word Church can signify a visible Monarch. Secondly, The council of Jerusalem
makes not for this, for not only proceed they upon Scripture grounds, but
although they were infallible men, yet none of them took the Papal way, and the
government was not Monarchical, It seemed good to the holy Ghost and us.
Thirdly, Church power is Ministerial, Matthew. 20. 25. 26. 2. Cor. 1. 24. 1. Pet.
5. 3. but Monarchy is Magisterial, therefore it agrees not with church power.
And when Papists reason for the power of the church and mention councils the
argument may be thus propounded, church officers, councils, have been appointed
to rule and order the affairs of the house of God, Ergo, they may do what they
will and who can say unto them what do thou. I deny the consequence. Ergo,
the Pope is one of these officers, it is absolutely refused. And this is summa
totalis, of the prolix answer to the fourth question, which may be taken away
with a word. Ergo, if the word make not for them, the^ they may betake
themselves to their own traditions and rule by them. That is denied also by us.
And suppose they should give the Law to their own Vassals, will it therefore
follow that they empire it over the whole Christian-church? And seeing all
churches are bound to a rule, can any be infallible which have need of a rule?
When you make the Pope your church, do ye not build your faith on him? Is this
like the foundation, Ephesians. 2. 20.? What is this but to make your faith humane?
And is it not absurd to say that Alexander the si^^h Pope John, 22. in the
cathedra were infallible as the Prophets and Apostles in dyting Scripture, they
cannot blush who speak so.

Fifthly, As for the fifth particular, viz. That place of Augustine, cont, ep.
fund. cap. 5. I would not have believed the Scripture, unless the authority of
the church had moved me. Our Divines have answered fully long ago, so it is a
thread bare argument: for he speaks not there concerning the formal reason,
why Scripture is believed; but concerning the mean and motive, by which
intrants are brought at first to the knowledge of the Scripture, (I mean the
consused knowledge of the Scripture) as when a man delivers a letter he may
tell from whom it is, but the faith of it is from the subscription. So here
then, by the church, he understands not the church or Pope of Rome, but the
Primitive-church of the faithful, which did hear and see Christ and his
Apostles. So says Durand Dur, lib. did. 24. qu. 1.
he had to do with the Manichees, who would make him believe their Gospel. No
says he, the testimony of those who did see with their eyes, hear with their
ears, and handle the word of life, is to be preferred to your assertion, and
this is a motive which made me at first quite Manichism, and close with the
Gospel of Christ, so speaks Melchior Canus lib. 2. de loc. cap. 8. therefore
it makes nothing for the imperious supremacy of the Pope or Church in matters
of faith, fot there is a difference between co^muma motivafidei, and formalis
ratio credendi. See learned and perspicuous Dr. Barron against Turnebul, Tract.
4. and page 188. Who has unanswerably demonstrated this truth, and so
interprets these words of Augustine, The testimony of the church is a
principle inductive, and a motive to new intrants, to read, hear, and consider
the holy Scriptures, and it produces only an humane faith: the inward
testimony of the holy Spirit is the principle effective of divine faith, and
the Scriptures themselves are the formal reason and terminative principle,
whereinto divine faith is resolved, as a building upon its foundation. Ephesians. 2.
20. To conclude this answer, We judge that the pure Gospel Church is, and
should be the pronouncer of divine sentence from the Scripture; that the
authority of Councils should be inrerposed for making men willing and obedient
to the divine law: so should the Magistrate concur in his station for that
effect. But the church of Rome is not pure, nor like that which once it was in
the Apostle Paul his time, and at no time could she be called the Universal
church, far less now. Albeit then her faith was spoken of throughout all the
world. Is this a good argument, the faith of the Church of Britain is
mentioned throughout all the reformed churches of Transylvania, Hungaria,
Polland, Germany, Bohaemia, Flanders, France, and Helve^ia, therefore it is the
Universal-church, no, we claim no more but to be a Sister church to these in
the confession of faith, according to the Scriptures, Alb. Pighius, lib. 6.
Eccl. hierarc. cap. 3.
and all together make up the Universal-church. And any one of these is
preferable to the church at Rome, as it is now corrupted and apostatized. Will
ye hear Albertus Pighius, Quis unquam per Romanam Ecclesiam intellexit
universalem, who ever did by the Roman Church understand the Church universal.
Why do ye then speak so, and ambitiously empire it over all the world?

Question fifth, Seeing no Scripture is of private interpretation, 2. Pet. 1.
20. should private men take upon them to interpret the same?

Answer, The sense of that text is, no scripture holy men of GOD spoke as they
were moved by the holy Ghost, and it came not of old by the will of men.
Therefore it is no ways to be thought, that private men should be barred from
searching the Scripture seeing Christ Jesus commanded the contrar, Io. 5. 39.
This was spoken to a whole multitude of persecuting Jews. The word is the sword
of the spirit Ephesians. 6. 17. should any private man be disarmed amongst his foes?
And blessed is he whither private or publict, who meditateth in the law of the
Lord day and night. Ps. 1.

Reply, In your fifth answer you grant with the Apostle, that no prophecy of
the Scripture is of any private interpretation; so should you grant also, that
the Scriptures cannot be rightly expounded of every private spirit, and fancy
of the vulgar Reader, but by the same spirit wherewith they were writren which
resolves in the Church. And I am very confident no learned or wise Protestant
will allow any private man to expound scripture, against the common consent of
the whole Catholic Church, wherein they were immediately before: But you
insist, that it is not to be thought that private m^n should be barred from
searching the scripture, seeing it is contrar to that text, John 5. 39. where
if by searching the Scripture, you mean the reading and interpretation of it,
that cannot be the sense of it. For the Apostle Paul says, 1. Cor. 12. GOD
has set in the Church Prophets, Apostles, Doctors, etc. Then he adds, are
all Apostles, are all Prophets, are all Doctors, do all interpret? Then this
does not belong to every man to read and interpret Scripture, but to search the
deep meaning and sense thereof from the Doctors of the Church. For the Jews did
search the scripture, reading and hearing it read in their Synagogues, and yet
did deny Christ to be the Messiah, which scripture does clearly testify. Even
as Protestants do read Scripture, and in it the real presence, the power to
forgive sins granted to men, justification by faith and good works, anointing
the sick, virginity preferred to marriage, and yet deny all this: Wherefore as
Christ exhorts the Jews, to do it with greater reflection and attention, not
superficially, turning and shuffling it over as Protestants do, so do I exhort
them. The word is the sword of the spirit, upon which you infer, should any
private man be disarmed amongst his soes. So let me tell you that the Apostle
calling it a sword, shows that it should not be put into a mad man's hand, or
in the hand of a fool, i. e. Poor ignorants who as Peter says, wrest it to
their own destruction, and yet this is your consequence, if it should be
granted to all private men. Children and fools get not arms amongst their foes,
wherewith they might rather wrong themselves then their enemies, but are under
the protection of their Paedagogues and attendants. And so the ignorant should
not easily handle the sword of the word, being ignorant, and only capable of
the letter, but should receive the sense thereof from the Church and her
Pastors, that it may be to them an arm of defense.

Answer first, All this is answered fully in the return of the first question,
to which place I refer the Reader, lest I make idle repetition: If the rule
of right reasoning had been observed, nothing of this ought to have come in
formerly, but here in its own proper place. I distinguished betwixt private men
and private interpretations, then, betwixt the extraordinar gift of interpreting
and the ordinar. Thirdly, Betwixt the privilege and the exercise. Private men
have the privilege to search the Scriptures, you say it should be by no other
then doctors; if that be true, then the Lord Jesus did not direct the people
who heard him, to use prayer and meditation for knowing the Scriptures, but to
go to their rulers, Scribes and Pharisees, who did what they could to make the
Scriptures testify against him and all his. I appeal to the conscience or
reason of any, if this exposition on the place can hold water? Or if an
indvidual act, such as this, being performed by another is an obedience to a
command? If this exposition be good, then when the Lord pronounces the man
blessed, who meditats in the Law day and night; the sense of it must be if his
Pastors do it for him it is enough? Who will admit this? But the one is as true
as the other.

Secondly, You contradict your self, for once you say that private men should
not interpret

Thirdly, You make all the people who are former exhortation? What if this were
told to the Kings and Queens who are Pop^sh? By the testimony of your doctors,
ye are all de clared unfit to rule others, for mad men fools and children
cannot govern. In effect ye guide the^ as such in divine matters, for ye muzle,
and blindfold the people, all this passes under the notion of Paedagogy. But
sad is the case of such pupils, ^f they knew what belonged to their peace. Let
ignorants be catechized, and trained in the ways of GOD, this may make them
more discerning of the sense and meaning of the word of God. Seneca tells,
Coenant nobiscum quidam quia sunt docti, alii ut sint do^li. Some men suppe
with us because they are learned, others that they may be learned. The
testimonies of the Lord make wise the simple, should they then be deprived of
them.

Question sixth, Ye agree not about the rule, for some cast at the Epistle of
James, others receive it?

Answer, None of the pure reformed do Lutherians in which we do not own them.

Secondly, The number of Scripture books is not the question, but whither these
mantained by all be the rule of says? Seeing all men are murable creatures and
at their best state vanity: Popes clash with Popes, Councils with Councils,
Pulpits with Pulpits, let any judge whither it be safest that the revealed will
of God be our rule, or the dictats of self contradicting men?

Reply, You say none of these pure reformed, reject the Epistle of James, and
you disclaim the Lutherians who do so, and they you; for I am confident they
will acknowledge none for pure reformers, who take an Epistle for scripture
which they hold to be none. Then you say, the number of Scripture books is not
the question, Sir, you move questions as you please, but hear Mr. Hooker one of
your most learned Protestants, lib. 1. Eccl. pol. Sect. 14. page 36. of these
things necessar says he, the very chief is to know what books we esteem holy,
which is impossible for it self to teach. Apply this to your only determiner of
faith, in your first answer. And truly I think this should be the first
question of all, to the pure reformed, according to the pure word of God, as
you call them, which are the books of the pure word of GOD? Now if you answer,
these are mantained by all which you make the rule of faith, how few books of
Scripture shall be this rule, if any at all? For there be few or none whereof
some have not doubted or flatly denied. Saint Augustine contra Faustum
Manichaeum, and lib. de mor. Eccl. cap. 1. Says, the Manichees did deny Moses
and the Prophets, the Jews did deny the New Testament? What books of Scripture
are mantained by all? For by that, you make the consent of all judge of
canonical Scripture, how then can you disclaim tradition, and say immediately
after men are mutable creatures, and at their best state vanity? Seeing upon
the consent of men ye take up your rule of faith, and number of Scripture
books. I know other Protestants allege for this, that the books of Scripture
like the Sun show themselves to be such, to him who has the spirit. But I
would ask at such, why the Rev. St. James Epistle, the second of St. Peter, and
two of St. John, did not show themselves to be Scripture to Luther, that
spiritual man, and the Protestants very first Apostle in the work of
reformation; in the end you say, Let any judge whither it be safest that the
revealed will of God be your rule and determiner, or the dictats of self
contradicting creatures? Where you seem to rub on Catholics: But Sir, this
touches not them at all, for they profess not to believe self-contradicting
creatures, but the unanimous consent of Councils and fathers, or the Catholic
Church, known to be the only Church established by Christ and his Apostles, and
by the continued succession of Popes, Bishops, and Pastors, the unity,
universality, and gifts of miracles in all ages. etc. Which Christ has called
the ground and pillar of truth. 1. Tim. 3. 15. and against which he assures us
the gates of hell shall not prevail, Math. 16. 18. and which he has commanded
us to hear, otherwise to be holden as heathens and publicans, Math. 18. 17. so
you see, that the written word makes the Church our judge, which we should
obey, and that ye who make so much of the written word, do not believe it when
ye do not obey her. And here I remarke that Protestant Ministers and preachers
deceive the people, in that they ground their faith on the written word only,
and Roman Catholics say they on humane tradition, and their Churches
authority, which being composed of men is subject to error. Whereas the
contrar is true, for Roman Catholics believe nothing which the written word
(believing both the tradition of the Church and Apostles) does not expressly
warrant. As for the Church, what is more expressly said then what I have cited,
both to prove that we are bound to hear her, Mat. 18. 18. and hold her
authority infallible. Math. 16. 18: and the house of God which is the pillar
and ground of truth, 1. Tim. 3. 15. Neither does it avail you to say, this is
not said of the Roman Church, which is not the universal Church, but a
particular one a strumpet, etc. For we speak not of any particular Church, when
we say that the Church is infallible, nor when we say the Roman, the Catholic,
do we understand the particular Church, at Rome? But that Church which
professes constantly the Romans faith, spread in saint Paul's time through all
the world. As we call yet the Roman Empire that which has its seat in Vien of
Austria. Yea, Protestants calling their own the reformed Church, cannot say but
we have one Church on earth, which Christ commanded us to hear constantly. And
if the reformed Church be the true Church, then she must have taken the place
from that church which was deformed, and had fallen into an error, and so
deserved no more to be called the pillar and ground of truth, or to be heard.
Moreover, the very pillars of the Protestant Religion, grant all the world to
be in an error before themselves, and so against the express written Word must
deny the infallibility of any Church whatever. For Calv. Instit. lib. 4. cap.
18. says, they made all the Kings and People of the earth drunk from the first
to the last, and Hospinian epist. 41. says, Luthers separation was from all
the world. White in his defense chap. 37. says, Popery was a leprosy breeding
so universally in the church, that there was no visible company of men free
from it. Jewel in his Sermon on Luke 11. The whole world, Princes, and people
were overwhelmed by ignorance, and bound by oath to the Pope; which if it be
true that the Church in former ages did err, the reformed Church may err,
that themselves do not deny. Thence it follows clearly, that the Protestant
Church is not the house of GOD called the pillar and ground of truth, that she
is not Christ's Church, against which the gates of hell shall not prevail, that
none are bound to hear her in matters of faith, being subject to error. And so
Protestants may well desire men to read the Scripture and believe what they
found there, but not urge any man to follow their doctrine, but in so far as
they find it conform to Scripture, which all Roman Catholics protest they do
not. As for traditions, are we not commanded to hold them in the clear written
Word? 2 Thessalonians. 2. 15. Hold the traditions which ye have learned, whither by
word or our epistle. Protestants read documents, but documents by word and
traditions are the same thing, on which place Chrysostom: says, It is evident
that the Apostle did not deliver all things by writ, but many things by word
which are worthy of credit as well as the other. That is Christ's word as well as
his writ, therefore we call them divine and Apostolical traditions, Aug. lib.
5. de Trinit. cap. 23. speaking of rebaptization, The Apostle, says he,
commanded nothing of it, but that custom^ which is believed to proceed from the
Apostle, is opposed against Cyprian, in it, as many things are which the whole
Church holds, and therefore are believed to be commanded by the Apostles,
though not written. And in the first age, saint Dennis chap. 1. speaking of the
Ecclesiastic hierarchy, says, These our chief captains of Priestly function,
did deliver to us the chiefest and supersubstantial points, partly in written,
partly in unwritten institutions. Epiph. Haeres. 61. is of the same mind, we
must hold traditions, says he, for the Scripture h^th not all things, and
Tertullian de praescrip: grounds his faith on the authority of the Church, and
what tradition I believe, says he, I received from the present Church, the
present Church from the primitive, that from the Apostles, the Apostles from
Christ. Here I hope you see you must either admit traditions as necessar in
themselves and infallible in their authority, or else disclaim both Scripture
and Fathers. All that Protestants can say either against the authority of the
Church, in general Councils, or Apostolic traditions delivered by her, is,
that all her decisions and traditions flow from men, and so are not infallible.
But I answer, neither were the Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists who penned the
Scripture, but men, yet I hope their writtings are not fallible or subject to
error: Because they were inspired directly and assisted by the Spirit of God.
The Fathers of the Church have to this day that promise verified to them, Math.
28. 20. which was made as well to their successors as to themselves. As for
that some Protestante speak of an invisible Church composed of the Elect, it is
but a shift to delude the ignorant, for as it is a Maxim of law, Idem est non
esse and non apparere, i. e. it is the same not to be, and not to appear to be
in the matter of any pretended right, so in the matter of doctrine, an
invisible Church and no Church is the same. For if I cannot see nor know the
Elect, as being invisible to the eye of man, so I cannot know that the Church
composed of them speaks to me, or that this Doctrine I hear of any man is
infallible, more then that he is one of the Elect.

Answer, I am weary transseribing a number James as the Lutherans. And the
answer I gave was, that although some Lutherans differ from us, about the
authority of that epistle: yet we both agree here, that uncontroverted
scripture is the determiner. And for the numerick question, it was sufficiently
answered in the second answer to the first querie; so we needed not this
tau^oligie to make the Reader nauseat. If I had to do with a Lutheran, then I
could prove the divine authority of that Epistle, but you do not deny it,
therefore to what purpose should I insist on that subject against you. Mr.
Hooker whom you cite, makes nothing against us as is alleged, for that which
he says, is first, that the light of reason rightly managed, is a requ^sit
mean for the knowledge of scripture books, and what says that against us,
seeing we suppose the Readers of Scripture to be ^ational men, and that reason
in its own line may be helpful to them for understanding scripture. Secondly,
Mr. Hooker directly disclaimeth your traditions, page 86. and affirms, that
they who betake themselves to that testimony as divine, have not the truth,
but are in an error. Thus he condemns you as erroneous, so it had been your
advantage, to have spared this tradition: neither was it needful to tell us,
that the Manichees denied Moses, and the Jews the New Testament. We have to do
with Papists, who hold all the books of the Old and New Testament, which we
hold for Canonick. At lest what some others make disputable, as Melchior Canus
tells us, you put it out of dispute, so you are not in bona fide to reason
about their number with us, seeing ye question none which we mantaine, albeit
we justly call in question Apocryphal writtings, which ye put into the Canon.
Is it not safer to regulate our faith by these uncontroverted Scriptures, then
by the dictats of mutable self-contradicting Popes? When Church Rulers have
been fully corrupted, Believers have continued orthodoxe, as in the time of the
Arrian persecution. The Fathers who lived the first 300. year, believed without
either Pope or General Council as propounders of their faith. For then there
was no such pretending to infallible supremacy. They had no infallible
testimony from the Church, they acknowledged not her testimony to be such. And
for ought I can learn, the^e be no testimony of your Church, nor statute
enacting her testimony to be infallible. If so it is nor according to you de
fide, however ye make a great noise amongst people with it. And if all the
faith you have, depend upon the testimony of the present Church, which is your
doctrine, your faith is not one with Abraham's faith, for the word of God did
beget his faith, but it is the testimony and statute of the Trent Council that
begett^th yours, and I would gladly hear from you, whither there was universal
consent there or not? Such clashing and pocket orders, as the author of that
history tells to the world, will not permit you to say, without a blush, that
the Council was unanimous and Gospel-like in their way. Therefore, unless it,
be against us, all their otheracts are made up of ambiguous stuff, like the
Delphian responses, this is purposely co^trived to cover debates with general
terms. And if their testimony, make the word of GOD Scripture to me living
under Popery, what rule had they for their faith who made these conclusions?
Their own testimony could not be the cause of their own belief: if you say that
the testimony of the ancient Church was their rule, then ye go contrar to your
own Doctors, who declare that the present Church of Rome is above all former
councils, and their authority depends on her testimony. See Bell. lib. de
Eccl. cap. 10. Valentia Tom. 3. disp. 1. quest. 1. Further that the supreme
power of judging is not in the Council but in the Pope, that he is above a
general Council, that he cannot be subject to it. See Bell. lib. 2. de Council
cap. 17. Valentia tom. 3. disp. 1. Suarez disp. 5. de fide, and your own Vives
in his comment on Augustins 20. book de civit. Dei cap. 26. tells us how
little ye make of Councils, or of the ancient Church when they militat against
you. Illa demum videntur iis Concilia quo in rem suam faeiunt, reliqua non
pluris estimantur quam commenta mulierum in textrina aut thermis. i. e. These
appear to be Councils to them, which make for them, the rest are no more
esteemed by them, then the sables of old women in the weavers shop or sloves.
Bris^^erius writting against Collag: a Jansenist as he is cited by learned
Dalleus See D^lleus de usu Patrum
, says, Councils are literae mortuae nisi animentur a praesenti Ecclesia. i.
e. They are dead letters if they be not animated by the present Church. This
appears to be true from experience, for ye agree not with the primitive,
either in doctrine, worship, or government. The ancients thought that Images
should not be in the Church. See Epiph. epist. ad Iohannem Hierosolymitanum,
(...) cum vidissem Imaginem pender^ in Ecclesia contra authoritatem Scripturae.
i. e. When I saw an Image hang in the Church contrar to the authority of
Scripture how grieved was I. But the Council of Trent appointed them to be had
in houses and Churches, and that debitus honor and reverentia Sess. 25.
eis impertiatur i. e. Due honor and worship be given to them. The Fathers
thought that the Virgin Marie was conceived in sin so says Ambrose, Augustine,
Chrysostom, as Melchior Canus de loc. Theol. lib. 7. tells. The Council of
Trent, Sess. 5. will not conclude he^ under Original sin. The Fathers excluded
Tobias, Judith, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, and both the books of the Maccabees,
out of the canon of Scripture. So did Hierom in his prologue ad libros
Solomonis. Epiph. lib. de Pond. and men's. cap. 2. page 162. Gregory Nazianzen.
c^rm. 3. Athanasius epist. fest. But the Council of Trent anathematizeth them,
who exclude these books out of the Canon, Sess. 4 Baptism was delayed till
Pasch and Pentecost in the primitive Church, it is not so with you. The 4.
Council of Carthage did forbide women to baptize, Canon 100. ye allow it. The
Sacrament was administered in the primitive Church to all present, and they who
did not partake were appointed to remove. Ite missa est, exite for as qui non
vultis accipere Sacramentum. i. e. Go, it is closed, go forth ye that will not
receive the Sacrament: Now the words are muttered and administered before all.
They took with their hand, and the bread was broken of old: Now it is not, for
ye make whole wasers, and put them into their mouth. For fourthteen hundred
years the Church appointed the Sacrament to be administered by bread and wine to
the people, all Christians of whatever judgment, except Papists do so
communicate as yet, Petau. de poenit. pub. lib. 2. shows that it cannot be
denied, nisi ab homine insigniter and supra omnem modum vel impudenti vel
imperito: i. e. Except by a man remarkably and above all measure either
impudent, or unskilful, that this was the primitive practice, yet the Council
of Constance hoc non obstante, and the Council of Trent decree the contrar. The
primitive Church heard nothing of the Popes universal supremacy, or
infallibility, which now by you i^ made Summa rei. See Cyprian ep. 55. ^^
Cornelius Bishop of Rome, and how he styles him f^ater, etc. and he says,
that they were formerly chosen to officiat, Non sine consensu plebis, not
without the Popes consent ep. 68. Ipsa plebs habet potestatem etc. Is not this
far from your imperious pompous way of Monarchy? how then can you so boldly
aver, that ye have the unanimous consent of Councills and fathers for you,
when indeed ye do not regard them so much as we. Hear your own Cornelius, Mus.
See D^lleus ubi supra.
ep. Bi^ont. in ep. ad Romans cap 14. Ego ut ingenue f^te^r, plus uni summo
pontisici crederem, in his quae fidei misteria tangunt, quam m^lle Hieronymis,
Augustinis, Gregoriis. Credo enim and scio, quod summus Pontifex, in his quae
fidei sunt errare non potest, quia auctoritas determinandi quae ad fidem
spectant in Pontisice residet. i. e. That I may ingenuously confess, I would
give more credit to one Pope, in the things which belong to the mysteries of
truth, then to a thousand such as Augustine, Jerome, or Gregory. For I know
certainly that the Pope cannot err in these things that belong to faith,
because the authority of determining matters of says resideth in the Pope; yet
ignorant people are made to believe that Papists have the consent and practice
of the primitive Church along with them, and Melchior Canus, l^c. Theol. lib.
7. cap. 3. number. 10. Sequi majores nostros per omnia, and in illorum vestigiis
pedes nostros figere, ut pueri faciunt per lusum, nihil aliud est quam ingenia
nostra d^mnare, judicio nos privare nostro and facultate inquirendae veritatis.
i. e. to follow our ancestors in all things, and to ^race their footsteps, and
fix in them as children use to do in play, is no other thing but to condemn
our own wit, and to deprive our selves of our own judgment, and faculty of
searching the truth. Salmeron in cap. 5. epist. ad Romans disp. 5. asserteth, quo
juniores eo perspicaciores sunt doctores, and cites Exodus 23. follow not the
multitude viz. of ancients. This is sufficient to prove, that as the Papists
are jealous of Scripture, so are they of the Primitive Church her consent. But
it is alleged, that ye have the word of God for your warrant, Matthew. 16. 18.
Matthew. 18. 18. 1. Tim. 3. 15. To this I answer, that the first Text, is meaned
of the collective body of the Church, which fall not away; this is clear from
the context, for it is the Church builded on that confession mentioned by the
Apostles: and an house so builded cannot fall, because it is builded on a rock,
Matthew. 7. 25. Yet it will not follow that there be no drops in it; for
particular believers cannot totally and finally fall away, but that they are
infallible who can say? see John 10. 28. and comyare it with 1. Cor. 13. 9.
James 3. 2. beside, your own writters interpret it so, see Melchior Canus lib.
5. de loc. Theol. cap. 5. and Panormitan on the place.

The second Text Mat. 18. is to be understood of a particular Church, which you
grant is not infallible, so Chrysostom interprets the place, and it is
further clear from the Connection, for it is the Church, to which appeals should
be made in prima instantia, this undoubtedly is a particular Church. But
admitting that it is meaned of the universal church, your Pope nor your Church
is not it.

The third Text 1. Tim. 3. 15. holds forth no more then what is granted in
the answer to the fourth question, or if you please to take learned Cameron his
exposition, who knitteth these words with the 16. verse, you may do well. But
what ever be the privileges of the true Gospel Church, which is the Bride of
Jesus Christ, Rome has forefaulted all these, and is but a leprous part of the
universal Church, you grant that the church of Rome is but a particular church.
Why plead you then for the whole privileges of the universal Church? Is not
this absurd arrogance? Nor does Calvin, Hospinian, Luther or White, speak
absolutely as ye allege, but assert that the generality for a time was
leavened by Popery which is truth. But what then follows? That the mystery
of iniquity did arise by degrees and over-runne all for the most we grant, so
did the Arrian heresy; therefore was not Athauasius, and such as adbered to
the truth, right in their way? The whole world in the Apostles time did ly in
wickedness, 1. John 5. 19. Therefore were they not Sons of truth who
endeavored a Gospel reformation. Your last hold is tradition, and you say, we
are commanded to hold them. 2. These. 2. 15. for this you cite Aug. Cyprian, St.
Dennis, Epiphanius. To this I answer, we are not against Apostolic traditions,
nor Church history in matters of fact, We make use of traditions there
mentioned: But for your Legends, we deny that they are such and disclaim them.
Have you Sir learned Logic? Why do you argument so, a genere ad speciem
affirmative? Is this a good argument, Est annual, ergo est homo, he is a living
creature, therefore he is a man? Can this be better, there were traditions
delivered to the Church of Thessalonica, ergo, yours are these. Credat Judaeus
Appella? Secondly, If there were unwritten traditions, why do you dare to writ
these things which the Apostles would not writ? Thirdly, Will that argue the
Scripture of imperfection? You may as well argue, the Minister writteth a book
the sum of which he has preached to people, Ergo, his book is imperfect. You
have then to prove for your end, that these traditions mentioned, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
15. were about matters of faith. Secondly, If so they be no where written in
Scripture. Thirdly, That if they be not written, they be the same which ye
deliver to the people, and by what authority ye press and writ them. But to
take this text wholly from your mis-interpretation, hear Theodoret, who says,
that the Apostle spoke not of diverse doctrines, but of the same diversely
delivered. For first he preached to the Thessalonians, and then did writ the
substance of it. But as where ever ye find fire in the Scripture ye make it
Purgatory, so where ye find tradition, ye make it pari ratione yours: Will ye
listen to Bell. lib. 4. de verbo Dei cap. 10. and he will put all out of doubt,
for he grants that all in substance were written by the Apostles, which they
preached to the people, or were necessar to salvation, Cyprian in his epist. ad
Pompeium, admits not any traditions, but such as may be perceived to be in
the Evangels, in the Epistles or Acts of the holy Apostles. Therefore it is a
perfect rule to all discerners say I, and no more was at first asserted. Your
Maxim Idem est non esse and non apparere, holds in law but not in divinity.
For the soul is not visible yet who can deny the being of it. What is more in
the Reply I judge not worthy the noticeing, and I am forced to make digression,
because of an impertinent return. Is it not strange, that when I called men
mutable creatures, and at their best state vanity, subject to clashing
contradiction, and that the written Word is the only infallible rule for
direction: that upon this tradition, universal consent, should be so prolixely
commented on without any connection. They who follow this reflecter must resolve
to deviat from tho high way.

Question seventh, Your Church which ye call reformed is but of yesterday,
where was it before Luther?

Answer, It is as old in its doctrinals as Romans, Corinthians, Ephesians,
Philippians, Thessalonians, as taught by the Apostle Paul are our Church of
old, so it is not new. Secondly, In all ages there have been and are, eminent
professors of that doctrine which we mantaine, as is abundantly proved by
Flaccus Illyricus in his Catalogue, Testium veritatis, and learned Dr. Usher in
successione Ecclesiae reform: which testimonies no Popish shaveling of what
ever ordour, yet could answer. Thirdly, where was the church of Rome as now
constituted, before the council of Trent? Nay more, was the Popes supremacy and
infallibility heard of the 600 year after Christ? Is not all Popish faith as
such resolved into a lie, viz. the infallibility of the Pope or Council, which
though errand untruths are the key of the Popish Religion. Fourthly, All the
positives of the reformed Religion, were mantained substantially in the
Primitive church, the first 300. years, (I speak not of changeable
circumstances, nor integrals, but essentials) and the negatives could not be
there, because the controversies were not then started. But ye Papists have
amassed a body of humane inventions, and gross errors contrare to scripture,
obtruding them under Anathema, to be the established doctrine of the Church.
And because we of the reformed Profession will not own these, and call that
which is new old, ye excommunicat us as Heretics.

Reply, In your seventh Answer you say, your doctrine is as old as scripture,
and your Church as the Apostles; and this is common to you with all sectaries
to claim the scripture and the Church, in the time of the Apostles. And like
to that answer of the common people, we are all come of Adam and Eve. But I
shall let you presently see, how contrar your doctrine is to that scripture,
and how unlike your Church is to that of the Apostles the first 300 year. In
the second part ye pretend that Illyricus and Doctor Usher have sufficiently
showed that there have been eminent men of your Profession in all ages, and
that without a Reply of any Popish shaveling of whatever ordour. But Sir, I am
sorry that you who are a Nazarian and not a shaveling, shoule be so ill versed
in books of controversy, as not to have seen so many Catholic writters who
demonstrat clearly, that of all these eminent men before Calvin you pretend to
be yours, there is not one, has holden all the same tenets with you and no
more. For it is enough for you, that they dissent from the Church of Rome, and
sling at the Popes authority, what ever tenets they hold in matters of belief,
to call them yours. Which has made Dr. Vane Chaplain to our late King,
judiciously compare them to Sampsons foxes, which were all bound together by
the tails, although their heads went diverse ways. So that when you call the
Luthereans, Valdenses, Albigenses, Hussites, Catharists, Wicklessians,
Graecians, Egyptians yours, you may as well call the Turks and Tartars yours;
if we trust all records which speak of their tenets. And as for the Fathers,
hear if they were yours in the opinion of the most learnea Protestants.
Dudithius apud Bezam, ep. 1. If that be true which Papists say, the Fathers
with mutual consent are altogether on their side. Pet. Martyr 2. de verbo col.
1539. as long as we stand to Councils and fathers we shall always remain in the
same errors. And fully confesses that Hierom, Ambrose and Augustine, held the
invocation of Saints, Chemnitius in ex. council. trid. art. 3. page 100. did not
disput but avouch, that most of the Fathers, said the souls of the Martyrs,
heard the petition of those that prayed to them, they went to monuments and
invocated Martyrs by name. Whitgift in his defense, page 473. all the Bishops
and writters of the Greek and Latin Church too, (who no doubt were the
Fathers) for the most part were spotted with the doctrine of Freewill, Merit,
Invocation of Saints. Judge then Sir if they were pure. In the third part you
ask, where was the Church of Rome before the council of Trent? I answer you,
even where she is now, except in Jappony, India, China, and some parts of
America, where by their Christian labors, and by the blessing of GOD she has
been established since. Neither can you instance that she is not constantly the
same in all points. Nay more say you, was the Popes infallible universal
supremacy heard of the first 600. years. Where it seems you must be very deaf,
who hear not the voice of 1200. Fathers speaking only in the four first general
Councils. He who holds the Sea of Rome, is chief and head of all Patriarchs
says right, seeing he is the first, as Peter, to whom all power is given over
all Christian Princes, and all their people, and who ever contradicts this,
is excommunicated. Can. 29. Council. Nicaeni anno 325. Where 316 Bishops were
conveened. Secondly, Of 150. Bishops in the first Council of Constantinople,
anno 381. Where the Bishop of Constantinople is decreed to be the chief next
the Bishop of Rome. Thirdly, Of 200. Bishops in the first council of Ephesus,
anno 431. where in the third action it is defined, that saint Peter was the
head and prince of the Apostles, and that the power of binding and loosing is
granted to him, who in his successors lives and exercises judgment unto
this very day. Fourthly, Of 600. Bishops in the Chalcedon council, in the year
451. where in the third action, also Pope Leo is called universal Bishop,
Patriarch of old Rome, and sentence is pronounced against Dioscorus in the name
of Leo and sunt Peter, to acknowledge Leo Peter's successor. The Fathers in
particular I do not cite, for their citations in this would make a volumn. Only
I engage that of a 100. there be 90. clear for this. And not one against it. Is
not Popish faith resolved into a lie, say you, viz. the infallibility of Pope
or Council? You should have said Pope and Council, putting t^em together as the
head, and chief members, which represent the whole body of the Church; As the
Parliament does the whole Kingdom, and then if you doubt of their
infallibility, you deny the express words of Scripture, which calls the
Church the ground and pillar of truth, 1. Tim. 3. and which assures us that
the gates of hell shall not prevail against her. Math. 16. 18. Yea, you take
away all possible means, to know infalliblie what is true Scripture, what is
the true sense thereof, which is to make us doubt of all, and leave us no
sufficient ground to believe undoubtedlie any thing. You take away Christ's
promise to be with the Church to the end of the world, Matthew. 28. 20. Yea, you
take away an Article out of the Creed (I believe in the holy Catholic Church)
and leaving men either to the dead letter of Scripture, which kills many, or
the private spirit which deceives more, or natural reason which can be a motive
of faith to none, you cast loose all Religion, every one re^ecting or receiving
Scripture as he pleases. Expounding Scripture as he pleases, and following in
both no infallible rule or guide, but his own opinion, fancy and imagination.
In the fourth part you say that all the positives of the reformed Religion,
were mantained in the primitive Church the first 300. years. But if this were
true, it would be made good no otherwise, but by the Fathers writtings in the
first three ages after Christ. Now if they had all your positive tenets; why do
your learnedest writters openly disclaim them, as I have showed formerly? Why
says Luther your Apostle, lib. deserv. arbitrio, cap. 2. the authority of the
Fathers is not to be reguarded: and in his Coll^q. cap. de patribus. In the
writtings of Hierom, there is not aword of true faith, of Chrysostom I make no
account, Basil is of no worth, he is wholly a Monk, Cyprian is a weak Divine.
But I must not insist on this, because you may in some measure deny the
greatest parts of controverted points, betwixt you and us to be positive
tenets. Albeit there be none of them but justly may be called so. For you not
only deny, for example, the real presence, invocation of Saints, use of Images,
that a man is justified by faith and works, etc. But ye positively believe,
that Christ's Body and Blood is not reallie present in the Sacrament, that to
invocat the Saints, is to give Gods worship to creatures, that to make use of
Images, is idolatry, that a man is not justified by faith only. Therefore I
instance only two upon which all your visible reformation is grounded. First,
That the whole visible Church may err. Secondly, That we should believe
nothing but what is in the written Word. Now I have made it appear, reflecting
on your sixth answer, that both these positive tenets are against the express
words of Scripture and Fathers. How then did the Church in the first 300.
years, hold all the positives and what you affirm? As for your negatives, and
what you deny, you grant they cannot be there, because the controversies were
not then stated. But this is a bold and open calumny, for not one point is
denied by you, but the Fathers in the first 300. years have clearl^e asserted.
And so the controversy betwixt you and us was sufficiently stated even then.
You deny real presence, and transubstantiation, but in the second age Justin
Martyr, Apol. 2. ad Antonium says, as Jesus Christ incarnat had flesh and
blood for our redemption, so are we taught, that the Eucharist is the flesh and
blood of the same Jesus incarnat. And in the third age, Cyprian sermon. de coena
Domini, says, the bread which the Lord gave to his Disciples, being changed
not in shape, but in nature, by the omnipotency of the Word is made flesh.
Secondly, Ye deny the sacrifice of the Mass, asserted in the first age by St.
Andrew in the book of his passion written by his Disciples, I daily says he,
sacrifice the immaculat Lamb to Almighty GOD, who when he is truly
sacrificed, and his flesh eaten, remains entire and alive. And in the third
age by Origin hom. 13. on Exodus Ye think your self guilty, and worthily if
any part of the consecrated Host be lost by your negligence. Thirdly, Ye deny
Purgatory asserted in the second age by Tertullian lib. de anima cap. 58,
seeing we understand Matthews prison which the Apostle demonstrats to be places
below, and the least farthing is every small fault delayed to be paid till the
resurrection, none will doubt but the soul will recompense something in places
below. And in the third Age, It is one thing being cast into prison; not to go
out thence till he pay the uttermost farthing, another, presently to receive
the reward of faith. One thing to be affected with long pains, for sins to be
amended, and have all sins purged with suffering* says Cyprian ep. 52. ad
Antonium. Fourthly, ye deny Prayer for the dead, allowed in the first Age by S.
Clemens ep. 1. de sancto Petro, where he says, Peter there taught to give
alms and pray for the dead. And in the same age by Tertul. lib. de cor.
militis, we make yearly oblations for the dead. Fifthly, ye deny invocation of
Saints and Angels, recommended in the secong Age by S. Dennis Eccl. hierarch
part. 3. cap. 3. saying, I constantly affirm, with the divine scripture, that
the prayers of the saints are profitable for us in this life, after this
manner, when a man is inflamed with a desire to invocat the saints, and
distrusting his own weakness, betakes himself to any saint, beseeching him to
be the helper and petitioner to God for him, he shall obtain by that mean very
great assistance. And in the third Age, Origin on the Lambent says, I Will begin
to fall on my knees and pray to all the saints, to succor me, who dare not ask
God, for the exceeding greatness of my sin. O saints of God I beseech you with
tears and weeping to fall down before his mercy seat for me wretch. Sixthly, ye
deny the making of the sign of the Cross and Images, but hear S. Dennis lib. 2.
Eccl. hierarch. cap. 2. and 5. The sign of the Cross is so much honored that
it is often used both in Baptism and other Sacraments. And in the third Age,
Tertul. de cor. mil. cap. 3. In every thing, we sign our forehead with the sign
of the Cross, of which practice, tradition is the defender, custom the
conserver, and faith the observer. And again the same Tertul. lib. 2. de
pudic. The Image of Christ bearing a Lamb on his shoulder, were graven on
chalices, and used in Churches. Seventhly, ye deny Freewill, which in the
second Age, Irenaeus lib. 4. cap. 72. affirms, not only in works but even in
faith, has Almighty God reserved liberty of will to man, saying, be it done to
thee according to thy faith. And in the third Age, S. Cyprian lib. 3. cap. 52.
The freedom of believing or not believing is placed in the will. E^ghtlie, ye
deny merit of works, but in the second Age, Justin Martyr Ap. 2. boldeth it
saying, We think that men who by works, have showed themselves worthy of the
will and counsel of God, shall by their merits reign with him. And in the third
Age, St. Cyprian sect. de Eleemosyna. If the day of your return shall find us
unloaden, swift, and running in the way of good works, our Lord will not fail
to reward our merits. Ninthlie, Ye deny the possibility of keeping the
Commandments, against Tertul. in the second Age cited by the Centurists, and
Origin in the 1. hom 9. on Job. the baptized says he, may fulfill the law in
all things. Judge now Sir, whither it be not an open calumny to say, the
controversies betwixt you and us, were not then started in the first 300.
years: The Fathers having taught even then so clearlie our tenets, which
nevertheless ye are not ashamed to call new with Dr. Pierce in his Court
sermon, but see the two learned answers made to him, which may evidentlie
convince you of boldness, ignorance, and error.

Answer, You are wise by this your reply, That our Church in Doctrinals,
worship, etc. is as old as Scripture. That you pass with a jeer, and say, that
it is the language of all Sectaries. This calumny has been cast of old upon
pure doctrine, Acts 24. and their worship called Haeresie verse 14, I wish that
all Sects were such as we are, scriptural in their way. Ye are the greatest
Schismatics I know on earth, departing from the Scriptures, and mocking others
who adhere to them. The other assertion is, That this is the voice of common
people, who claim descent from Adam and Eve. Is not this true? Are not all
nations of men made of one blood, Acts 17. 26. It is grace and virtue which
makes the difference, Omnis sanguis concolor. And i^ we have as much relation
to scripture Churches, as multitudes have to Adam and Eve, we are not spurious
but of a right extract. Ye probably must be a kind of men like the pre-Adamits,
and of another descent. But one cheat is here remarkable, you promise to show
how contrar our doctrine is to scripture, and when you come to answer, then you
begin with Dudithius, and overleap the whole scripture. Your own Rainerius an
Inquisitor, gives this verdict concerning us, that we are said to have been
from the beginning, and walked by the Scriptures. Secondly, You pass that
concerning professors of our doctrine in all Ages, and will not signify one
man who answers Flaccius or refuteth Usher, but only you aver with Dr.
Vane, to whom ye are much beholden in this, that they were not in all things
ours. I know few discerning men who agree in all things. If we hold one
foundation which Jesus Christ has laid, that makes unity and uniformity. All
Christian Churches, except Romanists, make the Scripture the sole rule of their
faith, and to this we accord. Were the Eastern and Western Churches essentially
different, because of some discrepances about the time of Easter, etc. For
Turks and Tartars they are without Christ, and you might more pertinently have
spared the comparison of them with ancient churches and professors; if your
charity were as much in your breasts, as in your books, and your respect real
to the Saints in light. Thirdly, That which I said I will make good, that all
the positive fundamentals of our Religion were mantained in the Church the
first 400. years. This appears from the Creeds, and Confessions of Faith then
made, yet extant. Let any read the Apostolic, Nicaene, or Anathasius Creed,
the determinations of the Ephesian council written by Cyril of Alexandria, the
Confession of Faith made by the council of Chalcedon, and there they will find
exact conformity with the positives of our Religion. Popery adds to these
their own inventions, which we renounce, and this makes the difference. To
make this truth appear the more, I shall name these foundations. The doctrine of
the Prophets and Apostles, upon which our faith is builded. We hold that there
is one GOD, and three Persons, that the world was made by GOD; and man the
tennant, when the house was made, appointed to bring in his rent. That man was
made according to the Image of GOD, in holiness, and righteousness. That he
fell from his first state, and turned to the creature by transgression. That
sin entered this, and death by sin. That he sinned as a public person, and
involved posterity under a curse. That GOD so loved the world, that he gave
his only begotten Son, who was very GOD, made flesh in the womb of the blessed
Virgin: and dyed for our sins, and after burial, rose again for our
righteousne^s. So that it is the blood of Jesus Christ only that cleanses us
from all si^. And eternal life is the gift of GOD through Jesus Christ our
Lord: and when he paid the price then he ascended to Heaven, and the Heaven
must contain him as man, ^ill the day of the restitution of all things. That he
i^ now a^ the right hand of GOD, advocating and in^erceeding for as many as the
Father gave him, and shall come again and render ^o every man according to his
works. When he ascended on high, he led captivity captive, and sent the Holy
Ghost who proceeds from the Father and the Son, who creates says in us, by
which we are justified. Who enlighteneth, convinces, comfort, supporteth,
directs all the household of faith, and teaches all the children to worship
GOD alone, in spirit and in truth, and to call on his Name, through Jesus
Christ the only Media tour betwixt GOD and man. Our Lord sent his Apostles, and
set them in the Church commanding them to teach and baptize all Nations. To
ordain Pastors for edifying the body, whose power and calling it is to preach
the Word purely, to administrat the Sacraments of Baptism and the Supper of the
Lord as it was first delivered, to rule their flocks as they that watch for
souls, and should stand and feed in the strength of the Lord, to administer
discipline according to the word of GOD, and to do every thing commanded there,
which may bring men near GOD, and help them forward in their journey to Heaven.
That Magistrates should be obeyed in the Lord. Parents honored, and husband and
wife dwell together according to knowledge, as heirs of the grace of life. That
Masters should remember they have a Master in Heaven, and Servants be subject
to their Masters for the Lords sake. That the Lord to whom we owe all, should
be loved with the whole heart, and have the flower of our affection, and that
we love our neighbor as our self. That we should rather suffer, then sin, and
glorify GOD in every station wherein he places us. This is the sum of the
positives which we mantaine, and he who will deny, that all this is contained
in Scripture, and consented to by the Fathers, has no understanding either of
Scripture or antiquity. The negatives of our Religion are points of Popery
denied by us, and condemned in the Scripture, contrar to all antiquity. Such as
these. That the Pope of Rome is supreme infallible Monarch of the Christian
Church. That he, and these who follow him cannot err in matters of faith. That
he has pre-eminence above the scripture, and may dispense with the law of GOD,
concerning incest, murder, perjury etc. That he may depose Kings. Their service
in an unknown tongue, is contrary to all pure antiquitity, so much is confessed
by Thomas Cajetan, and Lyranus writting on 1. Cor. 14. Their praying on beads a
late invention, Polid, Virgil, lib. 5. invent. cap. 9. Their carrying of the
Host by a pompous procession is praeter veterem morem, says Cassander
consult. art. 22. not according to antiquity: That Christ is bodily present
there, and should be worsh^pped, and that bread and wine is no longer there
after consecration, is not older then the Lateran Council. That the cup should
be holden from the People, is of one age with the council of Constance. That
the Mass i^ a proper propitiatory sacrifice for the sins of dead and living,
was unknown to Peter Lombard, who says from Augustine lib. 4. disp. ^^. that
which is offered, is called a sacrifice, because it is a commemoration and
representation of the true sacrifice made on the altar of the Cross, Augustine
lib. 20. cap. 21. against Faustus the Manichaean, the flesh and blood of Christ
before his coming into the world, was promised by the similitude of the leg^l
sacrifices; in the suffering of Christ (...), his flesh and blood was in the
verity, and antitype it self exhibited; after the as^^^tion of Christ, it is
celebrated in the Sacrament of commemoration. That none should communica^
except such as make a^ticulat consession to a Priest, was not known in the
ancient*Church, says Maldon sum. qu. ^^. art. 11. Where there was only public
confession. That Images should be set up in Churches and worshipped, was
abominated till the second council of Nice. The like may be said of Purgatory,
worshipping Saints and Angels, withholding the Bible from people, etc. So the
Romish Religion is new, and ours the good old way, quod primum verum, says
Tertul. lib. 4. contra Marc. cap. 5. It is true that the enemy did sow tares
quickly in the Church, and the mystery of iniquity did increase by degrees;
Yet these were not holden to be de side, and made articles of the Christian
Creed, under the pain of Anathema, till the council of Trent, then indeed in
stead of reformation, which occasioned that convention, the Trent Doctors, o^
at least the plurality of them gathered the crotchets of some Fathers, the
disputable opinions of some Schoolmen, and making a bundle of all together,
did obtrude them to be believed by all Christians, under the pain of
excommunication. So that the church of Rome as new dogmatized, is no older then
the council of Trent, and ours is as old as Scripture, sensed by the purest
antiquity. For further clearing, beside all I have said formerly, you may hear
this more, how Suarez tells us, that the council of Florence did at first
insinuat, that there were seven Sacraments, but it was no article of faith till
the council of Trent, the like may be said of the rest. So Popery is a
superstitious superstructure, like an ulcer on the body, which was long in
growing, at last did break out, and stain the garments of many in a world. When
our Lord Jesus dyed, he left a Testamen behind him, which being opened,
directs all his subjects how to carry. Papists not content with this rule for
ordering his legac^e, upon a pompous design have formed a dative, which they
make equal to his Testament, which we disclaim, and honestly adhere to the
first Testament, here is the rule of our Negatives.

It is ^^^rasonick brag, for you to say, That of an 100. Fathers ye have 99.
for your tenets, and as untrue that the four first general Councils were for
the Popes universal supremacy. The Fathers though the mystery of iniquity was
then in the cradle, being taken up with other controversies, did not purposely
fall on these tares, which scarcely were come to the blade then. For instance,
the Fathers in the first 300. years whose books are exta^t, were Just. Mar. who
did writ 150. year after Christ, an Apology for the vindication of Christians
to the Senate of Rome, after another of the samekind to Antonius the Emperor, a
Dialogue concerning the verity of Christian Religion, called Tryphon, and some
other letters exhorting to moral duties, holding forth the Roligion of
Christians against Jews and Gentiles, but that which is Popery, the source of
controversies in the Christian Church was unknown to him. The next is Ironaeus,
who lived about the year of Christ 178. He did write five books against the
heresies of his time, as the Valentinians, Gnostics, Ophites, the heresy of
Simon Magus, Menander, Basilides. So Popery is not to be found in them, unless
some of these heresies be found in their skirts. The ^hird is Clemens
Alexandrinus, who flourished in the year of Christ 196. who was a Presbyter of
Alexandria, the subject he handles is in three parcels* an exhortation to the
Gentiles to renounce their Idols, a Paedagogy to the Christians, instructing
them about their carriage, and his Stromara which is a Miscellany work against
the followers of Basilides, Gnostics, etc. Origin lived about the same time,
whose writtings are so imperfect and vitiated, that we scarce know what to make
of them, as Erasmus witnesses in his edition. Tertullian did writ about the
same time several books, as concerning Patience, the Resurrection, against the
Jews, against Marcion, Hermogenes, Praxeas, the defense o^ Christians against
Idolatry, etc. The Martyr Cyprian who lived anno 258. writteth some eplstles,
treatises and sermons about the cases of his time. Lactantius and Arnobius
flourished in the beginning of the fourth Centurie, and did writ against the
Gentiles, but the Popish trash was unknown to them. So it is not strange albeit
the Negarives of our Religion were not handled directly by the Fathers, seeing
then the Popish controversies were not started, however the Jesuits do w^est
some sayings of these Fathers for their own ends, yet an attentive Reader will
find that they make not for them, as Scultetus and Dr. Forbes, Dr. Usher, and
Dr. Morton have sufficiently proved. In the following ages they had to do with
Arrius, Macedonius, Nestorius, Eutiches, but Popery then was under the hatches,
and the decrees of the Trent Council wholly unknown.

Further, controversies betwixt us and Papists, can hardly be decided by the
Fathers, for some of them made retractations, others held forth the opinion of
others frequently, then what they propose sometime, is esteemed by them
probable, not certain; and all of them Printed since the Trent council, have
been castrated by the Popish Index expurgatorius. Therefore they cannot be
thought the sit Umpyres in our present debates; neither are they made
judges, either by the Popish party or ours: for they appeal to the Pope, we to
the Scriptures, and do make use of them as Commentators, and historians only.
Further, the Fathers desire us to look on them, only as such. I shall ci^e three
testimonies proving this to the full, One is that of Augustine, in his opist. to
Hierom, concerning the interpretation of the 2. chap. to the Galatians. When he
is pressed with the testimony of old authors, Ego didici, hunc honore^
defer tantu^ Scripturarum libris qui Cano ni ci appellantur, ut nullum eorum
authorum in scribendo aliquid errasse, firm^t^r creda^, nec arbitror, mi
frater, te velle tuos libros sic l^gi, tanquam Prophetarum and Apostolorum. i.
e. I have learned to give that honor onl^ to the books of Scripture, which are
canonick* that their authors, have not errod. And a little thereafter. I do
not think my brother that you would have your books, so read as the books of
the Prophets and Apostles.

The second testimony is in his third Epistle to Fortunatus, Nec quorumlibet
disputationes, tanquam Scripturas Canonic^s, habere debemus, ut non liceat,
salva honorisicentia quae iis debetur, aliquid in eorum scriptis impro^are, si
forte aliter senserint, quam veritas habet, talis ego sum in scriptis aliorum,
tales volo esse lectores meorum. i. e. We ought not to look on the writtings of
men, as the Scriptures of GOD, but may disprove that which is not truth in
their books, if they have not set down the truth, such I am in the writings of
others, such I desire to be the readers of my own.

The third testimony is that of Hierom, lib. 2. contra Ruffinum, where speaking
of Origin and other Fathers, he says, fier^ potest, ut simpliciter ^rrarint,
vel alio sens^ scrips^rint, vel a librariis imperitis eorum scripta paulatim
corrupta sunt, vel antequam Arrius natus sit, minus caute loqu^ti sint. i. e.
It may be they have erred and spoken in another sense, or their books have been
corrupted, or before Arrius they have not spoken so warily on the point. If
then we hold Fathers in their own room according to their desire, no wrong is
done to them.

Fourthly, That none think we disside the Fathers or Councils, it will be found
that pure antiquity savoureth us more then Popery. This you deny, and cites for
you Beza his epist. ad Dudithium, whereby your studied endeavor to deceive
people, may appear, for Beza there is only answering an objection brought in
amongst others by Dudithius, for resolution, that he might be confirmed in the
faith by him. Wherein Beza does judiclously give resolution. Will it then
follow that Dudithius was of this opinion? So deal you with Martyr and
Chemnitius who assert no such thing. It is known both of them were good
Antiquaries, and confirm our tenets by several testimonies of Ancients. It is
like you have taken these citations from your Index, and not from the Authors.
Neither Luther, Calvin, Whitgift, Fulke, or any reformed Divine hold from
Fathers or Councils their due. Yea, we reverence them more then ye do.

You bring the four Councils for the Popes universal supremacy and
infallibility. If this be not it which you intend to prove, your answer meereth
no^ mine. This is a negative of our Religion, was it heard of the first 300
years? You say not so. But in the next 300. years was the Popes universal
supremacy or infallibility heard of? This you allege, and by providence
contradict your self, it is known that in the Council of Nice no mention is
made of an universal, far less infallible Pope. You cite the 29. Canon of the
Nicaen Council, whereas there were but 22. of them in whole, says Ruffinus,
lib. 1. cap. 6. Their sixth Canon is far from that. If that had been in their
Creed they needed no Council, the Pope in Cathedra would have done all. And in
the council of Constantinople they establish the power of their own Patriarch.
Why then say you that he was established there universal infallible Mona^ch of
the whole Church? Will ye remember better your connexions? Was he Peter's
successor according to the council of Ephesus? Then no universal Monarch. He
was a Presbyter, an Elder, not a Lord over GODS heritage, see 1. Peter, 5. 3.
Thirdly, Expone this, and reconcile it with the Popedom, if you can? Was he
Patriarch of old Rome? Then no universal head, these two seem to clash, and the
council wordeth it better. But why do you not mention his infallibility in your
Reply; It is the koy of Popery, and let you it thus slip out amongst your
hands? Not one Father or primitive Council is cited for this. The Council of
Chalcedon says expressly, that the Pope of Rome has no privilege from Christ
above others; but only because it was the seat of the Roman Empire, Act: 15.
you will not then have the four Councils for you, except you coin some new
acts as the 29. of Nice. By which also it may appear how groundless, and vain
your boasting is of having 90. Fathers of an 100. for this point. The
opposition of the Ancients thereto is clearly demonstrated by learned Morton in
his Grand Impostor.

Here that you seem not to be silent, you bring forth impertinently these texts
of Scripture formerly explained, Tell the Church, etc. To which I refer the
Reader for satisfaction: there be no more privilege there concerning the
Church of Rome, then the Church of SCOTLAND, and not so much as it is how
constituted and adulterated. We do believe an universal Church, but it is far
from our thoughts that Rome is it. We allow Ministerial helps for expounding
Scripture, but do not renounce the judgment of discretion in Christians. And
concerning interpretation of Scripture, infallibility of Pope or Council, and
the privileges of the universal Church, enough is formerly mentioned. And
these your so often repeated cavils are abundantly refuted, and what you say,
you did in your Reply to my sixth Answer, is refuted by me in my Duply thereto
For this is Crambe recocta.

Lastly, You cite some Fathers of the first 3. ages against our negatives, and
would hold is in hand that they mantained them as Articles of their Creed. But
ye cite spurious Authors, as Origens, Threni, or Lament: Cyprian de Coena, St.
Andrew, St. Dennis etc. some of which your own writters call in question, see
Bellurmin de Script. Eccl. page 83. and de Euchar. lib. 2. cap. 9. Iust^n
Martyr In his Apology to Antonius the Emperor.
is brought for transubstantiation, which is a manifest untruth: For the words
of Justin Martyr are these, (...) etc. i. e. That sanctified Food, wherewith
our blood and flesh by conversion is nourished, i^ that, which we are taught to
be the Body and Blood of Christ. If it be food, wherewith out blood and flesh
is nourished, then where i^ your Transubstantiation? There it is bread in
substance, and the Body of Christ in signification and Sacramental relation. If
you please, by this you may be convinced of your error, ignorance, and
boldness. It is as untrue that Cyprian said or meaned so, except in a
Sacramental sense, for in his 63. epist. he says, Invenimus Vinum fuisse quod
Sangu^nem suum dixit. i. e. We find that it was the win^ which he called his
blood, and in his 76. epist. he says, quando dom^nus appellat panem, corpus
suum, and vinum sanguinem, populum nostrum quem portabut indioat adunatum. i.
e. When our Lord calls the bread his Body, and the wine his Blood, he
signifies that we being many are one lump of bread.

As for the proof of the Mass from St. Andrew, I can find no such book, and
amongst all the Ecclesiastic writters in the first 300. years there was no
mention made of him. If he making for your behove could be produced as an
Author, it is strange how Bellarm^n has forgotten to name him. So I cannot
take this author off your hand. But this is sure, Eusebius lib. 8. Them. Evang.
in fine calls the Bread (...) the memorial of his Body, the Image of his
Body. Then it is no sacrifice, nor corporally the Body. And seeing it is
really, relatively, and symbolically such, we would not have it now abused by
negligence, Origin says no more hom. 13. on Exodus we say no less.

For Purgatory, you cite Tertullian in the second Age, and Cyprian in the
third, neither of which were for it: For Tertull. lib. de Patien. says,
Christum laedimus, cum evocatos quosdam, ab eo quasi miserand^s, non
aequanimiter accipimus. As if they who are called hence, and be with Christ,
were in a pityful state, having obtained their desire, Phil. 1. 23. and Cyprian
de immortalitate, says, Ad refrigerium justi vocantur, ad supplicium injusti
c^piuntur, veloc^u^ tutel^ sidentibus, persidis poena. i. e. The just a^e
called to refreshing res^, the wicked are taken to punishment: safety comes
very swiftly to Believers, and punishment to unbelievers. And Cyprian says,
lib. adversus Demetrianum, Aevi temporalis fine completo ad aeternae, vel
mortis vel immortalitatis hospitia, divdimur. Et ibidem. Quando illin^ excessum
fuerit, nullus jam locus poenitentiae est, nullus satisfactionis ^effectus, ad
mortalitatem sub ipsa morte transitur. i. e. When men depart out of this world,
there is no place thereafter for repentance, no effect of sati^faction, at
death men pass over to immortality. It is true, they grant Probatory
afflictions, and the siery trial here. Some of them also deny full fruition to
the Elect, till the day of judgment: But for Purgatory till the sixth Age it
was not known; then Gregory the first mantained it, Dial. lib. 4. cap. 39.
Neither can that prison Matthew. 5 be understood of Purgatory, as shall be
afterward proved. I shall close this point with Justin Murtyr resp. ad Orthod
quest. page 75. (...). i. e. After the departure of the Soul out of the Body,
immediately there is a separation of the just from the unjust: for the souls of
the righteous are brought to Paradise, and the souls of the wicked are taken to
hell.

Then you prove Prayer to the dead, from Clemens epist. 1. de Sancto Petro, and
Tertul. de cor. mil. I shall not insist on that Apocryphal Epistle, but for
Tertullian, he and others prayed for a joyful Resurrection to them. And hence
are some Panegyricks concerning them, which were rather to profit themselves
then the party deceased, as Augustine tells us in Enchir: ad Laurentium, they
were Consolationes vivorum. You offer also to make out by St. Dennis that they
in primo primitiva Ecclesia, prayed to Saints and Angels. As for the first
citation, to you who profess to believe the Scriptures of GOD, and do yet
stumble weak ones with thornie questions concerning their authority; it will
not be unexpedient for me who cannot find such a writter in the second
Centurie, (for you cannot mean Dionysius the Areopagit who lived in the 1.
Centurie, nor Dionysius Alexandrinus, who lived in the 3. Centurie.) To enquire
I say of you, whither was there such a Saint? And if that be made out whither
did he writ any book at all? And if so, if this be the book which you call his*
I will not take the Popes word for it nor yours, seeing both Hierom and
Bellarmin leave him out of their history. When these questions are answered, I
shall prepare an answer for his testimony. But it is more strange that you cite
Origin who writting against the Pagan Celsus, in this point of prayer to Saints
and Angels, lib. 8. page 432. 433. says expressly, to whom we give the first
fruits to him we send our prayers to the great high Priest, Jesus the Son of
GOD, who is entered into Heaven. This is like your testimony from Dudithius,
if that be Origin you cite for Origens, Threni, or Liment: to be spurious, some
judicious do aver, as Erasmus so Barronius, tom. 2. ad annum. 253. here is a
retractation. Your own Salmeron tells us to more purpose, the reason why in
the primitive times there was no invocation of Saints and Angels, Quia occasio
daretur gentibus, put andi sibi exhibitos multos Deos, pro multitudine divorum.
disp. 8. i^ 1. Tom. 2.

As for the sign of the Cross, it is true Tertullian is for it in these places
named, and it was in use amongst Christians when they had to do with Pagans,
and some who are not of your communion make use of it as yet; others think that
seeing the occasion of the first making use of it is removed, it not being
commanded in Scripture, and much abused by you, that it is more expedient to
leave it undone: But, your abuse of it is not approved by Tertullian, so his
testimony makes nothing for you who do so. And for Images, it is an impudency
in you to say, that there were any Images set up in Churches the first 300.
years, what ever draughts might be in dwelling houses, or cups. For proving
your shamelesness in this assertion, hear your own Lorinus on 17. Acts on the
15. verse etc. where, wit Vasquez and Durand, he tells, that all Images were
forbidden under the Law, and cites for it Ex. 20. 3. then he shows that
under the Gospel in the first Centuries there were no Images, for this he
cites Lactantius and Tertullian, Augustine, and Arnobius contra Gentes, who
says that Gentiles, exprobrabant Christianis quod nullam Dei formarent
picturam, occultabant quod celebant i. e. The Gentiles did upbraid the
Christians because they would not make any Image of GOD, they did hide what
they worshipped. That Adrian fancying the Christians as Pagans suspected, did
build his Temple without any Images. And in Constantius his time, the Christian
Chapels were called Templa Adrians. Then he brings the decree of the Council
of Eliberis, where it was provided that there should be no Images in Churches.
Ne quod colitur and adoratur in parietibus depingatur. i. e. that which is
worshipped and adored should not be painted on walls. This council was
celebrated in the time of Constantine in the fourth Centurie, and this is the
36. Canon of it. And till the second Council of Nice, which was in the 800.
year, Image worship was abommable in the Christian Church. How then can you
assert so great and absurd an untruth: Read ancient History and acknowledge
your error. As for Free Will, we do not deny it in some sense^, and in the
Jesuited sense, none of these you cite did mantaine it. Augustine against
Julian, and Pelagius opposed that, so do we. This is well proved by Jansenius
Yprensis in his defense of Augustins doctrine against the Jesuits. Vincentius
Lyrinensis adversus Haereses, lib. 1. cap. 34. proves that Pelagius was the
first inventer of your Free Will, which is Arbitrium servum. As for the merit
of works, Just in Marty understood not by it meritum condigni, but the
obtaining of the end of their faith and labors. So Augustine, says the Apostle
Paul, electionis vas meruit nominari, lib. de praed. and gratia, and Cyprian
reads that 1. Tim 1. 13. I obtained mercy, misericordium merui. You keep the
words which some ancients used, and we the sense, so ye deceive the People. In
your sense they absolutely renounced it. Origin in epist. ad Romans lib. 4. suith,
Vix mihi suadeo, quod possi ullum opus esse a nobis, quod ex debito
remunerationem Dei poscat. i. e. I can hardly persuade my self that there can
be any work, which of debt deserves a reward from GOD. Bernard in Cant sermon.
67. non est in quo gratia intret, ubi jam meritum occapavit. i. e. Grace has
no place to enter where merit has occupied the room. Your own Ferus on Matthew.
chap. 20. S. says, GOD has freely promised (he rendereth freely) if therefore
thou would keep the grace and favor of GOD, make no mention of thine own
merits. For out of mercy he will give all, yet thou must not be the slower to
good works, yea welshould be more fervent, for doing of them, as becomes us
well, who have so bountiful a Lord. Which words the Spanish inquisitors would
have expunged.

Lastly, You prove the fulfiling of the law, even as the rest, by Tertallian
and Origin, who say nothing but that through Christ, who strengthens us we can
do all things. This is the word of GOD Phil. 4. 13. which we will not disclaim.
But the man who can fulfill the Covenant of works, needs not a Savior. Is it
like they would hold it in your sense, seeing they disclaim merit, and said
with us, In many things we offend all, and when we have done all we are
unprofitable servants. Where is perfection then? The saw may be so far
fulfilled as to make us acceptable to GOD through Christ, but not to justify
us. Now let the Reader judge impartially, whither it was ignorance in me, to
say, that the primitive Church knew not Popery, and that the negatives of our
Religion could not be allowed by them, more then by us. What they say obiter,
concerning any thing of that kind, is for us more then for Papists.

Question eight. How prove you the tenets of the Church of Rome to be contrar
to Scripture?

Answer, Your doctrine forbidding Laics, to read and search the word of GOD,
is against the command of Christ, John 5. 39. this is written Scripture, which
ye contradict by your practice. etc.

Reply, In your eight Answer, you are so confused in your method, so weak in
your citations, and even sometimes so contradicting to your self, that it
needs no other censure. Yet I will reflect briefly on every thing. You
object first our doctrine, forbidding Laics as we call them, say you, (as if
there were no true distinction between Church men and Laics: i. e. a Minister
and a Cobbler in Ecclesiastical functions.) To read the Scripture is against the
command of Christ. Where first you object, as if there were any article of the
Cathoilck Church, forbidding them to read Scripture absolutely. She forbids
them to read Scripture without leave of their Pastors and Directours, which is
easily granted to any judicious person, as all the Converts of this Country
know, whereof the greatest part have seen your errors in Scripture, and
detasted them. Your citation is weak, and can prove nothing till it be made
out, whither the words be imperatively taken, or rather indicatively. Ye search
the Scriptures, so Cyril interprets it lib. 3. in John chap. 4. To whom Beza
assenteth, advertisirg that the word should be rather taken in the indicative
mood. So that you see I must have some other infallible judge, to tell me in
which of these two senses it should be taken, before I build any thing on this
place. Thirdly, As Christ in the same chapter proves himself to be the Son of
GOD by four testimonies. First, Of John the Baptist. Secondly, Of his works and
miracles. Thirdly, Of his Heavenly Father. Fourthly, Of Scripture. So do we
prove by four like testimonies the Roman Church. First, By the authority of the
Fathers. Secondly, By miracles in all ages. Thirdly, By the authority of GOD
clearlie saying in all ages, by her unity, sanctity, in fallibility, This is
my Spouse. Fourthly, Of Scriptures, exhorting all to read and hear them, not
superficially, turning and shuffling them over as the Jews do to this day, and
yet obstinatly deny what they so clearly testify, but to consider and reflect
on the Catholic verities there delivered, as, that Christ was truly the Son
of GOD.

Answer, If my Answer be weak it is the more easily refuted. But how can a
Scripture Aesops fables to you, unless it be sensed and animated by your
Church. Hinc illae lachrymae. Then you say I am confused in the met od. I
begin with the Scripture, then I go to the wo^ship, etc. Is there any thing
jumbled here? I know no rule tendered by Methodists for sorting Scripture
citations, if they be pertiuently cited. And whither you speak truth in
^athering contradictions upon me, it will afterward appear when I consider your
an^we^s to these 20. texts of Scripture, and compare them with your former
Replies; it puts me in mind of our Sea fouls, which can flee only above
water, and slutter on the land. So you mount up with humane traditions, but can
scarcely slutter when you mention Scripture, it is not your Element, this
appears by your first Reply, and the rest are no better. For once you deny
that the people (I said you call them Laics, not that we deny a distinction
betwixt Pastors and people as you would insinuat. But to note your vain
appropriating the name of Clergy, or the Lords heritage, to your Priests, as
if the people of GOD were not a part thereof, contrary to 1. Pet. 5. 3. and as
if you had a commanding power over them. For the arrogance of your Roman
Clergy, Jerome called them Senatum Pharisae^um, the Senate of the Pharisees.)
I say the people are forbidden to read the Scripture by you. And that some in
SCOTLAND of your way are licensed to read them, if this were true, why is it a
ground of inquisition abroad to have a Bible by them, and made a ground of
per^ecution here in the time of reformation, if there be no countermand, why is
it held a transgression?

Secondly, The granting of a license to Italy or Spain. For there be no hazard
to the Popedom here, which might be there, if they were not so muzled. Next you
say the w^rd John 5. 39. is not in the imperative but indicative mood, for that
you cite Cyril and Beza. G^ving, no^ granting that it is so, it makes still
against your practice: Fot they searched the Scriptures with his approbation,
and our Lord refers the people to them, as the rule of their direction for
knowing him, which ye refuse to do, for ye must have another infallible judge
to bear testimony of him.

Thirdly, You desire people not to shuffle, Magna est vis veritatis, and
blessed is the man who meditate in the Law of GOD day and night. For your
application of the place it is selfish, and the similitude halteth on more
legs then one.

The second Scripture is that 1. Cor. 14. Protestants 2. Inst. 2.
14. which forbids your Latin service. If I pray in an unknown tongue, my
understanding is unfruitful, etc. How shall one who occupies the room of the
unlearned say amen? verse 16.

Reply, You reply that the word unknown is not in the Original, but taken in by
interpreters, neither is if great inconvenient, albeit men pray publicly in an
unknown tongue, sithence preaching only is for edification, and information of
the judgment, not prayer. I^ there any scripture forbidding us to pray, except
the understanding of the hearers be instructed? The high Priest amongst the
Jews prayed in the sanctuary, and was separated from the people, therefore
could not instruct their understanding, yet that was their form of publict
worship; And the Apostle in the same chapter, verse 5. To speak with tongues I
forbid not, I wish ye did all speak with tongues, and he desires them to pray
that they might interpret. And the Liturgies of the Church are interpreted to
the people. This scripture makes more against your Ministers, who with
extemporarie prayers, speak nonsense, which has made one of your own Poets
say, fools understand not us, nor wise men you.

Answer, You have need to understand the Greek tongue better, that there be a
difference unknown tongue, and when the Apostle says (...), it needed no other
word for that comprehends barbarous language, as (...) does the known tongue.
Further, he desires them to pray that they might interpret; Ergo, it was an
unknown tongue. Varro lib. 6. de lingua latina, when he cites Aristotle's book,
entitled Absolet names, calls them Glossae Aristotelis, any may see more of
this in that learned Critic Mausacius Mausacius in Harpoerationem. pa. 352.
If you will read the 7. verse, the equivalent of it is in the original, for he
mentions, speaking in a tongue not understood, and is not that an unknown
tongue? Then it is in a tongue to which the unlearned could not say Amen when
one blessed o^ gave thanks. Thus verse 16. and it is the purpose of the Holy
Ghost, to refute that unedifying way at length by sundry arguments. Amongst
which this is one, that the understanding was thereby rendered unfruitful.
Therefore, the Apostle resolves to pray with the spirit and the understanding
also, verse 15. You absurdly contradict the Apostle by your practice, and add
in terms, that it is no great inconvenient, albeit the understanding be
unfruitful. He says it is one. You deny it. Whither shall I believe the Apostle
Paul or you: I am ashamed of your impudency herein. How dare you Palam and in
^s, contradict the Scripture? Your ragged reasons subjoyned, Because prayer is
not so much for the understanding, as Preaching and Catechizing: Is there any
scripture say you not to pray, except they instruct the understanding of
hearers. I answer, the scripture is for it verse 15. I will pray with the
spirit and the understanding also. And if this were not so, Par^ats might pray,
but we ought to speak because we believe. Your other reason against the Apostle
is, That the high Priest amongst the Jews praying in the Sanctuary, was
separated from the people, and did not instruct their understanding, yet that
was the form of their publict worship. Yea in the same chapter verse 5. The
Apostle says, and to speak with tongues he prohibiteth not. I answer, that the
high Priest amongst the Jews, when he was with the people prayed in an known
tongue, Number. 6. and when he was alone in the most holy place, where he entered
but once a year, and that not without blood to typifie Jesus Christ, he spoke
also in the vulgar language of the Nation: And was not all their
administrations in Hebrew their mother tongue? How then can you say that any of
their worship was in an unknown tongue? As for that you add of the 13. verse,
and verse, 16. it is so dark nonsense, that to me now ye speak in an unknown
tongue, and deserves no answer. He desires them to speak with tongues, and
interpret them to the unlearned for the use of edifying, that all might say
Amen. What can be more clear against you?

At last you come off this as formerly, and yield the cause, and say, that the
liturgy of the Catholic Church is interpreted to every one, and the greatest
part of the public prayers translated to the people and set down in their own
prayer books. And this place of Scripture makes not against us, but Ministers,
who with their extemporarie prayers speak non sense, which has made one of
your own Poets say, fools do not understand us, nor wise men you.

I am glad to hear that this point which was deryed at the Council of Trent, is
now granted, and if it be so, why jangled you so much formerly. But I find it
is not so, for you are taught to equivocat. And what your greatest part
means, is unknown here, it is certain your Masses, Aves, etc. are yet
muttered and worded in Latin, ye are ashamed to own it, not without reason.
For your reflection on our worship we are for reasonable service, and lively
work, to a living GOD, not for none-sense, and would to the Lord your worship
were as pure as ours is this day, many souls might be edified thereby.

Thirdly, Invocation of Saints and Angels, is will worship, Col. 2. 23. How can
we call Inst. 3.
on him in whom we do not believe, Romans 10. 14. or lay stress of belief on a
creature? Beside they know not what we say. Abraham is ignorant of us, and
Israel acknowledges us not, Isaiah 63. 16.

To this your return, is, that I wrest the scripture Col. 3. which spe^keth
only of the duty of Masters and Servants, and not one word against the worship
of Saints or Angels. And that place Romans 10. 14. is concerning prayer to GOD
only, not about prayer to Saints or Angels. Because we will supplicat men on
earth in whom we do not believe. And the text Isaiah 63. 16. cited by you is
meaned of the knowledge of approbation, as Hierom interprets the place.
According to which it will rather follow, that they did know what passed here
below, and disowned a degenerated multitude.

Answer, I confess if I had cited that place which you mention upon this
subject, I had not only wrested but martyred Scripture. Coll^ssians, verse 23.
where worshipping of Angels is termed will worship. And what can you say to
that? I would suspect that you purposely have omitted this scripture, yet this
might as easily be refuted by you, as 1. Cor. 14. For he who said the one, said
also the other. The 10. Romans 14. you labor to interpret thus, that it is
meaned of prayer to GOD, not of calling on men or Angels: because we will call
on men on earth in whom we do not believe. The words are general, and the
interrogative is equivalent to a negative. None can call on them in whom they
do not believe. You say we call on men on earth. What do we pray to men? The
calling here, is a part of religious worship, which cannot be given to the
greatest Potentat in the World. Then you tell that the 63 of Isaiah, is meaned
of a knowledge of approbation, like that, depart from me I know you not, id.
est. I approve you not, so Hierom exp^undeth the ^ext, and acc^rding to this
exp^sition, it w^ll rather follow that they did know w^^t passed ^ere below,
and disowned a degenerated (...), I ^nswere that exposition of Is. ^^. is
contra^e to the str^^^o Interpreters. Yet to the connection of the words. For it
is a prayer put up to God, and the (...) to be this, Thou O Lord know how ^o
help us, although Abraham knows no^ what is become of us. So it is an
opposition between divine knowledge, and that of Abraham; Doubtless thou art
our father, etc. But supposing Hierom^ interpretation to be true, it will not
follow that they knew what was done on earth, but only this, that if Israel
were on earth, they were so (...) degenerated that he would not know ^is
posterity. I Will close this with the testimony of your own Eckius in his
Enchir. chapter 15. there is no warrant for invocation of S^ints ^r A^gels from the
scripture, and that the Apostie^ either by word or writ left any thing behind
them to be done etc. He might have said more, there be warrant for the contrar.

Fourthly, Your worshipping of Im^ges, is Inst. 4
an express breach of the second Command, which forbids any sort of worship
to any Image in Heaven or in Earth, Ex. 20. 4. And ye Papists being conscious
of your guilt herein, have thievously stolen out the second Command, and divided
the tenth into two branches, witness Bellarmins Catechism, and your other
writters.

To this you answer, That the division of the Commands is not in scripture, so
we cannot know the second or third. How then standing by scripture your only
determiner shall we judge of t^is? And if you come to authority or reason, I
appeal to your self whither it be Idolatry to worship Images? Seeing all
Idolatry is against the first Command. It being the worship of a creat^re in
the place of GOD. Therefore Bellarmin and others take what ye call the second
Command, for a further explanation of the first, and so set down, but the
substantial words, Thou shall have no other Gods but me. Yet take not the rest
out of the Bible, which is there set down at length. But Protestan^s take away
all the Commandments, saying, it is impossible to keep them. For there is no
Command where there is no obligation of keeping, and Nemo ^enetur ad
impossible. Then reason m^keth for dividing the tenth Commandment in two. For
as theft and adultery are forbidden by two Commands: so the inward desire of
the heart after a man's wife and goods, should likewise in reason be rather
forbidden by two Commandments, then Idolatry alone by two. But if making of
Images, kneeling before them or worshipp^ng them, not as Gods, but as things
which keep us in mind of GOD, and his Saints, as the seventh general Council
says, as the holy bo^ks; Why did GOD make man to his own Image, and obliedge
us to honor him as his Image? Why did he put two Cherubs on the A^k before
which the Jews kneeled? Why commanded he the Jews to adore the same Ark as his
foo^^stool? Psalm 98. Why should every knee bow at the Name of Jesus? For the
word being but a sign of the thing signified, is no better then an Image? And
why is the place on which the Name of GOD was written, called the place of holy
veneration? Exodus 39. 29. Why do we honor the crown, ^ob royal scepter, and
signs of royal autho^itie? Why do we call our knights worship? That is ^ man
deserving civil worship, as Saints and holy things do religious. Why do
Protestants make their Fathers, Grandfathers, and Mist^ess-Images to keep
their memory, rather then that of Christ and his Saints? Why in end hate they
Christ's Image, rather then that of Jupiter, or d^y false God, which they never
challenge in any man's house? Or why leave ye whole the Devils Image commonly
painted at St. Michaels foot, when they broke the Image of the Archangel? Who
loves the person loves the Image. Judge then whether Protestants love GOD or
the Devil best, their hatred being only against the Image of GOD and Saints,
not against these of false Gods and Devils.

To this your Rhetorication, for it is no Reply, I answer first, That ye
misreckon Deuteronomy 10. 14. Secondly, it is also clear, that the tenth command, Thou
shall not covet, cannot make up two; because the Apostle Romans 7. v. 7. makes it
but one (...). Thirdly, if ye will compare Exodus 20. 17. with Deuteronomy. 5. 21. this
will also appear true, for in Exodus the house is put before the wise. But in
Deuteronomy. it is said first, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife, and so these
cannot be two preceps, otherwise the Pen-m^^ might be challenged of disorder,
for not keeping them distinct. Would he have thus jumbled, two different
Commands, who can believe it? Fourthly, Ye mistake the meaning of the tenth
Commandment, for it is not the inward desire of a man's wise by way of adultery,
w^i^her deliberat or not which is there intended. That is forbidden in the
seventh Command. Nor is it the desire of a man his house, or ox, by way of
stealing: that is forbidden in the eight Command, but it is a covering of those
by way of propriety, which is equivalent to that, Heb. 13. 5. Let your
conversation be without covetousness, and be content with that which ye have.
Now there being but one act in specie forbidden that last Command should not be
parted in two. Fifthly, There be a waste difference betwixt the ultimate object
of worship, and the manner of worship, which requires two commands, and make
up the first and second, one where of is, Thou shall have no other Gods. The
other, thou shall worship the true and living GOD without Images, and this
second Command is explained alone by the Penman in Deuteronomy. 4. 12. which is not
usual in Scripture, upon a part of a Command. Sixthly, The ancient Fathers
generally so distinguished them, your own Estius acknowledges on the 3. sent.
did. 36. that Clemens Alexandrinus, lib. 6. strom. distinguishes them as we
do, and calls Thou shall not covet, the tenth precept Athanasius de Synops.
lib. 2. reckons them also after this manner, the second Non facies tibi
simulacrum. The Author of the imperfect work on Matthew, commonly said to be
Chrysostom. hom 49. makes this the second Command, Thou shall not make any
graven Image, Naziaz. in Carmin. Ambros. on the 6. chapter to the Ephesians. Philo.
on the decalogue. so Josephus in the 3. bo^k of Antiq: are all for our
division. So we have reason to divide the precepts thus.

It is clear to any discerner ye take with the breach of the second Command:
and Vasquez grants no less, lib. 2. de adorat. disp. 4 cap. 4. It is true,
says he, our practice of worshipping Images, cannot be reconciled, with the
second Command, nor with Deuteronomy. 4. 12. but Illa legis Mosaicae prohibitio, fuit
juris positivi, and ceremonialis, quae tempore Evangelii, cessare, debet. Atque
id quod alias jure naturali licitum est, ut imagines depingere, and illis ettam
uti ad adorationem, in lege Evangelica, locum habere debet. i. e. That
prohibition of the M^saicall law, was of positive and ceremonial right, which
ought to cease in the time of the Gospel: And that which otherwise were
lawful, by natural right, as to paint Images, and also to make use of them for
worship, has place in the Gospel law also. So ye judge that Command, albeit
one of the ten Moral precepts, which Moses calls ten words, ceremonial, like
the eating of Swins flesh. This is short work. Ye repeal the law because ye
will not obey it. Now you say, It is not Idolatry and that it is set down in
your Bible, albeit not in your Catechism. Where I observe a trick, ye permit
not the people generally to read the Bible, it is a sealed book to them. But
because they read the Catechisms, there must be castrat, lest that Command
should make them detest your Idolatry. You say, It is not Idol^trie, seeing ye
worship not a false GOD. I return, that according to the number of your Cities
are your Gods. By the vulgar practice, ye have a tutelary Saint for your horse,
sheep, corn, cattle, etc. Ye pray for Geese to Saint Feriol, for sore beasts to
St. Agath^, for children to St. Giles, to St. Hubert for dogs, to St. Otilia
for the headache, to St. Russia for madness, to St. Valentine for the
falling sickness: How then keep ye the first Command? Is not he God in whom I
trust, and whom I do worship; as appears from Romans 10. 14. Further, the
worshipping of God by Images, is expressly forbidden in the second Command, as
the worshipping of a false God, is in the first. And if Aarons calfe, Micah and
Jeroboams Images, being worshipped, rendered the transgressors Idolatrous, ye
are also guilty. For they worshipped the true God, in an Idolatrous, false way.
Yea, this was the sin of the Gentiles, when they knew God, thus they changed
his Glory. Romans 1. 21. 23. For this it is that John Monceius, in his book,
entitled, Aaron Purgatus, dedicated to Pope Paul the 5. undertaketh to clear
Aaron, Micah, and Jeroboam, from the guilt of Idolatry, because they did
nothing but what Papists do. Melchior Canus lib. de traditionibus cap. 3.
acknowledges that the worship of Images is condemned in scripture. And
Cassander consult. 21. confesses that the adoration of Images was condemned in
the Council of Frankford, as, contrare to scripture. So these two heads of my
answer that Image Worship is contrare to the second Command, and that precept
stolen from the rest of your Catechism, is proved and granted. We shall now
hear what more you will say, in the defense of your Idolatry, albeit it being
far from the first question and answer, deserves no answer. It is alleged we
break all the Commandments, because we hold that no fallen man can perfectly
fulfill them. To this I answered formerly, in my return upon the 7. question.
But giving and not granting, that this were our error. Two blacks makes not a
whit. None of us ever repealed any of the ten Commandments, or refused
obedience to them: only we say, it is not perfect obedience, as was required
under the Covenant of Works. And this is our regrat, but blessed be he who sent
our Savior to help us. As for the Cherubs and the Ark, I refer you to
Esthius on Heb. 9. 5. who will tell you that the Images of the Cherubims on the
Ark, were placed not to be worshipped, but set there for signs of things to
come. And the word Psalm 99. 5. worship at his foo^-stool, is not worship it,
but before it: for it was a type of the Church in which we worship. And it is
clear the people could not worship them, for they were in the Holy of Holies,
wh^re the people did not enter, nor ever see them. And admit all were true
which you allege, suppose there were a command for this, yet there is an
express command against graven Images. And this rule is our reason of doing or
not doing. This is Tertullians answer to some in his days, who framed the same
objection, lib. de Idololatria, by his gener^l law he forbade any Image to be
made: and by his special injunction, commanded the Cherubims to be set up.
(Advert, he says not, to be worshipped) stay thou till thou get the like
warrant, and make no Image against the law for worship, unless he command thee
as he did Moses. As for bowing at the Name of Jesus, we in this Church take not
these words literally, for there be no knee^ under the earth to bow; but he was
ex^l^ed, that all should acknowledge hi^ to be Lord and Christ. And they w^o
take it oth^rwise, will not admit of your consequence; for if it be commanded,
it is not an Image nor Will worship. For out pictures of friends, and persons
whom we respect, they are like the hangings about our walls. The ornaments of
our houses are forbidden by no law ^s your Images are. And your bitter
expression concerning our love to the Devil, is an unchristian sentence, and
non-consequential, for i^ amounts to this only, we will not b^eak the second
Command of the Lo^d o^t GOD, therefore we love the Devil, Hear O He^vens and
give ear O Earth! Now Reader, if this dool be no^ based the f^^lt i^ in me, not
in the cause. For it is clear as the Sun that the worship of GOD is ^uch
leavened by the Romish way. And albeit there were nothing else to say against
them, serious Christians who study holiness, and tender their salvation and
consolation, must sc^mner at their course. Yet for further satisfaction to the
Reader, I shall handle here this point more fully, and digest it methodically.

This controversy if it deserve to be called one (seeing it should rather be
esteemed the denial of a principle in Christianity, then a controverred point
amongst Christians,) is of great consequence. First, Because Idolatry, as
says Tertullian lib. de Idololatria, is exitium seculi, omne peccatum, the
vuine of the generation infected, and a complex of sin: an Idolater is Homicida
says he, he kills himself. It was that said Luther, as Melchior Adam^s
testifies in his life, which brought the Turk into Christendom. The Jews are
reported in time of their captivity, to reflect with sed sighs upon that as the
chief ingredient in their cup. Albeit an Idol be nothing in the world, 1. Cor.
8. 4. nothing of that it pretends to be, nihil formaliter. Yet the Lord is a
gracious GOD, and jealous, and that is a grievous sin which cannot go
unpunished long, against which he has in his word declared indignation, ^ and
served inhibition. Deuteronomy. 4. 12. Deuteronomy. 5. 8. Deuteronomy. 16. 22. 2. Chro. 33. 17. Ps.
97. 7. Ezekiel. 43. 8. Acts. 17. 22. 23. Romans 1. 23. 1. ep. John. 5. 21. etc.
Secondly, If the Romanists be such, we had reason to leave them. What agreement
has the Temple of GOD with Idols. 2. Cor. 6. 16. we had a fair call to leave
her by a voice from Heaven, Rev. 18. 4. as the Christians had to sl^e from
Jerusalem to Pella. Thirdly, If Idolatry be in the skirts of Rome, it must be
high madness in any who live in the reformed Church, to hanker after and cleave
to them. What will ye go to a Pesthouse? Idolatry is a plague, learn to keep
a distance, and take the wind of them. For if ye join again in affinity. Will
not the Lord be angry? Ezra 9. 14.

In following forth this debate, a method for our better clearing is to be
observed. First, What Idolatry is? And how it differs from supe^stion and
will worship. Secondly, Whether there be any difference betwixt an Image
terminating religions worship, and an Idol, or if in Scripture (...) and (...)
be promiscuously taken. Thirdly, What is the true state of the question, and
whither the Papists be guilty of the breach of the first and second Command,
according to the definition of Idolatry.

Idolatry, is to be defined here by uncontroverted writters, for if Protestant
Divines should only define the case, partiality might be alleged, as if we
made a definition, to infer our own conclusion. Therefore to stopp the mo^ths
of adversaries in this, I shall define Idolatry from Scripture, antiquity,
Popish writters, the testimony of a Jew and a Pagan, this is fair and square
dealing, against which none can justly make any exception. Idolatry is
religious worship, tendered to that which is not GOD. It is called religious
worship, for it is not civil, relating to the fifth Command which is here
handled. But that which is comprised in the first and second, consisting in
adoration, trusting, prayer, vows, worship, swearing, dedication of Temples
and days. When men give that to Images, Saints, Crosses, Relics, which is
due to GOD, that is idolatry, by the mouth of the spirit speaking in Scripture,
Ex. 20. 5. Thou shall not bow down thy self to them to serve them. Psam. 97. 7.
Confounded be all they who serve graven Images, who boast themselves of Idols,
worship him all ye Gods. Psalm 115. 8. They that made them are like them, so is
every o^e that trusts in them. Now then, service, bowing, trusting in, or to
images is Idolatry, cursed and confounded by the word of GOD. Secordly,
Ancients desine it thus, Idolatry is that Quae DEO fraudem sacit, honorem
debitum, DEO denegans, and conferens aliis. So says Tertullian lib. de
idololatria, that is Idolatry, which p^^loineth honor from the Lord, and
gives it to others beside him, as adultery gives conjugal benevolence to
others, beside the husband or wife. Idolum says Isiodorus in suis Origin: lib.
8. cap. 11. Est simulachrum, quod humana effigy factum and consecratum est.
That is an Idol which is made like a man, and consecrated for worship. So the
exhibition of Religious worship to that is Idolatry, according to him. Aug.
epist. 119. ad Jan. says, in primo praecepto prohibetur coli aliqua in
sigmentis hominum DEI similitudo, quia nulla imago ejus coli debet nisi illa
quae hoc est quod ipse, nec pro illo aut cum illo. In the first Command (where
he takes in the second) to us every similitude of GOD is forbidden to be
worshipped, because nothing should be wo^shiped with him, or for him, but He
himself alone. Then according to him, worship given to any Image made with
hands not being God is Idolatry. Then it will follow, first, that the Gentiles
did not always worship a false GOD, as ye shall afterward hear. And next, that
the Images representing ^he true God, worshipped by them were Idols. So that
worship must be Idolatry w^erever it is. The Adultery of a Pagan and a
Christian are one. So the Idolatry of the one and the other cannot be diverse,
whatever difference may be otherwise amongst them. Gerson says, Varietas
imaginum, plurim^s ad idololatriam pervertit. Thereby implying that statue
worship, as practiced by Romanists, was Idolatry. Josephus a Jew con. Appio.
says, it is abominable to place any Image in the temple of God, and declaimeth
against Pilat for intending the like. It is known, how averse the Jews after
the captivity were, from this way, whatever pollutions formerly they
committed. Religious worship, rendered to Images, was detested by them, and
reckoned Idolatrous. Varro a heathen, as he is cited by Aug. lib. 4. de civit:
Dei, says, that at Rome in the beginning, fuit purior Dei cultus, sine
simulachris, centum septuaginta annis. Then by the twilight of Pagans, the
worship is polluted, which is by Images. And in Pagan Rome, it was free of that
170. years. Afterward they took in Images, and multiplied their Gods, so were
they given up as the Apostle tells, Romans 1. 23. By all these it is evident
that Idolatry is religious worship, given to that which is not GOD.

Idolatry, Superstition, and Will Worship, may be thus distinguished.
Superstition is according to the Etymolygie of the word, supra statutum, and
may be in many cases where there be no worship at all. As when men are afraid
of the signs in Heaven, Jer. 10. 1. 2. If they meet such a foot in the morning,
if people be affrighted with dreams, vain divinations, as the falling of salt,
etc. And be charmed from dependence by faith on the word of GOD. That is
superstition, which ordinarily prophecieth according to their sentiments, all
the fears they imagine. The Papists would willingly take with superstition, if
we make Scripture the sole rule of faith and manners. In this they are not
unlike some Witches, who will acknowledge, when pannelled, gross crims, such as
adultery drunkenness, swearing, Sabbath breaking, that they may be thought the
more ingenuous in denying Witch-chraft. Bell. lib. 2. de Imag. cap. 8. says no
less, Non est tam certum, an imagines DEI, and sanctae Trinitatis, sint
faciendae in Ecclesia? It is not so certain, whither the Images of GOD, and the
holy Trinity should be made in the Church? And he thinks that worship given
to these, to be founded only upon opinion. Therefore he must acknowledge it, at
least to be superstition. Will worship is where there is no statute terminating
it. As the worshipping of Angels Col. 2. and they go away from it, with this
return, who has required it at your hands? Thus all Idolatry is superstition,
and Will Worship. For the Apostle Acts 17. calls the Athenian worship such,
and makes use of a general smooth word, to dispose them the more, for hearing;
or because, it may be there was no Image there, but an Altar to the unknown
God. Yet all superstition, and will worship, is not Idolatry, although all of
them are damnable, Ezekiel. 43. 8. and religious worship should not be ex arbitrio
humano sed imperio divino Tertull. de Jejunio cap. 13.
, in vain do they worship me, Matthew. 15. 9. says our Lord, who do so.

There be no difference in scripture betwixt a consecrated Image and an Idol.
If an image terminat worship, make it the brazen Serpent, it is an Idol. And
that sculptile forbidden in the second Command, the Hebrew word signifying it,
is Pesel, which is ordinarily rendered by the 70. (...), Deuteronomy. 4. 16. and in
the 4. of the Judges the word is twice rendered (...). The greek word (...)
which is a name give^ to paga idols Romans 1 2 3 and the image of the beast Re.
13. 14 is called (...), the worship whereof no Christian can deny to be
idolatry. Image in Latin is, quasi imitago, and (...), is ordinarily tendered
simulachrum, imago. Hippocrates Aph. 18. calls the body of a man without the
soul Idolum. The truth of this causes Lorinus confess, that apud profanos
auth^res. i. e. Critics and Humanists, (...) and (...) Aeque late patent, and
si latinitate utraque daretur eadem est significatio idoli and iconis. Sed apud
Ecclesiasticos. i. e. Popish writters it is not. So now let any reasonable man
judge, whither biased Papists, or learned Critics, not involved in the
controversy, can give the soundest sense of these words? And seeing the Hebrew
signifying both is one, if it be safe to hazard. Salvation upon a distinction,
merely nominal without a sure ground of Scripture or reason?

(...) and (...) in scripture, and amongst Humanists are promiscuously taken,
for the Hebrew word Gnabad, is indifferently taken, and signifies service:
which is rendered by the 70. interpreters sometimes by (...), sometimes by
(...). For instance Daniel 6. 20. the speech of the King Darius to Daniel, is
thus tendered by the 70. (...) etc. Daniel servant of the living GOD, is the
Lord whom thou servest constantly, able to deliver thee from the Lions? In one
verse (...) and (...) are taken for one. And it is ordinar in the Old Testament
to render the word Gnabad by (...). Yea more, in it self the word (...) coming
from dal, signifies the most submisse service: so it is absurd to say it
belongs to Saints, and not to GOD, whom we should most humbly serve. And in
the New Testament in more then 40. several places, as Pasor proves fully,
these words are synonyma, which I need not here transcribe, seeing the book is
common The Ap. Gal. 4. 8. condemns (...) as given to these which ^ are not GOD,
such are all saints Angels and Images. Ergo.
. Now is it not great boldness in men to break the second Command, upon the
pretended distinction of (...) and (...).

The state of the question betwixt us and Romanists is this, whither they by
their worship break the first and second Command? and so are guilty of
Idolatry, this they deny. And we prove by these following arguments.

Arg. first, Who ever do give religious worship to that which is not GOD, are
guilty of Idolatry, but the Papists do so. Ergo, The major is the definition,
already consirmed. The minor is thus proved, they worship religiously Saints,
Angels, Crosses, Relics, Images, bow down to them, build Temples, make
Processions, light Tapers, which Hierom calls insignia Idololatriae, therefore
they give to these religious worship. Beside it is not civil worship, Ergo, it
is religious, for there is no middle worship betwixt these two. Further the
Council of Trent in the decree concerning Relics, appoints worship to them,
opis impetrandae causa. Is not this to trust in them for help? They give to
Angels and Saints that which Peter refused from Cornelius, yet his pretended
successor claims it thrice together; once at the door, the second in the
middle of the room, and the third when they kiss his foot See St. Amors Iournal.
. They give that to Angels which the Angel inhibited John twice to do, Rev. 19.
10. Rev. 22. 8. And say it was refused by the Angel out of modesty: whereas it
is seriously forbidden with this reason, worship GOD, which is a sufficient
rule, directing us to give religious worship to none but GOD. Thou shall
worship the Lord thy GOD and him only shall thou serve. The distinction of
(...) and (...) serves for no use here as is above proved. And when they say,
that it is not as to GOD; let their Breviaries, See Breviariam Abredonense^
Printed at Edinburgh, 1508.
Rosaries, service books, testify the contrar, which gives them religious
adoration by prayer, praises, kissing, confidence. And will this satisfy a
husband from an adulteress, that albeit she committed uncleanness with another,
yet it was not with that conjugal affection due to her husband. Now how can
such an evasion then, satisfy the conscience of a Papist, or sustain before
the Lord Jesus who is the husband of his people? It is clear hence, that by so
doing they break the first Command, and have other Gods beside him, whom they
make Omniscient, Omnipresent, in whom they trust, from whom they seek aid and
help.

Arg. second, They who worship Images with religious worship, and break the
second Command, are guilty of Idolatry, because they worship the work of men's
hands. But the Romanists do this, Ergo, etc. In answering this they do not
agree amongst themselves, some of them deny the Major, as Vasquez, lib. 2. de
ador. disp. 4. cap. 4. for he confidently averreth that Illa Mosaicae legis
prohibitio, meaning the second Command, fuit juris positivi and ceremonialis,
quae tempore Evangelii cessare debet, he calls it a ceremonial precept, which
binds not us under the Gospel. This is short work, he repealeth the Law,
because he will not obey it. But why may not the first Command be declared
ceremonial, upon the same ground, especially by Papists, who make the second a
part of the first. And if so, Paganism may be brought in by Romanists into
their co^sistorie, which many fear to be rankly rooted there. He who said, Thou
shall not bow down to a graven Image, said also with the same authority, Thou
shall have no other Gods but me, Et e contra. This man has few followers.
Therefore some deny the minor, as Durand, lib, 3. did. 9. quest. 2. who
asserreth that they do not worship Images, but that which is represented by the
Image. So it is relative worship, and the Image is a representative only, and
memorial of the right object. Now this answore is naught, for if that be, why
do they nor likewise worship all the creatures, seeing they declare the glory
of God, and may be memorials? Secondly, the Council of Trent condemns this
gloss, which in its decree de imagini^us, says, that debita veneratio iis
imper^ienda est, i. e. due worship is to be attributed to them, viz, to Images.
They according to their manner, do not declare what manner of worship should be
imparted. But it is sure they mean not civil worship, therefore it must be
religious. Thirdly, it is tendered to the Image it self, in prima instantia,
therefore the Image terminateth the worship, and is more then a memorial.
Thirdly, the vulgar cannot distinguish betwixt Versu^ and Coram, Relative, and
absolute worship: therefore to them it must be a snare. How dangerous i^ it to
cast and knit a snare for people, and stumble the weak.

Some distinguish the Minor, as Thomas Bonaventure etc. and say, that the same
worship should be given to the Image, which is given to that represented by it,
whether it be (...), or (...), and yet say they it is not Idolatry, because
they worship not the timber or metal, but the Image, in regard of its form
or signification. And they worship not the Image of a false God, which they
allege to be forbidden only in the second Command. So Aquinas part. 3. q. 25.
Bonavent. lib. 3. did. But if this answer hold good, then the Pagans were not
Idolaters; For they denied that they did worship a stock or a stone. Aug. on
Ps. 114. brings in the Pagan answering thus, Non simulachruin colo, sed ejus
rei signum quam colere debet. And again, Non stipites colimus, sed quae illis
regendis praesident numina. We worship no stocks, but the Numen which presideth
over the Image. And upon the 97 Ps. Non illud colo quod video, i. e. the timber
or stone, sed servio ei quem non video. I serve him whom I see not. Secondly,
They who worshipped the brazen Serpent, did not worship the piece of brass, but
the form of it. And they thought not that it had innate virtue, yet were
guilty of Idolatry. Thirdly, It is clear from scripture, that some of the
Heathen, especially at first, did worship by the Image the invisible GOD who
made all things, Acts 17. 23. him whom ye ignorantly worship do I declare unto
you. Yet were Idolaters. And Romans 1. 23. They changed the glory of the
incorruptible GOD, into an Image made like man. It was the incorrubtile GOD his
Image, and withal Idolatry. But fourthly, If only the Image of false Gods
worshipped, make Idolatry, then Israel was not guilty of Idolatry: But Israel
was thus guilty, Ergo, etc. It is image worship whither of the true or false
Gods which is here forbidden. For it is certain that the Golden-call was
intended by them to represent the true GOD. Exodus 32. 5. To morrow is a feast
to the Lord, and 2. Chro. 33. 17. They sacrifized in high places, yet to the
Lord their God only. The like may be said of the Calves at Dan and Bethel, Ps.
106. 20. And of Micahs Image. For be confidently says, Now know I that the
Lord will bless me, Judges 17. because I have a Levit to be my Priest. They
used not Levits, for the worship of false Gods. Further, the speech of Stephen
seems to prove it strongly, Acts 7. 40. 41. for speaking of Isreal's
worshipping the Calf, he says, The Lord for this gave them up to worship the
host of Heaven, Now when sin is punished by sin, that sin which is the judicial
punishment, uses to be more gross then the antecedent sin, which is the
procuring cause; but the worshipping the host of Heaven, is not so gross as the
worship of an Ox: therefore they did worship GOD at first by the
representation of a Calf, yet were Idolaters. This answer then cannot satisfy
the conscience or reason of any man. And admit that the image of false Gods is
forbidden in the second Command, how dare Papists without warrant, and contrar
to the word, make the Image of the true GOD, which he has expressly forbidden?
Deuteronomy. 4. 12. Seeing Omnis cultus says Tertullian, de Jejunio, should be ex
imperio divine, non ex arbitrio humano. Lastly, We are forbidden to worship the
likeness of any thing in the Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath. Now the
Lord GOD is in the Heaven above gloriously, therefore we should not make his
Image, for to what can ye liken him? says he. Isaiah 40. 18.

Bellarmin de Imag. and Gregorius de Valentia, distinguish the Minor another
way, and reject the two former answers as extreme. For first, they say that
they worship Images properly, so they are against Durand a great Anti-Thomist,
who makes them only memorials. Secondly, They say, that they give them not
worship equal to the Pattern, so they renounce Thomas and all his adherents,
Valent. lib. 3. disp. 6. says, it is not sicut DEO, that they worship the
Image of the Trinity. Bellarmin says further, that it is not Aeque certum an
Imagines Trinitatis sint in Templis coll^candae, and reperendae. Yet say they,
that veneration suitable to them is to be rendered. Which is he ambiguo^s
phrase of the Council of Trent, like the Delphian oracle. If this answer hold
good, then Thomas and all his Clients are guilty of Idolatry, for they give
veneration to Images equal with the Pattern, all the Thomists say sicut DEO, so
to the Image.

Secondly, Cultus religiosus est accidens hominis, if we speak Physice, now
gradual difference in these alters not the kind of worship. Therefore,
according to the rules of Logic, the worship is one with the worship of
Thomists; or else they disclaim a maxim, by making the one Idolatry, the
other not.

Thirdly, We are forbidden to bow down to them, therefore the meanest degree of
religious worship is forbidden in the second Command. And they who break the
least Command, and teach men so, shall be least in the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew.
5. 19. Lastly, the seduced people know nothing of this difference. Yea
Bellarmin thinks it not fit, that in concione ^oram populo, it should be
divulged; and he has reason to say so, seeing they cannot conceive the
groundless distinction betwixt (...) and (...), for their Clergy men will not
make it hold water.

Fourthly, Some as Eckius in his Enchir: answers nothing but this to the
argument, that it is the tradition of their Church, and Command of their Pope,
which they judge themselves obliedged to obey. If this answer be relevant then
they were not faulty, who with their traditions, made the word of GOD of none
effect, Matthew. 15. 6. And Papists are too like the Pharisees in this. Secondly,
By that Logic, the Turk may mantain his worship of Mahomet, for his Church and
Mufti authorize it. Thirdly, The Pope in his Conclave may bring in the Alcoran
the next day, for that may have authority from them contrar to the word of GOD.

Arg. third, If Image Worship be condemned by all pure antiquity, then this
worship is not only a breach of the second Command, but contrar to the custom
of all the Churches of Christ. Upon which argument the Apostle lays stress,
1. Cor. 11. 16. But the first is true, Ergo, etc. The Minor is proved thus.
Many of the Ancients, as Clemens Alexandrinus, Tertullian, etc. Were against
the art of stat^e making, Epiph. in his ep. to John 23. of Jerusalem,
abominateth the putting them up in Churches; and says, it is contrar to
scripture that any Image should be in the Church of Christ Now if they were
against the making of them, against the hanging of them in Churches, much more
against teligious veneration given to them. Secondly, the council called
Eliber: which is as old, if not older then the Council of Nice, made a decree,
that no Image should be in the Church, ne forte quod in parietibus pingatur,
colatur, least that which is painted be worshipped, and till the second Council
of Nice, which was in the 8. Centurie, no such thing as image worship was
approved in the Christian Church. Thirdly, It is an ordinar objection made by
Celsus, and all Pagans against Christians as I said before from Lorinus. Ye
have Nulla Templa, nulla simulachra, nullas aras, quod colitis celatis. To this
objection Origin and Arnobius answer, yielding the matter of fact, and
vindicating their way, which they could not have done, if Images had been in
use amongst them. Further when Adrian did build a Temple for himself, the
Pagans suspected that it was for the Christians, because it was sine
simulachris, without Images, whence it is clear, that the Image worship comes
nearer Paganism, then Primitive antiquity. See D^laeus de Imagine.

Arg. fourth, That which notwithstanding of all distinctions, draws and
drives people to Idolatry, is abominable, but by the concession and
confession of some learned Papists, the Romish worship does involve people into
Idolatry, therefore it is abominable. The Major is proved by reason, that when
the people made an Idol of the brazen Serpent, the statue was brocken, and
called Nehushtan, although at first it was appointed by GOD. The Minor is thus
proved by the testimonies of learned Romanists, as Polyd, Virgil. de invent.
lib. 6. cap. 13. Many are now, says he, become so mad, that they worship the
Images of wood and stone, as if the^ had sense in (...), and put more
confidence in them then the^ do in Jesus Christ, or other Saints to whom they
are dedicated. Cassander consult. de imag. says, It is too manifest that the
worship of Images has so prevailed, that Christians seem to be nothing
inferior to Pagans in adoration of their Idols, they make them with as much
vanity, and adore them with as much devotion. From Scripture, reason,
antiquity, the confession and concession of adver^arie^, it is sure and clear
that Papists commit gross Idolatry, from which all good Christians should flee
and make their escape.

Fifthly, Ye mulitat the Sacrament of the 5. Inst.
Supper, contrar to the institution of Jesus Christ, Matthew. 26. 27. by
withholding the Cup from the people: yea contrar to the doctrine of the
Apostle Paul which be received from the Lord, 1. Cor. 11. 25. where all the
Communicants for the most were common Professors. And alb^i^ our Lord command
this to be done, till he come again without any substantial alteration, yet
acrilegiously, hoc non obstante, as says your Council of Constance, ye
withold the C^p from the people, and give them only the Bread.

The answer given to this is as follows, that Protestants in denying real
Presence, against the express words of Scripture, This is my Body, this is my
Blood, which is shed for you, not only mutilat the Sacrament, but take it clear
away. You give sufficient occasion to other Haereticks, to say that Christ was
no otherwise in the Crib, or the Cross, then ye say that he is in the
Sacrament, Scripture not being more clear for the one then the other. So that
denying the real presence, ye destroy and ruin in a manner the incarnation,
and very ground of Christianity. But Catholics, neither take it away from any,
nor give it mutilat. Seeing they profess to give Christ's glorious and living
Body, which is not seperat from the Blood, and who so receives the one
receives the other. It was instituted not only for a Sacrament, but for a
sacrifice, and so I grant that both kynds is requisite on the Altar, but it
should nor be given to every one, otherwise the very Disciples of the Apostles,
had not known how it should be given. For St. Dennis lib. de Ecclesia, he
asserteth the communion of Saints under one kind, and St. Cyprian de Lapsis,
affirms the same of the sick. Yea, when Christians in the Primitive Church in
the time of persecution, did carry it home, they did eat it, but under one
kind, as Tertullain tells lib. ad Uxorem. More, Christ himself did give it
under one kind, Luke 24. verse 30. as learned Fathers expound. And the
Apostles, Acts 2. 42. and Acts 20. 7. who then can challenge a necessity of
tak^ng both kinds? What St. Paul did then was lawful? But what Christ and his
Apostles did was no less, which shows that the Church way follow, either of
these examples, for good reasons, as she thinks ^i^.

Answer, Your mutilation of the Sacrament is so clear, that I admire how you
can deny Council of Constance establish it, hoc non obstante, i. e.
notwithstanding the institution, etc. Your citations for proof are
mismarshalled. For first you cite St. Dennis, Cyprian, Tertullian, and then
Scripture, which shows your respects for the word. But I cannot follow your
Method in this. Therefore know, that the place Luke 24. v. 30. makes nothing
for you. You say Fathers interpret it so, but tell us not who they are, so
their interpretation is no more but your word; but to show that there be no
mention, in that place of the Sacrament. First. There was no cup at all there,
at least none is mentioned. How then can you make it a Sacrament, seeing you
say to us that both kinds are necessar to a sacrifice, and the Sacrament of the
Supper is such say you. Reconcile your self with your self if you can? Here
there was no Sacrifice, Ergo, no Sacrament. Secondly, It is sure this was an
ordinary meal, honored with Christ his presence. And for proof of this read
Jansenius, on these words. There be some says he, who would take an argument
from this place, that it is lawful under one kind to give or receive the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, which opinion is neither certain, nor has it any
liklyhood of truth. We are commanded to eat and drink at that table, how we
shall make eating, eating and drinking too (says he) can hardly be perceived.

That breaking of bread, Acts. 2. 46. is interpreted, to be eating their meat
at home, with gladness and singleness of heart. Oecumenius, Lyra, Cajetan,
Carthusian, say, it is only meaned, de communi victu, non de Eucharistia. So
says Lorinus also on the text. Existimo, hic de Eucharistia non esse sermonem,
sed de victu quotidiano, vel convivio, quod (...) appellant.

So that place Acts 20. Lyra, Carthusianus, Cajetanus, make it corporal
refection only, for they say, the Disciples did conveen to eat with Paul,
before he went away, and this is proved from the 11. v. But grant that place,
Acts 20. to be meaned of the Sacrament, which is probably mantained by others,
it will no more follow, that the Apostle did mutilat it there, then that he
preached without Prayer, seeing the one is no more mentioned then the other.
Lorinus says, he could not make use of this text, for Communion sub una
specie, against an adversary.

Your citation from St. Dennis makes little for you. For supposing his
testimony to be ^eal, the administration of it to Infants was contrary to the
institution, as well as under one kind. We know Infants can drink before they
can eat, if any such thing was, it is liker an administration to Infants, then
to discerning Christians; It is true that they used to carry home the bread, as
you imply from Tertullian and Cyprian, but did always take the cup in
praesentia. But to put this out of doubt, see Cassander Consult. 22. Communion
under one kind was not in the Church, says he, till Aquinas his time, anno.
1265. And is it not against your light and reason then, to argue so against the
institution of Jesus Christ? Our judgment about the presence of Christ in the
Sacrament, will be heard a none, but it will be no ground for you to mutilat
divine ordinances, and clip treacherously the King of Saints his coin.

Sixthly, Ye add to the Sarament of Baptism, 6. Inst.
Matthew 3. 11.

Here your Reply is, that there is no command of Christ against it, and if it
be against Christ's command, because he has not commanded it, then it will
follow, that to call Baptism a Sacrament, is against Christ's command, for
neither has he commanded this, but by his Church, which also commanded that.

Answer, Here we have consitentem reum, that (...) Christ has not commanded
salt, Ergo, we may add materials to the work without a warrant. The practice
of the Baptist objected by me seems unanswerable, for you fail by it as by a
rock, which is not candid dealing. Yet it is your ordinar manner to pass with
silence material arguments.

Seventhly, Ye add to the Bible humane 7. Inst.
traditions, which ye equalize, and in a sort prefer to it. This is point
blank contrar to the Word, Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Rev. 22. 18. If any man add to these
things, GOD shall add to him the plagues written in this book, so ye have ^o
fear a plague in due time.

Reply, These are open calumnies, made to deceive the people in Pulpits, as I
have showed, reflecting on your sixth answer. And prove again summarily by this
Syllogism, what is expressly contained in Scripture, is not contrar to it: But
this is expressly commanded, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 1. Hold fast the traditions which ye
have received. Neither are your citations of Deuteronomy. or Rev. to any purpose. For
when it is said there, If any man shall add to these things, GOD shall add to
him the plagues written in the book. Of necessity it must be understood of
these books only, adding any thing as a part of them, otherwise it will exclude
all other Scripture, as well as tradition. But it may be you think the
Revelation the last written book of Scripture, and that St. John there did
speak of all the Bible. But this is a conceit out of ignorance, seeing
Chemnitius your great Gun, says, his Gospel was written after the Revelation.
And some say so of his Epistles, in the very last of which and last verse, he
says, I have many things to writ unto you, but not with pen and ink, but I
trust to come unto you and speak face to face. But ye would not have believed
him speaking face to face, who will believe nothing but that which is written.

Answer, You again defend traditions, by your old argument, A genere ad speciem
affirmative, Deuteronomy. and Rev. 22. confuteth your self. For you grant that it is
not lawful to add any thing as a part of these books. Then say I, it is as
unlawful to add traditions as a part of the Bible, and make an entire object
of faith with both, which is your doctrine. If the Pirrat was faulty for taking
a ship, Alexander was more faulty by taking of Nations. We will put nothing to
the Scripture that way. For then we might make a new Bible, and nothing into
our Creed, but what was written by the Penne^s of it. You make me ignorant of
the time when the Revelation was written, and goes about to father that on me,
which came not into my mind. How far and wherein we hold traditions, Vide
supra, on Quest sixth, I have no delight to make repetitions.

Eighthly, Ye mis-regard the Lord's Day, and 8. Inst.
celebrate days of your own devysing, contrar to and without any warrant from
the Word, see Gal. 4. 10.

You reply that these are calumnies, for we are taught to keep the Lord's Day
most religiously, and with it the holy days of Christs-Birth, Circumsion,
adoration by the Kings, presentation in the Temple, the feasts of the Mother of
GOD, of the twelve Apostles, of some Martyrs, and other Saints, upon the same
ground of Apostolic tradition, and ordinance of the Church, which the
Scripture commands us to hear and hold fast, and so what we do in this, is
neither contrar to Scripture, nor without warrant from the written Word. And
your citation may be as well applied against your observation of days of
humiliation and thanksgiving. For that place forbids only Heathenish or
Jewish days, or dismal days, superstitiously kept on frivolous remarkes. See
Hierom on the place, Aug. cont. Argenant. cap. 16. and in his epist. 118. cap.
7. and hear the same Aug. speaking of all our holy days in express terms,
which Protestants taking away, what St. Aug. says may creep in, both
ungrateful forgetting of Christ's mysteries, and unkind oblivion of his Saints.

You call this Argument a Calumny; but it in too well known how small regard
is had And how far other days of humane institution, are by you preferred to
them. And for Aug. whom you cite, as the main patron of them, he was so far
from approving the trash of his time, brought in by the devices of men, in the
worship of God, that in his 119. ep. he says, If they continue, they will
become Heathnish and Judaize in many things. So according to Hieroms exposition
on the text, Gal. 4. 10. concerns you, for some of your stust is Judaicall
some Paganish. Polyd. Virgil de invent. lib. 4. in proaemio, says, That a
very world of Jewish and Heathnish ceremonies, pestereth the Lords field.
Agrippa de Vanit. cap. 6. says, That Christians now, are more oppressed with
ceremonies, then the Jews were. The Jewish holy days were but few in respect
of the Romish, for they had but their Passover, Pentecost, feast of
Tabernacles, of Trumpets, Reconciliation, New Mons, Purim, and Dedication, the
most of which were of divine institution. These have holy days for every
Saint, All saints, all souls, for the Cross, Corpus Christi, two daye^ every
week, Lent fast, etc. without any warrant from scripture, or pure antiquity.
For Aug. says, ep. 86. against Urbicus, we are indeed commanded to fast, but
I find not the days prescribed in the Evangelicall or Apostolical writtings.
The same says Socrates, that it was left by the Apostles to every man's free
choice, lib. 5. cap. 22. and Erasmus on the 11. of Matthew. complains, that in
Hieroms time there were few holy days beside the Lords day, but now they were
unreasonable and burdensome, because of their multitude. Thus you see neither
Hierom, nor Aug. savor your holy days, unless it be in your Utopian tractate
contra Argentinant: for there is non-such among his works. You might easily
perceive that Gal. 4. 10. does not militate as much against our days of
humiliation or thanksgiving, as your holy days, if you wo^ld consider. First,
We have more regard to he Lord's Day, nor any of these, this we desiderar
m^inly in you, for as ye prefer humane traditions to the Scripture, so do you
these your days, to the Sabbath of the Lord. Secondly, Our days of
humiliation and thanksgiving, are not nimious for number, nor one rous to the
people: but yours are such, that many of your own complain on them, as
Polydore Wirgil. in proaemio, and others. And if Aug. complained so of these in
his own time, what would he say ^ow, if he were living? Will ye hear what he
says, Epist. 119. Omnia talia quae sanctarum Scripturarum autho^itatibus
continentur, nec in Conciliis Episcoporum statuta inveniuntur, nec consuetudine
universae Ecclesiae roborata sunt, ita ut vix, aut omnino nunquam, inven^ri
possunt causae, quas in eis instituendis, homines sequuti sunt; sine ulla
dubitatione resecanda existimo. Then he says, all such things which stumble
the weak, and are detrimental not founded on Scripture, are to be cut off. And
again, albeit it cannot be found out, Quomodo contra fidem sint. Yet, ipsam
Religionem premunt seruilibus oneribus, ita ut tolerabilior sit conditio
Judaeorum, because, non humanis praesumptionibus ita subjiciuntur. Is he not
clearly then against your way? Thirdly, In observing the Sabbath, we regard at
that time the work for the day, but in the days of fast and thanksgiving, we
regard the day occasionally for the work. Fourthly, We have in observing
these, no cognation with Jewish or Pagane times, whereof ye may be impeached,
and cannot plead not guilty.

Ninthly, Ye condemn marriage as carnal 9. Inst.
to some, contrare to the Apostle Heb. 13. 4. and make it a Sacrament to
others. So ye confound your self, making it both Sacramental, and Sacrilegious
to the elect of God; whereas Enoch walked with God, and begat sons and
daughters Genesis 5. 22.

You reply to this, that we Ministers are addicted to marriage, and therefore
should not offend that it is called a Sacrament. Thou that it is so called Ephesians.
5. and by the Greek Fathers who understood their own language. And that ye
condemn it not as sacrilegious in any but such as take on the vows of
chastity, poverty, etc. And that it is malice in Ministers to call Virtues,
Vices.

Here you contradict your self, for in answer to the sixth Question, you denied
that Sacrament was at all in scripture, which is true, and yet now you
allege, that it is to be found in the 5. Ephesians. and marriage is so called.
Beside your contradiction, you speak ignorantly, by telling that the Greek
Fathers, who understood their own language, called marriage a sacrament;
whereas the word is Latin, and not Greek. If that place of scripture be read
by any, it will so^n appear, that marriage betwixt man and woman is no^ called
a myst^rie, but that which is between Christ and his Church verse 32. For the
marriage of Ministers, I se^ not why it should be blamed, seeing it is holy in
all. Heb. 13. 4. Nor how any should take on the vow of chastity, who have not
the gift from God. The Apostle says, it is good in time of persecution, for
the present distress for a man not to be married. 1. Cor. 7. It is Bonum utile,
but it is better to marry then to burn. A chaste life, is commendable in any
Christian, and a Caelchs state, may free him of many cares and snares: but to
tie all Clergy men to it, whither they have the gift from GOD or not, is a
sin. And your encroarchment on the divine ordinance, and appointment of GOD,
has filled your Church with whordoms and adulteries, your Cloisters and
Nunries with abominable uncleanness, and murders of children. It is too well
known how the vow of chastity is kept by your Church-^en: And if any doubt of
it, let them read the late relation of the Ambassador of Venice, concerning
the present state of the Church at Rome, and he will tell you, that some of the
most eminent Cardinals there, will frequently be under Lues Venere^. Is it not
better to marry then to sin thus? I appeal to your own conscience.

Tenthly, Ye teach for doctrine, the Commandments of men, contrar to
scripture, 10. Inst.
for it is reproved Matthew. 15. 9. And do dye your worship wholly with there
colored antic gestures, so that in your worship ye are more like to Monkies,
then reason^ble men, and g^ddi^ stage players, then solid Christian^, who
worship God in spirit and in truth

Reply, This ci^ation is often answered. It is not known of what gestures you
speak, as if ^uer you did see the gestures of worship of the Catholic Church.
But one thing is sure, that it is a very childish calumny: Our gestures being
so grave that they move men to dec^^^ion and do accompany GODS w^rship with
decency, Majesty, better then your gaping lik^ distracted men, your affected
sighs and howlings. You cite again two words of Scripture, that we should
worship in spirit (...) in truth, to condemn reverend and grave gestu^es of the
body in time of worship, as if men were pure spirits.

I answer, that albeit I have of seen your Judaism and Paganism? And are far
more like stage work then sincere worship. And i^ these be not the
commandments of men, why produce ye not Scripture for your warrant? We are not
against reasonable service, both with the spirit and body, but think that
bodily exercise alone, profits little, and the marrow of the work, is to
worship GOD in Spirit.

Eleventhly, Ye think it lawful to equivocat in some cases, to dispense with
lawful 11. Inst.
Oaths. But Scripture says, It is a snare after vows to make enquiry, Pro.
20. 25. And that the man shall only inhabit the holy mountain, who speaks the
truth in his heart. Ps. 15. Thus ye Popelings are scarce for moral fellowship,
seeing no words can tie you. Doleful experience proves this: in that your
Council of Constance murdered John Huss and Hierom of Prague, contrar to the
solemn warrant for security of their lives. And then said by way of poor
defense, that faith was not to be kept to Heretics.

To this it is replied thus, In your eleventh Section, you are not ashamed to
set down in writ, that we think it lawful to l^e, which no Catholic did ever
writ or say. But ye Protestants brought in your Religion by lies, as if the
whole Church before them had erred in matters of faith, and making poor
ignorants believe, that Catholics do adore stocks or stones, give GODS worship
to Saints or Angels, think to be saved by their own works, without the merits
of Christ, that there be nothing required for remission of sins, but tell them
to a Priest, that the Pope gives pardon for by gone sins and sins to come, all
which are open sies. So they continue it by lies and gross calumnieses, which
makes the people though wearied of many alterations and innovations in their
Religion, yet profess it outwardly, as if there were none better. As for
equivocating, I grant it is a probable sentence, (although no article of our
Creed,) that men may equivocat in some cases, but not in answer to any just
interrogative before a lawful judge. And as for that you say in some cases, we
dispense with lawful oaths, it is true, for there be many oaths with which we
not only dispeace, but put a tie on men not to keep them, etc. But when oaths
are lawfully made and continue lawful in all circumstances, both for GODS
glory, and the greater spiritual good of the people, we dispense with none. As
Vows of chastity, obedience to the superior, and Pastors of the Church. But
I hope you will hardly persuade any, that Popelings as you call them, (not
regarding Kings, and Queens of that profession, more then if they were
bonnet-makers in Dundee,) are searce for moral fellowship, as if no word nor
oaths could tie them. There being many old men, yet living who remember, some
to have seen, and some to have heard that in the time, the Catholic Religion
did flourish in this Kingdom men's words were better then their bands now. And
that since the reformation, which is but a hundred and three years ago. There
has been more rebellion, falsehood, and perjurie, then in 300. years before.
Neither had John Huss nor Hierom of Prague, been in any danger in the Council
of Constance, if they had keep: the conditions, upon which security was
promised to them. And so faith is only not to be kept to Heretics, when
they keep not the conditions upon which it is promised: which is common to them
with all others, and the Council of Trent has declared Sess. 15, that to
vi^lat the least part of public faith given to Heretics, is a thing
punishable both by the law of GOD and man.

There be here many words and little doctrine, and lies also taught by you, see
it fully proved by learned Mr. William Douglas, in his late Treatise de
Aequivocatione, which you cannot refute nor refuse. Your dispensing with oath^,
you say is, when the oath is unlawful. But I entreat you tell me, if you judge
the oath of alledgeance to a lawful King an unlawful oath? For it is clear ye
dispense with such, as shall appea^ afterward. Or is the marriage betwixt
single persons who are not within degrees of affinity, or consanguinity
forbidden by GOD, lawful? It is a^ true that ye loose such. And was it not a
lawful oath that the Emperor gave to John Huss and Hierom of Praguo? Yet the
Council of Constance dipensed with him, and broke to them, as their death did
demonstrat. You say they failed in conditions, but do not set down particulars.
This is an invention of your own, what condition did they fail in, can you tell
it? Tutus accessus, and recessus, was promised to them not kept, few of your
writters adhere to this childish evasion, but tell us plainly that the Emperor
had no power to do so, and therefore the Council wo^ld not stand to it. You may
justify if you will also, by so^^e device of this forge, the murder of
Count-Edgmount and Horn, contrar to the tennour of their safe conduct, under
trust by Duke de Alva. The Council of Trent seeing the odium, this tenet
brought on Popery, speak after their manner in general terms, for vindication
in time to come. But this not I hope will catch few fowls, unless there be a
particular renunciation of that damnable error which I desire heartily all of
you to do. Was there not an act of the Council of Constance Sess. 19. saying
that the safe conduct was salva justitia? The German Protestants refused to
come to the Council of Trent, upon their assurance, because of the tenet at
Consta^ce not clearly renounced. You say, that our Doctrine is carried on with
lies, we desire not to lie for GOD, nor mis-state any question betwixt you and
us. Truth can stand upon one foot, when a lie will need many proppes, like an
old house. If we should fraudulently deceive people, how could we expect a
blessing, or assistance from the GOD of truth? It is my wish to the Lord that
this may be our Motto, which was the Apostles, 2. Cor. 13. 8. But I remarke in
your large discourse one notable lie, you say there be old men in SCOTLAND who
did live when Popery flourished, and can yet witness what moral honesty was
amongst men then: such old men must now be six score years old ^t least, for
you must allow them to be fourteen years, before they could discern the
carriage of neighbors and Ancestors in commerce and barganing, and it is 106.
years and above, since the Reformation. If I knew where such old men lived, I
should have some account from them: but you did not wisely tell us that they
were here, seeing one of that age is not to be found with us, far less many.
Although this be an untruth, yet I find you speaking some truth here, for you
call without any ^^^^nution, that work a Reformation, and so indeed it wa^,
although ye hate to be Reformed.

Twelfthly, Ye teach a practice that lawful 12. Inst.
Magistrates may be deposed by the Pope. Ye will canonize the kille^ of such,
contrar to the Apostle, Romans 13. 1. 1. Pet. 2. 13, Let every soul be subject to
the higher powers, and submit to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake. If
your Pope had his will, there would be no Kings, at lest none reformed: And
Kings have not reason to be content, that there be a Pope, nor yet indulge
tr^^fiqueing Papists, seeing it is certain that none holding their tenets, can
be a loyal subject to a Protestant King, and scarcely to any other.

Reply, In your twelfth Sect: you make us teach, that lawful Magistrates may be
deposed by the Pope, and that we canonize such. Where citing Romans 13. and 1.
Pet. 2. you sight with your own shadow, and make up tenets contrar to
Scripture, which Catholic detest and abhor. But this is proper to Heresy,
and particularly yours, to cause rebellin from lawful Princes and Magistrates,
as it did every where, even in its first beginning witness the revolting of the
Princes of Germany, against the Emperor. The bloody war of the subjects in
France 20. years against their King. Holland against Spain to this day, the
Suitzers amongst themselves. SCOTLAND first against Queen Mary, and then our
late gracious King. Nevertheless, Ministers are so bold as to speak this, who
can neither be subject to Kings, Magistrates, nor Bishops, if they oppose their
whimsyes in the least. Every one of them taking greater power to himself, then
Catholics gives to St. Peter.

Duply, Any one may here perceive a Gregory the seventh against Henry the
fourth the Emperor, or of Sixtus the 5 against Henry the third King of France,
or of Pius the fifth against Elizabeth Queen of England; and there ye will find
this tennor, Nos in supremo justitia throne collocati, supremam in omnes Reges
and Principes Terrae universae, cunctosque populos, gentes, and Nationes, non
humana sed divina institutione obtinentes nobis traditam potestatem,
declaramus, praecipimus, jubem^s, etc. Viz. That none of their subjects should
own o^ acknowledge them. For your better information in this particular, know
that the power of the Pope in this particular, is one way explained by the
Canonists, and another way by the Jesuits. For the Canonists say, that the Pope
has jura omnia caelestis and terrestris imperii sibi a Deo concessa. The
Jesuits that Pontifex ut Pontifex, non habet direct ullum temporalem
potestat^m, sed solum spiritualem, tamen indirecte, ratione spiritualis, habet
potestatem quandam, ea^^que summam, disponendi de temporalibus rebus omnium
Christianorum. See more of this in Dr. Barclay, de potestate Papae in Principes
Christianos. They hold it beyond doubt, that in ordine ad spiritualia, which is
a broad charter, the Pope may depose any King, and loose their subjects from
all allegiance to him, cum subest causa rationalis Anno 1654. When it was
Printed at Naples, by authority, that the Pope should not exercise jurisdiction
civil in the territories of Spain, without the Kings leave, this was condemned
at Rome by Innocent the tenth.
. Secondly, They hold that Bishops may omnem mover^ lap^dem, and that is a
broad word, ne degant sub Haeretico Principe, Baron: anno 438. Sect. 89.
Thirdly, When the knowledge of the fault is evident Subjects may lawfully, if
they have sufficient strength exeem themselves from subjection to their Prince.
Bani^s on Thomas quastion. 12. and that ante judicis sententiam declaratoriam.

Lastly, Private persons may kill an Heretical King, after sentence is given
against him Suarez defens. fidei Cathol. lib. 6. cap. 4. only their tenderness
appears in this, that the King be not constrained wittingly or willingly, to
be the cause of his own death, the sense is thi^, if you can poison him by his
gloves, garment or saddle, you may do it. But by meat or drink you may not, for
then he takes his own poison. So John Mariana de Reg. instit. lib. 1. cap. 7.
Is it not then true, that by principles of doctrine, no Papist adhering to the
Pope can be a loyal subject to the King? As for our Reformations ye look on all
such with an evil eye. But our doctrine in the reformed Church, concerning the
Magistrate is such, that no Christians on earth give him more then we do.
Witness out Confession of Faith, to which we will adhere while we live, what
ever the scripture and pure antiquity gives to Kings, that we willingly
tender for conscience sake. All sound Protestants do abhor and detest the
murder of our late Sovereign Lord the King, and we in this Nation did protest
and declare against it, for which our Commissioners were committed close
prisoners, and sent with a guard to the border. As for the Reformation abroad,
I desire that famous Mr. Baxter his Key for Catholics, and disswasive from
Popery, may be read by you, who has written so well on this point, that I hope
all men satissiable may be satisfied with his reasons, which I need not here
transcribe. See also the testimony of the Ministers at London against that
horride murder, to which testimony we do still adhere and then adbered. But
Quis tulerit Gracchos de seditione, etc. See Bilson of Subjection, page 382.
Does not your great Cardinal Allen, write an Apology, for Stanles treason
against Queen Elizabeth. Does not Bellarmin show lib. 5. de Pontif. cap. 8. in
how many respects Kings may be deposed by their subjects? Did not Pope Sixtus
the fifth, make an Oration at Rome, in commendation of the Friar who murdered,
Henry the third King of France? Was not Tyrones treason commenced, and
commended by your Party, who then did take on the co^^ of Arms, and sound the
trumpet of rebellion. When the Popes Bull roared in England against Queen
Elizabeth, how many treasons were hatched and evil humors bred in the people?

Thirteenthly, Ye say, we are justified partly by faith, partly by works,
but the 13. Inst.
Scripture says, that we are justified by faith without the works of the law,
and that the man is justified to whom the Lord imputes faith without works,
Romans 4. 6. and that we are saved by grace through faith, not of works lest any
man should boast. Neither can any good works be wrought by us, till we be
justified and sanctified, how can an evil tree bring forth good fruit? Nor can
we understand any good work which the law does not require, seeing it was
tendered under the Covenant of grace. Beside, our best worksare leavened with
many imperfections and debt for the present, so these cannot absolve us for
bygones, or the time to come: And whereas the Apostle James chapter 2. speaks
of Justification by works, his purpose there is only to declare what
justifies faith. Now justifying faith must be a lively working faith, and if
it be dead it avails not, and if he hint at personal justification, which
verse 29. implies, it is before men; and that before the Tribunal of GOD,
there all must say, Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight
no flesh living ^^n be justified, Psalm 143. 2. And the Church must confess,
that all her righteousness is ragged and as a menstruous cloth.

Reply, In your thirteenth Section, you denying that we are justified by faith
and works, do both contradict scripture and your self. It in the Epistle of St.
James, chap. 2. verse 20. 24. You see then how by works a man is justified, and
not by faith only. No wonder after this ye contradict your self, when you grant
that faith is justifying, or made justified by works. For what is it to say
that works justify faith? But that faith without works is not justifying. And
so that faith justifyeth not all, or no other way then as it is decompanied
with good works as two conjunct causes. For as the Philosopher says, causa
causae est causa causati. But what needs any reasoning, if this place be not
clear to a Minister, what it clear to ignorants in all the scripture? Wherefore
ye had done better to reject the Epistle of James with Luther, then to
acknowledge it for scripture and to deny that we are justified by faith and
works, the two parts of Christian duty being belief and life. Yet to show that
the place of St. James is not to be taken according to the letter, you cite
three passag^^ excluding works of the written law from justifying, but not
excluding works of grace and the Gospel. The first whereof expounds the
rest, and St. Augustine them all, de fide and operib. cap. 14. saying, St. Paul
speaks of the works of Abraham, in so much as they proceed from the law,
excluding the spirit and grace of Christ. Then you say, neither can any good
work be wrought by us, till we are justified, for how can an evil tree bring
forth good fruit? To which Question, I answer with our Savior in the Gospel,
asking how a good tree can bring forth evil fruit: as David committing
adultery. For if you understood the one, you may easily understand the other.
Which if you do not go to the school and learn the distinction betwixt
simpliciter and secundum quid, betwixt good and evil simply and in part. For
as there be few so good, but they do some evil: so there be few so bad, but
they do some good, being assisted by GODS actual grace, albeit they want
sanctifying grace. Yea, very good actions may be done with some little
imperfection; which makes the Prophet compare our righteousness to a
menstruous cloth.

Duply, You are like to your self all along in this reflection, for I cannot
call it a return, for justification by faith without the works of the law. My
first argument was this. That the Apostle Paul says, we are justified by faith
without the works of law, therefore not by them. You say, he means not of
works of grace. What then? Of sinful works before Coversion? And is it indeed
like, that sinful works can be called by the Apostle worke^ of the law, seeing
these are transgressions of the law? Or that the justitiaries amongst the
Romans in the days of the Apostle, were so gross as to assert, that sinful
works justify a man which condemn him. Secondly, you say, that justification
by faith contradicts scripture, James 2. 24. which place I explained and
reconciled with the 4. of the Romans, and all you say to that is, that I
contradict my self. I said works justify faith, for my faith is known by my
works to my self and others. But that will nor say, that works and faith
justify the man. So I clash not with my self here. And for your Maxim, causa
causae est causa causati. If I understand this, you contradict your self in the
application of it; for faith being the cause of works and justifying the man,
works are the effect of justificat^on, not the cause of it. Hence the Apostle
James says, show me thy faith by thy works, O man! For it cannot be showen
without works. v. 18. Albeit we say that faith alone justifies, yet that
Fides sola in approhendendo, non est solitaria.

My next argument was, that a man must be justified before he can work well,
therefore works are not the cause of justification. I hope you will not say,
that the effect is antecedent to its cause, if you have read Ramus Logic. And
that a man must be justified before he can work well, I prove thus. He must be
sanctified, Ergo, etc. a corrupt tret cannot bring forth good fruit, Matthew. 7.
18. Ere you have not something to say to this, you close with Pelagius for a
defense, and speak nonsense. For you say, that you answer with our Savior, by
a distinction of that which is simply such, and secundum quid. In what part of
the Gospel is this Logic to be found? For it is clear from the verse above
cited, that our Savior denies simply the thing, so he grants it not
secundum quid. Some good acts you say, may be done by evil men, being assisted
by actual grace. I would know if actual grace can be in exercise, where
habitual grace is not at all? then if men habitually evil, in an unconverted
state, can do any thing well? That something materially good may be done by
them, as well as sin may be committed by the regenerated, I doubt not: but that
they can do ought upon a good principle, for a good end, by a good morive, I
deny it simply. Now if they be not such they cannot justify a m^n. For nullum
agens potest agere, extra Sphar^m suae activitatis. Till he be sanctified he
cannot be be such, till he be justified he cannot be sanctified. Works
justify no more the man, then the fruit makes the tree good.

My third Reason you leave untouched, which was this, that the present time
requires all our work, Ergo, it cannot justify us for bygones or the future,
What is now debituns, cannot pay my bygone debt, nor free me for the time to
come. And you grant all I have said in the fourth, that our best works are
unperfect, and so cannot hold water before the Tribunal of GOD. I am glade to
hear you grant so much, for then where will works of supererogation and merit
appear.

For further clearing of our Doctrine of Justification, take notice, the
Papists and we thus differ. First, They say there is a two fold justification,
one, whereby a m^n unjust is made just; for attaining this, there must be
previous dispositions by the acts of faith, fear, hope, love, whch fit the man
for his justification, some of them term this, Meritum congrui, others say,
that this is the free gift of GOD not deserved by works. The second
Justification, is, that whereby ^ man being just is made more just: this they
say is merited by their works, and proceeds a DEO and arbitrio simul, both
from free will and GOD. So Molina. Here they confound justification and
sanctification; And by this way we are not compleetly justified till we die,
ere the work of sanctification be perfected fully, we must be Saints in light.
Secondly, That free gift of grace, is parted betwixt GOD and free will, if this
Doctrine hold. For Bellarmin says, we co-operat with GOD in justification it
self, and the beginning of faith. So by it that emphatick place, Romans 8. 34.
cannot be interpreted aright, it is GOD who justifies. If man had no part nor
hand in the Creation, how can he have it in the first Conversion, seeing that
is a new Creation? Thirdly, They make the formal cause of justification,
inherent righteousness, which is ragged by their own confession, as appears
from this reflecter. Then it is no fit covering for our nakedness, for it self
needs a covering. Can it satisfy divine justice, being so imperfect?
Augustine tells the contrar, on Psalm 42. Whosoever lives here, albeit he
live righteously, if that righteousness be strictly judged, woe to him.
Fourthly, It is not safe nor comfortable for ourselves. That same Father
tells us again, de bono perseverantiae, cap. 6. ^e live more safely when we
attribute all to God wholly, then when we commit our selves partly to GOD,
partly to our selves. Now this inherent righteousness, as put on in the second
justification, is the bir^h of merits and free will say all Papists, then
positively and mostly thy own. The merits of Christ are a far off cause, causa
formalis immediata, is thy own righteousness; the consideration of this made
Bellarmin confess, de justif. lib. 5. cap. 7. tutissimum est in sola DEI
misericordia conquiescere: It is safest to repose on the mercy of GOD, not on
thy own righteousness. A dying Christian seriou^ about salvation, will indeed
find it safest and surest. We again mantain that a converted man is under
previous law work of conviction, contrition, humiliation, and the fallow ground
of the heart is thus prepared, and broken up by the plowing of the Word: but a
man may come this length and go no further, the dispositions have not always a
necessar connection with that new birth. Nor is the seed of faith still sown in
such as are under the spirit of bondage. He who ^asteth of these powers may
fall away. There be a relative difference between these acts in the Elect and
others. Secondly, When faith the free gift of GOD, Phil. 1. 29. is sown into
the heart and planted there, as it is native to the child to seek the breasts,
so it leaves and leads the man in its first motion, to the righteousness of
Jesus a Mediator, who is The Lord our righteousness, Jer. 23. 6. and he makes
mention of his righteousness, even of his only. The Lord has so appointed it,
he is made of GOD to us righteousness, 1. Cor. 130. faith apprehends that, as
the ship-broken man does a plank, whereby he comes to land; by that we are
justified before GOD. Inherent graces cannot satisfy the justice of GOD, nor
make perfect obedience to the law, nor pay the penalty which it requires. But
Mediatory righteousness can do all this. So the causes of justification are
these, the final cause is the glory of GOD and man's salvation. The efficient,
the favor, mercy, and good will of GOD. The meritorious, the obedience of
Jesus Christ. The formal, the imputed righteousness of that blessed Mediator.
The instrumental cause or condition, (as some word it) is faith, Romans 3. 24.
25. so we are justified by faith alone, as Abraham was before GOD, and this
gives glory to GOD, Romans 4. dethroneth the boasting of men, and is the sure
safe scripture way. Now when we say that faith alone justifies, by laying hold
on his righteousness, and applying it, we still hold that faith which justifies
to be pregnant with good works, such as love, heart-cleansing, new obedience,
patience zeal, and other fruits of the spirit. This adversaries deny not to us.
Bellarmin does us this much right, for he acknowledges that we hold good
works to be necessar to the justified, Non necessitate efficientiae sed
prasentiae. So they justify our faith to ourselves and others: but faith
justifies the man, and works have no place in that act. We do not deny that
good works have room, and are necessary for working out of our salvation,
they are via reg^^, but in the point of Justification they are excluded. Our
justification is the Lords act of gracious absolution tendered to us through
Christ. When we receive the sentence, faith the hand of the soul lays only
hold of it. And it is not said in Scripture, love in his blood, or patience, or
real in it, but faith in his blood, by which we are justified, clothed, and
covered. Remission and righteousness comes in this way. This animateth all
our graces, and we hold justification and salvation of free grace, Ephesians. 2. 8.
9.

Fourteenthly, You set up free will in fallen man, almost as it was under the
Covenant of 14. Just.
works in the state of innocence; and do attribute Election partly to that
Idol. More that without Christ we may merit congruously and naturally dispose
our souls for grace. But the Scripture says, Romans 11. 6. Election is merely of
grace, and if by grace, then it is no more of works, otherwise grace were no
more grace, but if it be of works, then it is no more grace: otherwise works
were no more works. Nay, We cannot of our selves as of our selves think a good
thought. 2. Cor. 3. 5. and without Christ, we can do nothing. John 15. 5. being
by nature children of wrath dead in sins and trespasses.

Ye say we set up free will in fallen man, as it was in the state of Innocence:
whe^eas we put great distinction betwixt free will in these two states, as you
may see in our School Divines; yet Christ by his grace, has so set it up, that
with the same grace a man may choose to do good and refuse to do evil. Both
Scripture and Fathers are clear for this. Scripture, Deuteronomy. 30. 19. I have set
before you life and death blessing and cursing, therefore choose life, that
both thou and thy seed may live. And 1. Cor. 7. 37. He who has determined in
his heart, not having necessity, but having power of his own will to keep his
Virgin. Is not here free will asserted, necessity clearly excluded? How then
can you call it an Idol? or, if a man have not free will, wherefore sorveth
preaching, and exhortation, to persuade a man to that which is not in his
power? Protestants say, there is no good action in the power of a man: Why then
do they persuade Roman-Cath^licks to turn Protestant, seeing Conversion being a
most holy and good work, is nor in our power or free will? Or how could it
stand with GODS wisdom to command men what they could not do? Or with his
justice to condemn them eternally, who had not free will to obey his
Commandments? Hear St. Aug. lib. de Fide contra Manich. chap. 10. Who will not
cry out it is a foolish thing to command him who has not freedom to obey what
is commanded? And it is an injury to condemn him who has no power to fulfill
them. And again, lib. de Gr. and lib. Arbit: cap. 2. GOD has revealed to us in
Scripture that in man is free will, because GODS Commands would not perfect man
unless he had free will to do them. Gregory hom. 12. on Numb. O Israel what
does the Lord thy GOD require of thee? Let them be ashamed of these words, who
deny free will in man. How should GOD require of man, unless man had in his
power what to offer to GOD requiring? Does he not here speak to you, and
clearly against you? Now whereas you cite Romans 11. 6. Election is merely of
grace, you put in the word (merely) which is not in Scripture: And whereas it
is said, if it be of grace then it is no more of works, that is meaned of
natural works, without grace, or works of the law. As answer these Doctors,
whose sentence you here impungue: for without grace, you say well with the
Apostle, we cannot think a good thought, and without Christ we can do nothing,
John 15. 5. Wherefore it is another calumny, when you make us say that without
Christ, we may merit congruously, which we hold for Pelagian and Semi-Pelagian
Heresy.

Duply, You reason for Free Will upon Pelagian grounds, as Jansenius, Ipr. who
was Popish, has abundantly proved in his learned work. If you would read and
consider him he would satisfy and refute you. But seeing you gift us with him,
and so with Augustine, for in these be is totus Augustinus. I shall only say this
by way of position. First, The natural man has no freedom for spiritual good,
as before the fall, because he is the servant of sin. Hear Aug. contra du^^
epist. Pelagian. Liberta^ illa quae fuit in Paradiso, periit per peccatum.
Propter quod natura humana Divina indiget gratia, dice^te Domino si vos filius
liberaverit vere liberi eritis. He grants a freedom for evil, but of our
selves, as of our selves, we cannot think a good thought, we say the same with
Scripture and Antiquity. Secondly, We hold that in some moral acts a man has
freedom, whither by a new gift, or as the remainder of the first, I shall not
disput, E. G. He may elocat his Virgin to be warried, or not, according to the
text cited by you 1. Cor. 7. 37. this we do not deny. Thirdly, Commands,
threatenings, exhortations, are means appointed by GOD, to make us who are
nilling willing to do good, yet so, that it is he who works in us both to
will and to do, Phil. 2. 13. Who works all our works in us, Is. 26. 1^. So
the place you cite Deuteronomy. ^0. 19. makes nothing against us; for as Augustine
says, jubet and javat, and the Elect get grace ^o obey, these who are
approven, will thus be made manifest, so it is not in vain for us to exhort
Papists to be converted, for wisdom wi^lbe justified of her own children. And
did not our Lord upon this account exhort the obstinat Jews to reformation. Yet
your atgument from exhortations is against him, and his way, as much as against
us. We have a will, moral faculties of willing and nilling, and are not
stocks. Augustine throughout means no more, and admit that Origin be of your
mind, Scripture says the contrar. If election be of grace without works, is
it not clear that it is of mere grace? For these two are opposite here. You say
you do not refuse that, not set up free will in man as before the fall, and
appeal to your Schoolmen for my information. I answer you make use of the word
(grace) as Pelagius did ad frangendam invidiam, but indeed Adam had no more
power over his will, then ye give to lost man, which I prove thus: Adam could
plead for no more but the posse by his c^eation, and the velle if he pleased to
choose or refuse obedience. But all your J^suits give this to man after the
fall, that positis omnibus requisitis ad agendum, (which does take in the
decree, the concourse and grace it self, in the sense of all your Dominicans at
lest, who impugn this description,) yet potest agere vel non agere, therefore
he has as much now as before the fall, according to your Divinity. Albeit you
condemn Pelagius yet ye are wholly his here. See I beseech you Jansenius on
this subject. Yea ye make your self differ from another contrar to the Apostle,
1. Cor. 4. 7. For two having equal grace objective and subjective, it is the
will which casts the balance, and makes it efficacious in one, not in
another. This is the doctrine of Schoolmen. So ye have your will to thank,
your will to invocat for any good. And what more said the Semi-Peldgians or
Messalians then the Mass-men do here aver? Your Council of Trent says the
will potest dissentire si velit, your schoolmen whom you desire me to consult
in this matter are of the same tenets. The council, says Sess. 6. chap. 5.
that one is converted and mother remains in his infidelity, the cause is in
their will, in that one entertaineth the other rejects the grace of GOD.
Molina disp. 12. to hold this, says he, is a matter of faith. Eckius in his
Enchir, says, that the beginning of our Salvation we have from Gods mercy, but
it is in our power to yield to tha^ divine inspiration or not. Aquinas contra
Genres lib. 3. says, it is in the power of free will to hinder or not hinder
the receiving of divine grace. Molina again tells that the persaverance of
men in good, depends upon their own cooperation with grace. By grace they
mean no more but a moral suasion externally offered, or an objective
inclination of the will, but no effectual determination at all. So indeed at
the command of the will, grace is either useful or not, permitted to enter in
or shut out of doors. Who perceives not this doctrine to be derogatory to the
honor of GOD and power of free grace? Therefore we say with Augustine in his
Ench. cap, 32. DEUS nolentem praevenit ut vel^^, volentem sequitur ne frustra
velit. The Lord by his grace makes nilling men willing, and willing men are
assisted by the same, lest they run in vain. The will of man (says he, who
was the hammer of Pelagianism) is libera quia liberata. Its free because its
freed. See Aug. de side ad Petrum Diaconum, cap. 32. Firmissime tene and
nullatenus dubites posse quidem hominem, quem nec ignorantia literarum, nec
aliqua prohibet imbecillitas, vel adversitas, verba sanctae Logis and Euangelii
sive legere, sive ex ore cujusdam praed^cator^s audire sed ut quod audit
percipiat etiam cord and mandata DEI facere velit, nemo potest, nisi quem DEUS
gratia sua praevenerit, data divinitus bona voluntate atque virtute. i. e. Hold
thou it most firmly, and no ways doubt, that a man whom neither ignorance of
good letters, nor any infirmity or adversity does hinder, has power both to
read the words of the holy Law and Gospel, and to hear them from the mouth of
the Preacher, but to take up and receive in his heart what he hears, and to
be willing to do the Commandments of GOD, no man is able but he whom GOD has
preveened by his grace, having given to him good will and virtue. Aug. lib. 1.
contra duas epist. ^el, cap. 19. Christus non dicit, nemo potest venire ad
filium nist Pater duxerit, ut ill^c aliquo modo intelligamus praecedere
voluntatem, sed dicit (traxerit) quis autem trahitur si jam volebat, and tamen
nem^ venit nisi velit, trahitur ergo miris m^dis, ut velit, ab illo qui nevit
in ipsis hominum cordibus operari non ut homines, quod sier^ non potest,
uolentes credant, sed ut volentes ex nolentibus fi^nt. i. e. Christ does not
say, no man can come to the Son except the Father lead him, that then in some
measure we should think the will of man to preceed, but he says, (except the
father draw him) but who is drawn who before was willing, and no man comes
except he be willing, therefore man is drawn in a wonderful manner, that he is
willing, even by him who knows to work in the very hearts of men inwardly,
not that men (which is impossible) should believe not willing, but that of men
nilling they should become willing. Moreover, we have need of grace to keep
grace and continue in it. Hierom ad C^esiphontem has an excellent saying, non
fussicit mihi, says he, quod semel donaverit gratiam nisi semper donaverit. i.
e. I will not be satisfied to get the first grace, unless I get a constant tack
of it. How co^trar is this to the doctrine of Jesuits the Render may consider,
who indeed give more to the will of man, then to the grace of GOD. If
Tertullian be judge, this will be found in them a heresy, for adversus
haereses, he says, true faith dictareth this in defending the true GOD, and
whatsoever in his, we make it only his: for he will be copartner with none in
these works: as without him we can do nothing, so it is he who works in us
to will and to do of his good pleasure. For further knowledge of Jansenius
tenets I will here set them down. The Jansenists, Dominicans, Augustines, and
most of the Gallican Church, do follow the doctrine of Augustine, about free
grace, and mantain these five prop^si^ions.

First, Al^qua DEI praecepta, hominibus justis volentibus, and conantibus
secundum praesentes qu^^ habent vires, sunt impossibilia, deest quoque iis
gratia, qua possibilia siant. So they say, that the gracious cannot fulfill the
whole law, but have need of a Savior.

Secondly, Interiori gratiae, in statu naturae lapsa, nunquam resistitur. Men
may resist external means, but esticacious grace is prevalent.

Thirdly, Ad merendum and demorendum in statu natura lapsae, non requiritur in
homine libertas a necessitate, sed sufficit libertas a coactione. The Lord may
draw a man freely to his duty, yet necessarily.

Fourthly, Semi-Pelagiani admittebant praevenientis gratia interioris
necessitatem ad singulo^ actus, etiam ad initium fidei; and in hoc erant
haeretici, quod vellent eam gratiam talem esse, cui posset voluntas humana
resistere, vel obtemperare. By this all the Jesuits are heretical, who defend
the victory of the will over free grace.

F^fthly, Semi-Pelagianorum error est dicere Christum pro omnibus omnino
hominibus mortuum esse, aut sanguinem fudisse.

These Propositions were judged and condemned at Rome by Pope Innocent the
tenth. Albeit he professed himself not to be versed in these matters, being no
Divine but a Canonist. Non sum Theologus, said the Rabbj. sed Canonista.
The Ambassadors from the Gallican Churches reasoned most earnestly for them,
and held forth clearly that this was the ^enet of Augustine, and all Catholic
Doctors except the Jesuits. Yet notwithstanding, anno 1653. the Bull came forth
against the efficacy of grace, and all the followers of Augustine, the tenor
whereof follows.

Primam, Praedictarum propositionum aliqua DEI praecepta hominibus just is
volentibus, conantibus secundum praesentes qua^ habent vires, sunt
impossibi^i^; deest quoqueillis gratia qua possib^l^^ si^nt, temerariam impiam
blasphemam anathemate damnatam, Haereticam declaramus, and ut talem damnamus.

Secundam, Interiori gratiae in statu naturae ^apsa nunquam resistitur,
Haereticam declaramus, and ut talem damnamus.

Tertiam, Ad merendum and demerendum, in statu ^aturae lapsae non requiritur in
homine libertas a necessitate, sed libertas a co-actione sufficit: Haereticam
declaramus, and ut talem damnamus.

Quartam, Semi-Pelagiani admittebant, praevenientis gratiae interioris
necessitatem, ad singulos actus, etiam ad initium fidei, and in hoc erant
haeretici quod vellent eam gratiam talem esse, cui posset voluntas humana
resistere, vel obtemperare, falsam, and haereticam declaramus, and ut talem
damnamus.

Quintam, Semi-Pelagianum est, dicere Christum pro omnibus omnino hominibus
mortuum fuisse, and sanguinem fudisse, falsam, temerariam, scandalosam, and
intellectam eo sensu, ut Christus pro salute duntaxat praedestinatorum mortuus
sit, impiam, blasphemam, contumeliosam, Divinae pietati derogantem, haereticam
declaramus and ut talem damnamus.

Hence it appears that the present Papal Church, is contrar to the Doctrine
of Augustine, etc. is a condemner of all the Dominicans, Jansenists, Sorbonists,
and of the Doctrine of free and efficacious grace, making the will umpire in
all these matters, and owneth the tenets of the Molinists only. And that since
the Council of Trent it is not what it was formerly: therefore erroneous then
or now, so not infallible. When the Bull was proclaimed, the Commissioners from
the Gallican Churches determined amongst themselves, that if they were required
to subscribe the Popes sentence, they would rather suffer then subscribe it,
except in their own sense. i. e. Excepting and securing the grace of Jesus
Christ, effectual by it self, necessar to all actions of piety. And by this it
appears that they could not judge him infallible in Cathedra. And beside many
at Rome and in Flanders cried down the decree, and spoke often of the
necessity of a Council seeing the doctrine of free grace was impeached, and
Pelagianism brought into the Church of Rome. It must be evident therefore, that
Pelagianism and Semi-Pelagianism being the main ingredience in the doctrinals
of Rome, concerning grace, they do frustrate the grace of GOD, Gal. 2. 21. and
give the victory over it to the will of man in all cases. How gracious a Papist
keeping these principles can be, let the Reader judge, and how numerous their
Party is, it is easily known.

At the same time the Pope condemned a book called the Hours, Printed at
Paris, and commended by the French Divines, because efficacious grace was there
mentioned; and the second Command was translated thus, Ye shall not make an
Idol, or graven Image to adore them. When one of the Commissioners from the
Gallican Churches did complain upon the sentence of the Pope, against a book so
generally approved in France. Mr. Albizzi the Popes Secretary said, that the
translation was one with that of Geneva, and what ever Scholars might conceive
of it, the People would readily mistake it, and not fall down before the
Images. One of the Commissioners answered, that this Doctrine would be also
valid against the translation of Scripture, for the second Command behoved to
be thus translated, he answered, that the Pope was not obliedged to hear
Parties, and answer reasons, and the Gospel we^e not the Gospel, if the Pope
did not approve it. This is high-language, yet the Court strain at Rome. Yea,
the operation of grace is heresy, if he call it so. See more of this in the
Journal of St. de Amor, concerning the five Propositions, who with other
Commissioners from the Gallican Churches relate this.

Fifthteent^ly, You lay too much stress on the work wrought, as Satisfactory 15
Inst.
Penance, Extreme Unction, the telling over of Prayers, the outward receipt of
Sacraments, Bodily Auster^ties, etc. And put these in stead of Regeneration, so
necessar for each Christian, and of inward duties which have the promise
chiefly, terming all such phanatick, whereas Scripture says, Except a man be
born of water and of the Spirit he cannot see God. John 3, 3. And, except ye be
conve^ted and become as little children, ye cannon enter into the kingdom of
Heaven, Matthew, 18 3. and bodily exercise profits little, 1. Tim. 4. 8. Duties
rightly done are well worth their own room, but to turn us back under the
Gospel to the Covenant of works, i^ a fascination, and making void of the
grace of GOD, Gal. 2. 21. Gal. 3. 2 and this error leads you to condemn
Infants unbaptized for the want of that work wrought, whereas the promise is to
us and to our children. Act. 2. 39. and we have all freely, not by merit.

Reply, You calumniat us here again, saying, that we put bodily austerities in
the place of Regeneration, wherein you contradict your self, granting that we
hold Baptismal Regeneration absolutely necessar: so that a man cannot be s^ved
without it, according to the clear words of St. John 3. 5. How then can you say
that we hold bodily austerities in stead of Regeneration? How can Minister^ be
so carnal or sensual, as to speak, against bodily austerities. Which Christ
coming into this world, did cho^se, says the devout St. Bernard, concluding
that either licentious men in a world are deceived, who choose them not, or
else Christ. Sermon. de nativ. But as for the work wrought, it seems you
understand it not, when you adscribe it to the telling over of Prayers, for it
has no place but in the Sacraments: which of them selves work grace, either in
these that cannot work, or put a stop, as Infants or others. And when you say,
the promise is made to us and to our children, Acts 2. 39. Either you must
acknowledge your self a Jew, and to be of the seed of Abraham according to the
flesh, or else with the Apostle and Catholic Church. In the same place, say,
We are made the children of Abraham by Baptism and Regeration, as verse 24. and
41. proves.

Duply, That which I said ye grant viz. the receipt of Baptism, ex opere
operato, to Trent Sess. 7. Can. 7. and 8. speaks otherwise, they anathematize
them who deny, that Sacramenta novae legis conferunt gratiam ex opere operato
semper and omnibus non aliquando, and aliquibus. So they speak of all the
Sacraments of the New Testament and not only of Baptism: and if they limited it
to Infants, it could not be omnibus but aliquibus only. And Bellarmin who
understood Popery leaves you alone here, for lib. 1. cap. 12. de Sacram. Bapt.
he says, Baptism ex opere operato confert gratiam, qua vere and formaliter
justificatur homo. Then he is not speaking of Children. If it be so all
Baptized are Regenerated immediately, even your Indians, whom ye drive by d^oves
to the font-stone, and turning from Heathnism is true Conversion. Yea, all
baptized are saved and none of them damned, this is indeed an easy way to
Heaven. That place John 3. is not chiefly meaned of Baptism, otherwise all
unbaptized persons should be damned, which is not true, and they who say so are
cruel to Infants. And wherein I pray you do I contradict my self here? Seeing
your external Regeneration is not that Scripture one meaned, John 3. and Matthew.
18. and 2. Cor. 5. 17. If all such be new creatures, we have none in the
visible Church, come to years, but converts, new creatures, regenerated ones
born again; and can you say so, without a blush? I mean by the seed of Abraham,
the heirs of promise, with the Apostle Gal. 3. 29. What you challenge in this I
do not understand, and I doubt if you understand your self: for the blessing of
Abraham belongs to us Gentiles as well as to the Jews. Bodily austerities for
mortifying sensual corruption I did approve, if they be put in their own place.
So you fight with your own shadow here, We are for fasting, humble-walking,
and all the acts of Scripture-self-denyal, we hold commanded duties for
mortification, such as fastings, etc. to be very useful for holding the body in
subjection, and for subduing sensuality. Secondly, we deny not but the Lord
will in fatherly wrath chasten his children here for their sins, as he did
Israel in the wilderness, Moses, David, Iehoshaphat and many more, according to
that Amos 3. 2. Thirdly, this chastisement, whither voluntar or not, is not
satisfaction to divine justice, nor proper penalty of the law, because the
satisfaction of Jesus Christ is completely perfect, but it could not be so if
any satisfaction were laid on us, see Dallaeus Dallaeus de satisfactione.
who has a learned Treatise concerning this truth. Fourthly, If we cannot
satisfy, we merit nothing that is good at the hands of GOD, but must say with
Bernard on Cant. Sermon. 61. Misericordia tua, merita nostra Domine; thy mercy O
Lord is our merit^. Salvation, deliverance, Heaven, happiness, and all our
welfare is of the Lord. We get these, gratis. The Papists may be ashamed to
tell the world of congruous merits before Conversion, of commutative justice,
betwixt GOD and man by the dignity of their works after conversion, and their
refusing to have Heaven gratis. Andradius the interpreter of the Council of
Trent, Orthod. explic. lib. 6. says, The reward of the just is not freely
given, but Heaven is set to the sale for our works. T^pperus says in Explic.
art. Lovan. tom. 2. art. 9. GOD forbid that the just should expect eternal life
as the poor man does his alms, it is our conquest, our triumph, and the prize
due to our labors. Valentia tom. 3. disp. 7. tells, that the works of the
faithful, are satisfactory for the punishment of sin. Bellarmin brings forth
a new evasion, de just if. lib. 5. cap. 10. saying, that Christ merited, that
we should merit. So that the merit of our works is from his merits; this is
plaster to daub with. For where do we read in Scripture that phrase? He has
suffered for us that we should be holy in all manner of Conversation, and serve
him in righteousness and holiness, but no where that we should merit eternal
life, the gift is wholly from him, so it is written, Romans 6. 23. Secondly, This
is petitio principii, for the question betwixt Papists and us, is, whither we
are unprofitable servants when we have done all? So speak we with Scripture,
they say we are meritorious men. Thirdly, Suarez says, Tom. 1. in Thomam disp.
4. another thing, that good works are in themselves and of their own nature
meritorious, therefore not such, because of Christ his merits. Otherwise says
he, we could not be said to merit. We say, this is the way to clipe the
satisfaction of Christ Jesus, and the value of the price paid for us. What
good works we do are mixed with imperfections, and are too few, alas, if the
Lord accept of them, and reward these works with temporal or spiritual
blessings, it is not for the merit of the work, but of free grace and mercy,
and for the merits of Christ merely. So we may be freely rewarded; see Matthew.
5. 46. Luke 6. 32. where the word (...) and (...) are promiscuously taken. We
cannot make amends to GOD nor satisfy his justice, but his promise is sure,
not according to our merits, but his own mercy: so we must inherit eternal
life, this is Aug. doctrine on Ps. 88. and Chrysostom. on Col. 2. Your
satisfactions and merits are contrar to Scripture, pure antiquity,
dishonorable to Jesus Christ, and prejudicial to souls. Now you see this
reflection might have been well spared, for it is no reply at all to what I
said.

Sixteenthly, Ye foster looseness and prophainess 16. Inst.
by telling tales about Purgatory, the use of prayer and sacrifices for the
dead. But the Scripture says Heb. 9. 27. after death comes judgment, which
must be understood immediately, otherwise it might be said after birth comes
judgment, and in the grave there is neither work nor invention; neither is
there any place appointed for people after their removal hence, save Heaven or
hell.

Reply, The telling of men that after their sins are forgiven, they must suffer
for the temporal pain due to them, is not a way to foster looseness, but rather
to terrify all who believe from offending GOD in the least, seeing all such
must be chastised, either by GOD punishing, or man doing penance, and that
voluntary, either here, or in Purgatory hereafter, according to the Apostle 1.
Cor. 3. 15. If any ones work burn, he shall suffer loss, but he shall be saved,
yet so as by fi^e, which place Augustine citing on Ps. 37. says, and because it
is said, he shall be saved, that fire is contemned, yet that fire shall be more
grievous then whatever a man can suffer in this life. Purge me O Lord and make
me such a one as shall not need that mending fire, etc. Now does St. Paul or
Aug. here tell tales? Or can that mending fire by which a man is saved, be more
grievous then what he can suffer here? Or can it make a man loose to pray with
Aug. thus? But it may be he was doting here, as when he said Mass for his
Mothers soul, as we read in his Confessions, committing both sacrilege and
Idolatry, (as commonly Protestants say) to please an old w^fe after her death.
You add that Scripture says, after death comes judgment, and in the grave
there be neither work nor invention. What makes this against Purgatory? Do
Catholics deny that we are justified at the very moment of death before they
go to Purgatory? Or that they work in the grave. But how is it true say you,
there is no place mentioned in Scripture save Heaven o^ hell, to which the
godly and wicked do go? Albeit all go to one of these places, yet is there not
a prison mentioned, from which a man shall not go till he has paid the
uttermost farthing, Matthew. 5. 25. which the Fathers expounded to be Purgatory.
viz. Hierom on this chapter, St. Cyp. ep. 52. Tertull. lib. de anima. and does
not St. Paul above cited, speak of another fire then that of hell?

Duply, You have Rhetorications in defense Matthew. 5. 25. where we are commanded
to agree with our adversary quickly, etc. this place proves no Purgatory
prison. For first, It is allegorick, and so cannot be argumentative, on a
controverted point. All that is here intended, is, that brethren should dwell
together in love, and forgive other their trespasses against them, as is clear
from the context. Secondly, If it were meaned of Purgatory, it would make the
Lord their adversary, they behoved to be delivered up to the Devil, for he is
the Jailer of the prison: Now it is strange divinity to say that the Lord is an
adversary, and the Devil a Jailer, to the man whose sins are forgiven him.
Thirdly, If this prison be Purgatory, then there is commutative justice betwixt
GOD and man, for such here pay the uttermost farthing. And who can say to the
Lord, forgive me, have mercy upon me, and yet be of this judgment, that he can
pay all his debt by that mending fire, and not owe any thing to free gracious
pardon?

Fourthly, It makes punishment to purge away punishment, which is Repugnantia
in adjecto. For you grant that the filth and blot of sin is removed here. Your
own Jansenius interprets it not of Purgatory, Concor. in locum. The other
Scripture is 1. Cor. 3. We shall be saved yet so as by fire, that is not meaned
of purgatory fire, but of probatorie fire in this life, not hereafter. Let any
man read the chapter, and he will see this the purpose of the Holy Ghost, to
show what was doctrinally or practically erroneous should be put to the fiery
trial, when judgment should begin at the house of God, as the Apostle Peter
speaks, 1. Pet. 4. 17. your own Pererius interprets not this place 1. Cor.
3. of purgatory.

You say Ancients interpret these Scriptures, so namely Augustine, Tertullian,
Hierom, Cyprian. I would first enquire at you, how you can cite the Commentars
of any private men on Scripture? Seeing you aver before confidently, that the
sensing of Scripture and interpretation thereof belongs to the Church of
Rome, and to no private persons, Augustine, Cyprian, etc. were not the Church of
Rome, but private Doctors. Yea, they were never members of this Church as it is
now constituted, being great strangers to supreme infallibility and universal
Monarchy engrossed in the person of the Pope. They lived in, Africa the one at
Hippo, the other at Carthage, and were Bishops there. Tertullian was a
Presbyter, and forced to leave Rome for the aspersions cast upon him, by some
envyous Doctors there; which was the first thing tempted him to Montanism, as
it is told in his life; he was formerly free of it. When you interpret
Scripture, you are bound to bring one of the Popes decretals, or a Canon
authorized by him for the meaning of a text, otherwise you are inconsistent
with your own opinion. But that which now you bring from these ancients, is as
I conceive fully satisfied and explained in the eight Duply, to which I refer
the Reader. You bring back hither and thither with your impertinencies. All you
have to do here if you would keep rule, is to answer Scripture arguments,
seeing these taken from antiquity have been debated formerly in their own
room. Yet to tell Augustines mind about the sense of the 1. Cor. 3. it is not
so as you cite it, he thinks the text hard and difficult, but does not build
Purgatory on it, he is in that at a stand what to say, and will not define the
interpretation, but modestly thus, Non ideo confirmo, quoniam non refello, Aug.
de Civit. DEI. lib. 21. cap. 24. Tertullian is so far from it, that he says
lib. de patientia. Christum laedimus, etc. We wrong Jesus Christ, if we shall
say, that these who have their sins forgiven, are in a state to be pitied. But
in Purgatory if the suffering be so great, they are to be pitied. Cyprian de
mortalitate, is of the same mind, all who are in Christ, when they go hence
reign with Christ. Ejus est mortem timere qui ad Christum nolit ire: Let him
fear death who will not go to Christ. You say, these in Purgatoty are in
Christ, then says Cyprian, they go to Christ not to Purgatory, Justin Martyr
says, (...) immediately after death the souls of the righteous go to Paradise,
and of the unrighteous to hell, resp. ad Orthod, quast. When you would have
them then holding Purgatory, you bring them under contradiction, and are bound
to reconcile them with themselves; for any such clashings you may thank your
Index Expurgatorius. The Fathers indeed speak of probatory mending fire here,
of loca refrigerii before the Resurrection, of Fluvius igneus after it, this is
the opinion of some. Hence arises your citations, but for Purgatory they knew
it not. It is the Blood of Jesus Christ which takes away the guilt and filth
of sin* Now that this erroneous opinion makes men loose, reason proves it.
For men who believe that they may live loosely here, and yet go to heaven, are
tempted to prophainness, ipso facto, whatever be pretended to the contrar;
especially when it is told them withal, that some Soul-Masses for a little
money may be had to free them quickly thence. And our experience in this land
makes it out also, because many loose livers hanker after Popery, and hate to
be reformed. You answer just nothing to the 9. Heb. for if judgment comes
immediately after death, where is Purgatory then? That judgment is not
temporane but eternal, it is one with Eccl. 11. 9. And I would gladly know, if
this Tenet can hold with that scripture Rev. 14. 13. They who die in the Lord
rest from their labors. And if so they are not punished henceforth. This
purgatory fire of your own kindling, makes a hot kitchen to the Pope, but
purges no soul at all. For Purgatory was no^ decreed to be de side, till the
Council of Lateran, under Innocent the 3. the Florentine under Eugentus the 4.
and the Tridentine under Pius the 4. so it is not old. Many of the Fathers
supposed that the saints received not full reward till the resurrection. Aug.
though dubious about it else where, yet in one place, De verbis Apostoli, sermon.
18. says, There be two places, there is not a third, we are ignorant of a
third (meaning Purgatory,) yea we find in scripture that there is none such.
In the Greek Fathers there is no mention of it says Roffensis. And whereas it
is objected, that Augustine said Mass for his mother Monica. He says only,
that seeing she prayed so frequently for him, he was bound to send his best
wishes after her, if they could avail. But speaks very doubtfully of the
matter in his book de civit. DEI. Beside the Ancients prayed for these whom
they thought to be in Abraham's bosom, for a joyful Resurrection and full
fruition to them. The prayers of the Romanists are for men in misery, prisons,
in a place next to hell. So the one and other differ much. But the matter is,
that your gold grows here, it is your livelihood, your Mexico, this makes
you so contend for it.

Seventeenthly, Ye commit murder and 17 Inst.
allow it contrar to the sixth Command, witness the Massacre at Paris, commended
by the popish Orator Muretus, whose book is Printed by authority?

Reply, The testimony of a private Orator, does not make the articles of our
faith. And if this fact was done by private Animosities, neither Religion nor
reason can allow it. Nor do any Catholics approve it, except they who think it
was done by the Kings authority, to punish rebellious subjects whom he could
not otherwise crub.

Duply, This Oration of Muretus wherein he commends the Massacre, is
licensed, that no Catholics approve it, except these who think it was done by
the Kings authority. I answer, the fact was, clearly murder, a breach of the
sixth Command, and admit the French King who then was young had consented to
it, will that justify the breach of a divine precept? How can that consist
with Acts 4. 19. I am bound actively to obey my Superiors in the Lord, ad
aras, religion, reason, craves no more. Your own Thuanus has not this poor
evasion for justi^ying this murder, but calls it a bloody barbarous fact to
murder men living peaceably. And that universal flux of blood which flowed so
abundantly from all the passages of that young King at his death, proclaims
more lowdly to the world the unlawfulness of it, nor all the Rhetoric of
Muretus can wipe off. For as an excellent Poet says on that subject,

Maribus, ore, oculis, atque auribus undique and ano,
Et pene erumpit qui tuus iste cruor,
Non tuus iste cruor, sanctorum at caede cruorem,
Qu^m ferus hausisti, non poteras, coquere.
Eighteenthly, Ye call your selves the Universal Church, which was never
attributed 18. Inst.
to the Church of Rome in the Apostle Paul his time; notwithstanding that then
their faith was spoken of through all the world Romans 1. 8. Beside ye are but a
particular Church at best, not so numerous as we and the Greek Church are, with
whom we join in one Confession, except about the manner of the Processio^ of
the Holy Ghost As witnesses their Confession set forth in the name of the
Greek Church, by Cyrillus Patriarch of Constantinople, and printed Anno 1633.
which book can easily be produced. Whereas ye brag of Unity, ye are great
Schismatics, renting the universal Church, and taking the tittle from them to
your selves. Ye are miserably divided within, as appears from the strong
factions of the Council of Trent, and these hot skirmishes amongst Jesu^ts
Dominicans, and Jansenists lasting to this day. Moreover, the scripture calls
Rome, B^bylon, the scarlet whore, according to your own Interpreters upon Rev.
17. 18. which Babylon is to be destroyed.

Reply, You accuse us for calling our selves the Universal Church, and yet
would willingly take that title to your selves, if the common pract^se in all
Ages, to your shame and discre^it did not oppose it. None acknowledging your
Church under this title, but all gener^lly ours. But I have heretofore told you
why the Roman Church is called the Catholic, as being the Mother Church
constantly since the Apostles times, which has a power of head-ship and
jurisdiction over all the rest, holding communion with her through out the
world. Then you say, we are but a particular Church, not so numerous as ye and
the Grecians, with whom ye join in one Confession of Faith, except about the
manner of the procession of the Holy Ghost. Which it seems you hold but as a
trissle, although it makes no distinction betwixt the second and the third
Person of the Trinity: for where there is no Procession and relative opposition
in the Trinity, there is no distinction say Divines after John Damascene, yet
notwithstanding, ye join with this in the confession of faith, albeit they
plainly disclaim them, in the censure of the Oriental Church, where chap. 7.
12. 13. 21. they hold Transubstantiation, seven Sacraments, an unbloody
sacrifice, prayers to the saints, and for the dead, whatever you allege of
that confession of faith printed only in the last year. But however, this
shows the Protestants weakness, and wavering faith, that they claim the
Grecians and Lutherians, albeit both do openly disclaim them. Neither do you
prove better our division amongst our selves, seeing all the parties in the
Council of Trent, subscrived the Canons thereof, nor does the hot skirmishes
betwixt Jesuits and Dominicans in school questions, hinder their Unity in all
the tenets of the Catholic Church, both being willing to subscribe them with
their blood, as amongst Jesuits many do to this day. As for Jansenists we
altogether disowne them, and to make you more numerous, if ye please, are well
content that in many things you call them yours. I am content also Rome be
called the scarlet whore, Rev. 17. 18. viz. Rome under Pagan Empe^ours. But was
not the Church of Rome then in her greatest integrity and virginity, under the
Apostle^ St. Peter and Paul, who praising, her faith as spoken of through the
world, both declare her Universality, and speak of her pre-eminence.

Duply, I had reason to challenge your usurpation Pighius Eccl. hierarch. lib.
6. cap. 3. says, Quis unquam per Romanam Ecclesiam, intellexis universalem? He
thinks it absurd and repugnant, and so it is. As for the Grecians I can
presently produce their Confession, See it set down after the Preface.
Printed not the last year, but 30. years ago and upward, wherein they disclaim
seven Sacraments, the unbloody service of the Mass, prayers to Saints, or for
the Dead, Purgatory, Transubstantiation, etc. And Dr. Rivet in his 3. Tom. page
1257. sets down at length, how the Jesuits by money and moyen of the French
Ambassador, accused the same Cyrillus of treason before the grand Segniour,
and said, that he favored the King of great BRITAIN: by which accusation he
was for a time thrust out of charge, and forced to flee anno 1627. but
afterward by the good providence of GOD restored, the Greek Church would own
no other Patriarch during his absence, and how sore he was persecuted
thereafter, see Hornbeck in his Summa Contro. As for the Jansenists you gift us
with them, calling them ours. So Augustine and the Dominicans are ours also in
this, so your unity and universality ^s not so much as you pretend. You grant
also that the scarlet whore, Rev. 17. and Babylon is Rome, but under the
Heathen Emperor, and not as it is now under the Pope. Your own Ribera refuteth
you fully in this, for he says So says Sixtus Senensis, and Baronius, also.
that it must be meaned of Apostat Rome in the time of Antichrist, because she
is called an adulteress, the mother of harlots, but there can be no adultery,
where Marriage was not once. Secondly, The people of GOD are required to leave
her lest they partake of her plagues. But they were never incorporated with
Pagan Rome as Christians, for they had no communion with Pagan Idols, Ergo, if
your Church be the Mother of Fornications, and less numerous then these who
hold the Scripture for the rule, in no sense can ye be called the Catholic
Church.

Ninthteenthly, Ye make the Pope Christ's 19. Inst.
Vic^r on Earth, Peter's successor, the head of the Church, an infallible man,
a Demi-God. Whereas all the Apostles were equal in power and dignity, Matthew.
20. 26. And Cyprian lib. 3. de unitate Ecclesiae, says, hoc idem Petrus quod
reliqui Apostoli, pare^ consortio, and dignitate. Peter was one with the rest
of the Apostles in dignity and fellowship. Ambros. de Sp. S. lib. 2. cap. ult.
Nec Paulus est inferior Petro. see August. ad Hieron epist. 97. and Hierom ad
Evagr. and Cyprian epist. ad Quintum (71.) Prophets and Apostles were not
infallible except in penning the Scripture. Did not Moses speak unadvisedly
Psalm. 106. 33. the Prophet Elisha professes that the case of the Shunamit was
hid from him, 2. Kings 4. 27. Nathan gave forth a verdict to day, and made a
retractation to morrow, 2. Sam. 7. Peter controuled the Heavenly vision, and
knew not what to do Acts 10. 17. And shall your sinful Popes then be infallible,
who will believe it? Is it not then lamentable, that ye resolve your faith into
humane testimony, yea, into that which is a very lie, the Popes infallibility?
Were it not safer to make Scripture your ground, then to build upon this sandy
foundation, and so river your selves incurably into error?

Reply, You run out upon the Popes titles, till in the end you make him a
Demi-God, imputing this as that by way of calumny to us. Whereas all the
Apostles were equal in power and dignity, say you, Matthew. 20. 26. Where (brist
only forbids spiritual Superiors, to exercise that power with pride and
tyrrany, as did the Princes of the Gentiles, but with humility and meekness as
himself did. Yet he there expresses a greater and a lesser, a superior and
inferior amongst them, as he says more clearly in Luke 22. 26. he that is
amongst you greatest, let him be as the lesser, and he who is chief as he who
would serve them. You cite Cyprian, saying, the Apostles were equal in dignity,
but suppresing the following words, that Christ disposed the order of unity;
beginning with Peter, whom in his epist, ad Julianum, he calls, both head and
root of his Church. All that follows is, that Moses spoke unadvisedly, the
Propher Elisha was ignorant of some things, the Prophet Nathan made a
retractation, and St. Peter controuled the Heavenly vision. To show the
Prophets and Apostles were not infallible, save in penning the Scripture, and
so that the Pope is not such. This is but a vain rapsodie, to color your own
unsettled belief and contradiction in doctrine, but nothing against us. For
suppose they had erred in these things that concerned not their doctrine, all
that you can infer by comparison is, that the Pope may err in the like. But
as in penning the word of GOD they were infallible, were they not also in
preaching of it? Or is not the high Bishop in all Councils as in the
representative Church, infallible in subscribing, approving, and confirming her
decrees? If the same decrees of the Council be infallible. So that when you
deny the Pope as head, with the Bishops in general Councils as chief men to be
infallible, you deny the infallibility of the Church, which I have sufficiently
showed, reflecting on your sixth Answer.

Duply, You labor to prove imparity amongst Luke 22. 26. and would have us to
believe that the Papal Monarchy is there; which is like the consequence of Mr.
Vaux in his Catechism, proving Image worship from the second Command. For it is
clear from verse 30. that albeit Kingly government was in the state, yet it
should not be so in the Church. And that tyrranie is not the only thing
forbidden here, appears from this, that somewhat is interdicted to
Churchmen, which is granted to others, but tyrrany is licensed to none.
Compare Matthew. 20. 25. with Luke 22. 25. (...) in the one place is expressed by
(...) in the other. Then it is not only inhibited here. Beside, the 20. Matthew.
which you call unclear is most clear, he that will be greatest, seeking to
exalt himself, shall be least, for he shall be abased. And be who is called
greatest in Luke 22. is opposed to the youngest, the word is (...) in the
verse* So by this opposition, the greatest, is the eldest or the greatest in
gifts, who should be humble, self-denyed Ministers, as if they were not so
privileged. See 1. Peter 5. 3. To the place of Cyprian cited, ye answer
nothing. Only you allege that I suppress what follows, and in stead of the
citation you take your self to another place ad Julianum, where he ca^leth
Peter first in order, and this we do not deny. But what will that make for his
visible Monarchy? For sure I am, dic Ecclesiae, Matthew. 18. will resure that to
the world^ end. This is confirmed by Cyprians own practice, for says he,
Cyprian epist. 6. ad Clerum de cura Paup. Ab initio Episcopatus mei, nihil
statui agere, sine consensis cleri and plebis. See Cyprian epist. 52. al
Antonium, and there you will perceive that your Pope is not like Cornelius of
whom he speaks, for he was chosen Clericorum omnium testimonio, and plebis
qui adfuit suffragio. The faithful Martyr was much for peace, unity, and order,
and being infested with the Novatians he says, inde sunt nata schismata, quod
sacerdoti DEI non obtemperatur, and tells that by way of regrate: But when he
writteth to Cornelius he calls him frater and no more. Where then was your
Popedom? But ye equal your Pope to the Prophets and Apostles who penned the
Scripture, which is an odious comparison not worthy of an answer. But
forgetting your self you say, the Pope in the Council, then it is not the Pope
alone, of whose Monarchy we are here speaking, and ridiculously you subjoyn if
the Council be infallible, what language is this? The Pope is infallible in
subscribing the decree of a counsel if the Council be infallible, I say neither
of them is infallible, so your faith is resolved into a lie. You would seem to
hang the Popes infallibility on the sentence of a council; if it be so, the
Pope sealing their decrees is infallible accidentally, and relatively not in
himself, Others hang the infallibility of the Council on the Pope, so a
fallible council may consequently be infallible, and if he ratify the sentence
of a Session, it is all one with an Oecumenick-council. All these crotche^s are
the pillars of your faith, which are worm-eaten proppes, to which I have spoken
formerly in answer to your mentioned reflection.

20. Ye make Christ as many Bodies a^ their be administrations of the Supper,
20 Inst.
by that your Transubstantiation. Whereas Scripture gives him but one natural
Body, which the Heaven must contain till the restitution of all things Act. 3.
21. And we believe in our Creed that he ascended to Heaven, from thence he will
come to judge quick and dead. Ye break not the Bread contrar to the Scripture,
1. Cor. 10. 16. Yea, ye deny that Bread is there after the consecration,
contrar both to sense and reason. And whereas Christ entered within the Vail,
not that he should offer himself often. An unbloody sacrifice, expiatory of sin
under the Gospel, is contrar to Scripture, Heb. 9. 22. Heb. 9. 25. And by one
offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified, Heb. 10. 14. Ye
make as many bodily offerings of Jesus Christ, both for dead and living, as
there be Masses.

Reply, You have many false accusations as formerly, but no witness or warrant.
It is to be altogether ignorant of our terms, to say, that we give Jesus Christ
as many Bodies as there be administrations of the Sacrament of the Supper. For,
as we teach one and the same Body, is given in every one of our
administrations. So we believe that he ascended to Heaven, that the Heaven
contains him, and from thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.
But we believe also, that he is really present in the Sacrament, in as many
places as it is given in. Which you nor any man else cannot show to imply
contradiction, and yet ye delude the people, as if there were an impossibility
in this? When you say we break not the bread, it seems you know not how
either the bread is broken or given. If we for greater decency, prepare the
bread in a just greatness, for one man before it be given, so did ye of old
cutting it in pieces, albeit now ye break and bite about. What you say in end,
of his once offering himself, in a bloody way on the Cross, it is true, but if
you understand it in an unbloodie manner, and on the Altar, it is false.
Otherwise Christ should not be a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedeck, Psalm. 110. Sir, for all these passages of Scripture which you
have cited in thi^ your eight Answer, which you see make nothing either against
us or for you, look to the Touchstone of the reformed Gospel, and you will see
the Scripture altogether ours.

Duply, You pass over all the scriptures, Rome, Millan, etc. there be as many
bodies there as sacraments. And by this tenet, do not the words of
consecration make Christ on the altar, as well as by the holy Ghost he was
co^ceived in the womb of the Virgin? And does nor his corporal presence take
away his ascension, sitting at the right hand of God and his return? because he
is bodily already here. He is a Priest for ever, by the infinite virtue of his
once offering, which needs not be repeated, as the Apostle reasons well,
seeing it is not imperfect, but only applied by faith, and this is all our
salvation. As for the distinction of a bloody, and unbloody offering, it is a
device like the rest of your humane inventions. Show me scripture for i^ if you
can? This you are bound to do at the least, seeing now we are on scripture
arguments, and I brought scripture to the contrar. You call it real presence
only, I am for real presence, spiritualities are realities. Your tenet, if you
understand it, is corporal presence. See Bell. de Ench. lib. 1. c. 2. and 5.
the body of Christ is in the sacrament, with the whole magnitude thereof, and
that same body which is in heaven is on the altar, either then he must have
many bodies, or else one body having magnitude and dimensions, must be in many
places at once, in heaven and earth both, which is impossible, seeing it
implies contradiction. Theodoret. dial. 2. against the Eutichian heresy,
tells us, that the sacramental signs change nor their nature, but remain
in their own substance and shape. It is said, John 6. 56. He who eats my
flesh shall live by me. And ye interpret this place of sacramental eating,
ergo, all who take the sacrament shall live according to your gloss. Although
Christ had a spiritual body after his resurrection, yet he had a true body,
because he said to his disciples feel, and see, says Aug. ad Dardanum ep. 57.
Now then he has true dimensions, and when he appeared to the Apostle Paul
going to Damascus, Aquinas thinks, that for the time he left heaven, Summa q.
57. And when he came in amongst the Disciples, the doors being shut, Theodoret
says, that they made passage for him as their Creator. And the ancient Hierom
speaks with the scripture, that the Angel removed the stone from the grave.
Although his risen body be glorified, yet it is a real body, and they who are
for transubstantiation make it fantastic, without any warrant from the word.
For Bellarmin acknowledges in the forecited place, that this tenet of
corporal presence cannot be clearly proven from scripture, and lib. 3. de
Euch. cap. 19. Tollitur verborum Domini obscuritas, per patrum consensum. And
Andradius de caena Domini, Licet transubstantiatio ex scriptura probari nequ^t
tamen furor est non credere ecclesiae hac in^e. And Scotus lib. 4 did. 11. uo^
extat ullus locus scripturae cogens nos admit e transubstantiationem sine
ecclesiae declaratione. And adds that ante Lateran concilium, non fuit d^gma
fidei. Further, this takes away the sutableness betwixt the sign and thing
signified. If transubstantiation be, the bread and wine nourish not the body.
How can accidents nowrish the body? How can they be without a subject? How
Capernaitan like? can reprobats ear the body of Christ? You refer me to the
Touchstone, I wish rather you had touched pertinently scripture or reason in
your answers, then that you should shift satisfaction to the Reader with a
reference to a book, which possibly he cannot find, I have seen that already,
and an answer to^r printed twelve years ago by Dr. Guild who is now at his
rest, and his answer is yet unanswered, if you have time it may be worth the
while to peruse it for your conviction. Now I beseech you to lay aside
interest, prejudice, passion, and weigh again these twenty scripture-arguments,
it may please the Lord to discover how Antiscriptural your way is, who knows
what the Lord may do by weak instruments, when his word and truth is on their
side.

Question ninth, But seeing we mantaine the Apostles Creed, why did ye separat
from us?

Answer first, The Apostles creed, commonly Lessius de vera fide, in his
appendix page 17. says, that symbolum Apostolicum is not sufficient test for
knowing a pure Church. Ye know Socinians will say it, who are scarce
Christians. It mentions nothing to be believed concerning the fall of man,
the work of conversion, the two sacraments which are sealing Ordinances. So it
is the whole scripture, which tries best Christians and Churches. We did
separate because of Idolatrous superstitious worship, by setting up Imagerie,
which the Lord hates, Deuteronomy. 16. 22.

Secondly, We separat only from these Ans. 2.
errors, and cleave to the Scriptures and primitive, pure antiquity.

Thirdly, We were persecuted, fugati fuimus Ans. 3.
non fug^mus, what fire, faggot, bell, book, and candle could do, that we
endured before we break off.

Fourthly, when the light of the Gospel Ans. 4.
broke up we had a clear call for separation, Rev. 18. 4.

Reply, In your ninth Answer you say you did cleave to Scripture and pure
antiquity, and only left our errors. You had said better, that you had left
Scripture and pure antiquity, by so doing. For whosoever seperateth from the
true Church, which Scripture commandith us to hear, leaves it. But ye were
persecuted, this I grant of your first Apostats, Luther for sacrilege in
marrying a Nun vowed to GOD. Calvin for Sodomy burnt on the shoulder, Knox
for incest. And so are all knaves, persecuted by laws. Should they then turn
outlaws and rebels.

Duply, In stead of refuting our Reformation, Luther, Calvin, and Knox were
excellent men of GOD, as their lives and writtings testify. But if your Popes
were such, Platina has done them wrong. You may say as safely, I am brunt on
the shoulder and have committed incest, there be no more warrant for the one
then for the other. And for lawful marriage, I see not what divices of men
could deny that to any called to it, seeing the Lord grants the liberty.
Stapleton a virulent adversary, yet in this more for the truth then you are, in
his preface ad autidota Evangelica, speaks thus of Calvin, Est interpres
Scripturae diligens elegans and suavis, and Comentarii ejus perutiles sunt. He
is far from calling him a knave. Florimond Raymond, de not. haeres. lib. 7.
cap. 10. speaks thus, Fatendum est Calvinuns fuisse ingenio admirando acuto
and promptissimo in imaginationibus suis, in conceptionibus suis exornatissimo,
etc. And for his vindication from these calumnies which you injuriously fix
upon him, read your own Papyrius M^ssonius, Elog. par. 2. page 431. where his
life is set down, and Bolsecus refuted who was the author of these lies. If
faithful Historians can have any trust with you, these three worthies whom you
labor to blot, were as faithful holy Ministers of the Gospel, as lived in the
Church for many hundred years formerly. Your own writters blame your Popes and
Clergy men, but they were either Apostats or constant adversaries who blot
Luther and Calvin. It is told by your own that Pope Sixtus the fourth licenced
the Cardinal of St. Lucie and his family to use freely that sin not to be
named, in the three hot months of the year. And Johannes a C^sa Arch Bishop of
Beneventum legate to Pope Julius the third, set forth a book in commendation of
Sodomy, there is more warrant for this report then for the Incest of Knox, or
Sodomy of Calvin. Yet who will delight to ^ake in such pudles, chaste ears,
should abhore such speeches. Michael the Archangel brought not in time of
dispute, a railing accusation against the Devil; but you spare not to accuse
the brethren who are now dead in the Lord, falsely. Is this the right way to
promove the truth? Absit. But lies being your refuge, I leave you to the GOD of
truth for answer, and shall only take notice that you leave all the four grounds
of our separation from Rome, unrepealed and entire. So by your silence it
appears we had reason to leave you, for ye Papists hate to be reformed. This
your own Espencaeus regrateth on chap. 1. to Titus.


Question 10. What call had your Reformers to go about such a work?

Answer, They were Ministers lawfully ordained, the Bishops of England and
Doctors Germany etc. For Calvin he was thrust forth by Farrel and Virer, and
ordained by laying on of the hands of the Presbytry, according to the rule, 1.
Tim. 4. 14. So was our Knox, Wishhart, Willock. etc. They were like Scribes
fitted for the kingdom of God, and furnished with things new and old. And being
Officers in an army where they did clearly see the captain of salvation
injured, did lift up their voices like trumpets and show the people their
transgressions, which was the duty of their office according to their oath.

Reply, Ye take your first Ministerial ordination from the Bishops of England,
Doctors of Germany, and hands of the Presbytry, where by Bishops if you
understand Catholic Bishops remaining such, you must understand, they neither
could, nor would give any power, to preach against the Catholic Church. No
Bishop having power to destruction, but to edification of the Church. As also
you must understand, the Catholic Church was yet in her integrity, having
lawful Bishops, whom ye should have constantly followed. If Bishops turned
Protestants. I ask from whom had they their power, but from the Catholic
Church, which no doubt had suspended them in the exercise of their Episcopal
function, for their disobedience and separation from her. As for the Doctors of
Germany, they might well make Luther a Doctor, but not a lawful Pastor or new
Apostle, nor could there be a Presbytrie of pure reformed Ministers to
consecrat Calvin, he being the first Reformer himself. For by the word
Presbyter, ye understand an Elder in the New Testament, and so by the word
Presbytrie you must understand a convention of Elders in the Session, which is
the first place indeed for a Sodomist, called for setting him on a pillar,
rather t^en in the Pulpit. But true it is ye had no ordination in the
beginning, but every one did preach at his own hand, pretending the goodness of
their doctrine, did give them sufficient power and call, as all other Sectaries
do commonly in the beginning.

Duply, There was a necessity of, Reformation pleaded for, by many under the
Papal tyrrannie. This was denied, and school questions made articles of faith,
which caused some officers of the house first write against them, and preach
down such profane errors, as Indulgencies, etc. Now I ask, if the case and
exigence be such, whether might not a Popish pastor, by virtue of his
ordination, judge himself bound in duty to decrie the sins of the time, and
endeavor reformation a^ Savanorola did? especially seeing every ordained man
is a pastor of the Catholic Church, this is power for edification not for
destruction. Admit the Bishops of England did continue Papal, it was their
duty to purify the worship, throw down Idols etc if they were Reformed, then
the more fit were they for reforming others. When Athanasius separated from the
Arrians ceased he to be a Bishop, or was he holden to be silent in his apology
to the Emperor, he pleads for the contrare. Had not the Doctors of Germany
power to preach against Indulgencies, and were they not Presbyters also? You
bewray your ignorance concerning Calvin, he was not the first reformer, Farrel,
Viret, and others were before him, who thrust him out into the work of the
Lord. You have as little skill of Presbytry by taking a Session for it. But it
seems your mistake has been studied to vent your malice against Calvin. If
ye were as free of superstition and Idolatry as he was of Sodomy, the
offerings of the Lord would not be so injured, nor his Name polluted.

Question eleventh, Ye want uninterrupted succession, which the primitive
Church claimed still, as appears from Aug. contra Cresconium l^b. 2. cap. 3.
and ep. 48. This was one of the weapons whereby they did b^at the Donatists?

Answer, The ground of separation of the Donatists, was the personal vices of
men, ep. Now we did not separat from Rome, because their Popes (whom they take
for a patron) have been Atheists, Heretics, denyers of the souls
immortality, Whore mongers etc. as their own writters confess, in the lives of
Silvester 2. Alexander 6. John 22. and many more, but because ye apostatized
from the Apostles doctrine and corrupted the worship miserably, so these
testimonies concern not us.

Secondly; If interrupted succession make void the Ministry, ye Papists have
none at Ans. 2.
all. For ye often had Anti-Popes, and the Council at Pisa deposed two Popes
at once, as Heretics departing from the faith. The Council of Constance
deposed John 23. for denying the immortality of the soul and the resurrection.
Behold then your succession, and the infallibility of your Popes. Eugenius the
fourth, was deposed by the Council of Basil; and all the following Popes were
his successors, albeit the Council judged Faelix the fifth to be Pope. Yea
further, this place has vaiked for many years together, so that a line of
immediate successors cannot be drawn by your selves.

Thirdly, We have a lawful Ministry, as Ans. 3.
powerful as the world affords, honored by the blessing of the Lord by
begetting souls to himself, and many can from their experience say, that it
has been the power of GOD to their salvation; how then can you challenge our
Ministry? Is not this near of kine to that old Antichristian question proponed
to our Master, by what authority do thou these things? And if personal
succession had such weight as you say, the Priesthood under the law had been at
a great loss. For the line of it was interrupted oftener then once before the
coming of Christ, yet he commends submission and obedience to them so long as
they did sit in Moses chair, and no further, Matthew. 23. 1. So that in Ministers
it is the Doctrine and not the Genealogy of persons that is so much regarded.

Reply, In your eleventh Answer, you grant personal vices are not a sufficient
ground of sepa^ation from the Church, and say that Protestants did only separat
themselves from the worship miserably polluted, and because the Roman Church
had Apostatized from the Apostolic Doctrine. But Sir, let me ask you, when the
Catholic Roman Church (which before your Reformation at least was a true
Church) Apostatized? And who was a competent judge to declare her Apostacy,
and give you leave to separat? Was ^t Scripture, as according to your first
rule you must say? Then I ask if two or three under pretense of a Reformation,
may adhere to what they think to be in Scripture, against the judgment of the
whole Church at that time? Which ^ssuredly all must grant who teach that the
true Church may err; and so give the same liberty to all Sectaries, which
they take so boldly to themselves. But albeit you say, your separation was not
from our personal vices, yet you impute in the by going heresy, denying of the
souls immortality, whoredom to two or three of our Popes, Silvester the
second, Alexander the sixth, John the twenty two. How justly we shall presently
see. But however this were true, it could no more wrong the Popes authority in
his Canonical decrees, then David's adultery, or Solomon's Idolatry in penning
Scripture. Neither is it a great wonder that amongst 240. Popes, there have
been two or three evil. Since even amongst twelve Apostles there was one Judas.
Nor do Catholics canonize all their Popes although for these three whom ye
name wicked, they have 33. most famous Martyrs and Saints. What ever they teach
as private doctors, as it m^keth no law in the Church, so it cannot derogat in
the least to their decision, and doctrine as Popes. But to answer for these
three, what Martinus Polemius, and the Magdeburgh say against Silvester the
second as a Magician, is known by all the learned to be mere fables, imputed to
him for his eminent knowledge and learning in the Mathematics, which made the
ninth Age wherein he lived to call him a Magician, because of its gross
ignorance. Alexander the sixth is also blamed for lewdness, by no impartial
writter. And what Calvin says lib. 4. instir. against John 22. is known to be
error and lies speaking of him as Pope, whatever was his opinion as a private
Doctor, of the soul before the day of judgment, which he disclaimed to be his
at his death, professing and protesting that he had never any belief but that
of the Catholic Church, says John Williams lib. 11. hist. cap. 19. But
Heretics speak of Popes as Rebels of Kings, discontented subjects of Ministers
of state, and criminals of their lawful judges, which no wise man will much
regard, Then to show that we have not an uninterrupted succession, you speak
first of Anti-Popes, as if they did interrupt the succession of Popes more then
Usurpers the succession of Kings, Secondly, Of Popes deposed by Councils, but
you cannot, instance that any lawful Pope was deposed by any general Council
what ever, Thirdly, You say the Sea of Rome has vaiked for many years. To
which I answer, as Kings die not, so neither Popes, as it does not interrupt
the succession of Elective Kings, that after the death of one there be long
debate before the Election of another, the royal power then residing in the
Electours, so neither interrupteth it the succession of Popes and their
Election. You speak nothing of your own succession, because ye have none. You
brag much of a powerful Ministry, but shows no call you had to the Ministry
from GOD, nor his Church, so we had good reason to challenge it, albeit you
call this an Antichristian question, to ask at new upstarts who pretend to
reform the Church, who gave you a call? because the Jews had such a question
to Christ. But Christ John 15. 24. says, if he had not showed himself to be
the Son of GOD by his words and works which none else could do, no man had been
obliedged to belive him. Yet ye will have us to believe you, are lawful
Ministers, without succession or a call, and that Luther and Calvin were
extraordinarily sealed for Reformation, without the least sign, mark, or
miracle, showing that they were sent for that end? So that in Ministers you
conclude it is the Doctrine more then the Genealogy of persons, which is so
much regarded. As if preaching of true doctrine were sufficiant to make a man a
Minister without any ordination or call; the Scripture expresses another thing
saying, how shall they preach except they be sent. And as to seek true
successsion of Bishops and Pastors in the Church from the Apostles and their
successors, were to seek their Genealogy and Birth. Such answers are made to
deceive the ignorants, and to let any rational man know, ye have no lawful
successsion at all, however, ye intrude your selves into the Ministry upon
pretense of doctrine, as all phan^ticks and sectaries do.

Duply, Here is multum scribere, and a rabble of ragged discourse to small
purpose, Calvin, and the Magdeburgenses, and the ages wherein they lived the
lie. And is this all your vindication of them? That it may appear this covering
to be too narrow, for so foul faults, not only have Calvin and the
Magdeburgenses said so: but Platina, B^r^nius, Sigonius etc. Are these also
liars? These are not authors like Bolsecus the Apostate, but such as ye will
not deny to be credible witnesses, Silvester the 2. lived in the eleventh
Centurie, and not in the ninth as ye mistake. Once he was called Gerbert, and
studied the Mathematics says Onuphrius, then turned a consulter with the
Devil says Platina, for instance this is brought, that he enquired curiously
how long he would enjoy the Papacy? And the response he received, was till he
laid Mass in Jerusalem. Within four years thereafter, he was saying Mass in
the corner of the Ro^d-Church which is called Jerusalem, and asking how the
Chapel was called, it was answered by some Jerusalem: Then he knew that his
death was near, and becoming to be sad, he confessed his sins before many
witnesses, whom he exhorted to bewarre of ambition and commerce with the Devil.
Some say that he desired his body to be cutted, and laid on a cart, etc. This
his tragedy is recorded also by Polid. Virg. de invent. rerum. lib. 5.
Nauclerus vol. 2. gener. 34. If these be your Matheticks I will learn none of
them. So it is sure by testimony of your own, that Silvester was a Magician.

Next ye say that John 23. your Pope is wronged by Calvin, for saying that he
denied the immortality of the soul, and ye alleadg^ what ever was his opinion
as a private Doctor, of the soul before the day of judgment yet that he
recanted his error, and died in the faith of the Church. If Calvin wrong him,
Bell. lib. 4. de Pontif. wrongeth him also for he says the Cardinals resisted
him in this gross tenet; and does disput whither it was heresy, seeing it was
not defyned in a Council. Nauclerus says that many Divines hold this Pope to
be an heretic. And his successor Benedict did publicly condemn him and it.
Erasmus in his preface to the 5. book of Irenaeus, says, that he labored to
propagat this heresy in France, and being challenged, was compelled to recant,
which he did coldly says Nauclerus. Had ^o^ Calvin then reason to say, that
this Pope was heretical? Otherwise why was he put to recantation?

Thirldy, Ye say that Alexander the 6. was blamed by no impartial writter. Was
not Guic^ardine Guice. lib. 1.
impartial? What think ye of Phil. de Comin. Phil. de Bello. Neap.
was he partial also? They give us this relation that he came by bribes to the
chair. And when Charles the 8. intended war against the Turk, the Pope
advertised Bajazet, and promised for a su^me of money to make a stop to the
expedition, which the Turk undertook to pay. Was not this a holy Father?
Further, Onuphrius tells that he was much given to whoredom, and did beget
four sons and two daughters, whom he avouched. His family was stained with
incest. So that a Poet in these times did write this Epitaphe on his daughter;

Hoc jacet in tumulo, Lucretia nomine, sed re

Thais, Alexandri filia, nupta, ^urus.

His death was tragical, for having prepared a bottel of poisoned wine, for
some whom he invited to dinner, was poisoned therewith by the ignorance of his
Cup Bearer, and fell into the ditch which he prepared for others; his candle
was thus put out, and he left an unsavory snuff behind him, as his Epitaphe
witnesses, written by Ia. Sannazarius, who when he has mentioned his many
faults (into which pudle I love not to raike) shuts up all with this,

I nunc Nerones, vel Caligulas nomina,
Turpes vel Heliogabulos.
Hoc sat viator, reliqua non sinit pudor,
Tu suspicare, and ambula.
Then you reflect upon the society of the Apostles, where there was one Judas.
But when he fell did he not cease to be an Apostle, and fall from his
Ministry? But your Popes continued such till their death infallible; and they
erred as men, but not as Popes. This could not be said of Judas though once an
Apostle. They are liker to Judas then any of the rest of the Apostles. But to
make such a head of Christ's Church upon Earth is a strange paradox. O but ye
say, David and Solomon fell, yet were penmen of holy Scripture. Ans. They
penned no Scripture while in that state. I hold the Negative you are bound to
prove the Affirmative, but will never do it. Their repentance was more then
ordinar, witness Psalm, 51. and the book of Ecclesiastes. O if your Popes had a
grain weight of their repentance, soon would we hear other language from them
and you. Then you say, that Heretics speak evil of your Popes, as criminal
persons do of a judge. Was Platina a criminal person or heretic, and yet he
marketh eminent vice^ in more then 33. Popes. Read him and resent your
expressions, or refute him as ye do Calvin with a broad lie and no more. You
put us to it to tell the time when Rome became Idolatrous and vicious in the
worship, etc. Which was the ground of our separation. This belongs to the
former question. Yet to this I say with reverend and learned Bishop Usher, Rome
was not built in a day, nor the great dunghill of errors which now we see
raised in it in an age, therefore it is a vain demand.

Secondly; There be a difference betwixt open Heresies which oppose the
foundation, Tim. 4. 1. 2. The impiety of the one is notorious, the other
mysterious as the Apostle re^^^eth it, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7. they who watched against
the one, might sleep while the seeds of the other were in sowing, or
peradventure might have a finger in bringing in this Trojan-horse under the
name of devotion.

Thirdly, Albeit we cannot ^ell day and place, when and where errors did at
first begin, yet that will not make error truth. The Dup. 3.
S^ddueces taught their was no Resurrection, nor Angels, can any man tell under
what High Priest this error was broached? Shall it be a truth for that? So ye
have damnable errors, but when the first seed was ^owne of these t^res,
probably men sleeped, and an adversary has done it. Your Anti-Popes made an
interruption of succession and possession, otherwise their work was non ens. If
so, then where is your uninterrupte I succession? And if it be nor such, you
speak nothing to the point. You say, I cannot instance that any lawful Pope was
deposed by a Council. I hold no Pope lawful, and your Schoolmen say, the
Council cannot depose a Pope, so it is an unlawful sentence. But seeing it
appears you are of the contrar mind, I produced the instance of Eugenius the
fourth, deposed by the Council of Basil, and all the Popes were his
successors, albeit the council judged Falix the 5. to be Pope. But after your
manner, you pass with silence, what you have not mind for. You say vacancy for
many years makes no interruption, because the Pope is like an elective King,
and the power in the interim continues in the Electours. This is loose
language, for once ye make the Popes like the Kings of the Nations against
Matthew. 20. 25. then ye make no inter-Regnum, but seat the power in the
Electours. If so, the power is not of GOD but of man, contrar to Scripture,
John 19. 11. Romans 13. all that Electours have is the application. And if it be
theirs originally, then they may depose a Pope by the Conclave. For ejusdem est
author are and exauthorare. That saying the King dies not, is meaned of
hereditary Kings. The Pope is not such, and you will not say it. For Elective
Kings, the Kingdom by his death wants a King, as a Burgh does a Provost. If
then the seat of the Pope vaiked so long the Church was headless for many
years. How make you out then the line of uninterrupted succession? You come
over again upon the call of our Reformers, to which I answered formerly, that
o^r Ministers are called of GOD, is proved by the success which some of them
had in converting, confirming, convincing souls, see Ier. 23. 32. they who
run unsent profit not at all, but they have edified many and turned them from
darkness to light. We say not that the call of Luther and Calvin was immediate,
and wholly extraordinar. But admit it were so, it needed not miracles; for the
Baptist wrought no miracles, yet was called extraordinarily. What our Lord
Jesus and the Apostles did that way, are ours for use, and aggravateth the sin
of those who will not believe Gospel truths. The place cited by you I^. 15.
implies no more, yet it is well known that Luther, Calvin, Knox, Wishart,
Welsh, Davidson, were more then ordinar men, and had the spirit of prophecy in
some measure. But we will not lay weight on these things, seeing we have a more
sure word of prophecy, to which we are bound to take heed. And this does
warrant us to purge out the old leaven with both out hands, that we may become
a new lump. And no more is designed by our Reformation.

To conclude this then, Our first Reformers had as lawful ordination, as the
Roman Kirk could give them. And this is a strong argument ad hominem. Secondly,
The power which that ordination gave them, you say was to edification, we are
persuaded they made use of that in a Scripture way, and edified more in one
year then ye did in many. If any man called to the work of the Gospel oppose
the errors of many, can that strengthen Sectaries? Did not Paphnutius oppose a
whole Council, and was commended for it, because he walked according to the
rule, and had Scripture on his side? Did not Athanasius oppose the whole world,
almost turned Arrian, and who ever blamed him for so doing? The case is the
same, these called men adhered to the divine commission and opposed the errors
of Popery. Their praise therefore must be in all the Churches of Christ.

Question twelfth. Ye are so broken amongst your selves, that ye look not like
the primitive Christians, who had one heart and way?

Answer first, Our breaches are our burden before the Lord, and a stroke upon
us, for

Secondly, Ye Papists are more divided, Ans. 2.
for we all agree in doctrine and essentials, but ye skirmish about that so
frequently, that if the ^udgment of the Roman Church be the sentence of your
Church, it is hard to know what people shall do, tied to believe as your
Church does. For sometime the Council is put above the Pope, sometime the Pope
above the Council. The pragmatick sanction of France is allowed and subscrived
by many, cried down by others. Some will have a divine predetermination on the
will, others only moral swasion. Some are for mediat concourse of the first
cause with the second, others for immediate. If Unity be a convertible note of
the Church, ye are none.

Thirdly, Perfect Unity in all things, is not to be expected here, so long as
we know but Ans. 3.
in part. 1. Cor. 13. 9. If whereto we have attained we walk by the same rule,
the Lord will reveal more to us in due time. Phil. 3. 16. If any should have
said that the Church of Corinth was not true because of some divisions, or that
therefore these of Corinth should return with the foolish Galatians to the
covenant of works, it had been a Solecism in reason, yet no greater then this,
to allege that some differences make us no Church.

Reply, In your 12. Answer, you grant your breaches amongst your selves, as
your burden for the abuse of pure Gospel light. How can ye all agree in
Doctrine, except in so far as the abuse of the Gospel, which is (to say true)
all the unity ye have. Neither is it wonder ye do nor agree, seeing ye do not
acknowledge the high Bishop successor to St. Peter, who as Hierom says, was
chosen for this amongst the twelve, that a head being constitute, the occasion
of Schism might be taken away. Secondly, You pretend that Catholic Romans are
more divided then ye, because sometime the Council is put above the Pope,
sometime the Pope above the Council. But find you this as an article of the
Catholic Church? What ever has been the opinion of sacred men, yea of Fathers
and Councils thereanent, yet they were never confirmed nor owned by the Church
for an Oecumenick decree. And suppose both sentences were decided, it is easily
answered, that the Pope is approved to be above a Council not approved by
himself, and a Council approved by a Pope is above a Pope alone, wherein there
is no disagreement or contradiction. As for the pragniatick Sanction, as it
has no reference to matters of faith, so it makes nothing for your purpose,
no more then praedetermination, seeing all Catholics who hold it, think it
takes not away free will. But then you say, perfect unity in all things is not
to be expected here. So ye show your selves conscious enough of your own
divisions: and if you understand it in matters of faith, it is a blasphemy
against Gods word, which says that there be but one GOD, one Faith, one
Baptism. If one faith, then no division of faith, without which no unity can
consist. So judge you if it be not only a solecism in reason as you speak; but
also in belief to join with the Grecians in Confession of Faith, albeit they
deny the procession of the Holy Ghost which ye believe, or with the Lutherians,
who hold the real presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament, which ye flatly
deny.

Duply, You grant that the Pope according to Hierom was first chosen, that the
occasion Dominicae dispositionis, and that Hierom nor the Fathers did ever
dream of his Monarchical Empire, as Casaubon ad Barronii Annals, proves well
Exercit. 15. A Prolocutor is the most they give to the Apostle Peter, they call
him (...) aut (...), this will not make a Pope, so by adhereing to Hierom, you
destroy the Pope. And not only was he of this opinion, but your own Medina
tells us, de sacrorum hominum origini: that Ambrose, Chrysostom, Theodoret,
Theophylact, Oecumenius, Sedulius, Primasius, mantained the same. And it is
clear that Augustine in quaest. Veteris and Novi Testament, quaest. 101.
homologa^^h all this. I Will help you further herein, to show that I am no
adversary to truth. Gregory the Pope prophesied, that whosoever counted himself
universal Bishop was Antichrist. And writting to John Patriarch of
Constantinople, epist. 38. lib. 4 who did usurp that tittle, he calls him
Rex superbiae. Which title Boniface did take on afterward, by Phocas means who
killed his Master Mauritius, and fulfilled the prophecy of Gregory. Neither
John Patriarch of Constantinople, nor Boniface excluded other Bishops, as
Esthius labors by this reply to make evasion. For both in the Eastern and
Western Churches at that time there were Bishops whom they acknowledged such.
But he is universal Bishop according to Gregory, who lays claim to the
universal supremacy and extolleth himself above all, as the Pope now does in
the Church at Rome. I shall shut up this answer, with that famous consideration
of Bernard to Pope Eugenius the 4. which words Antonius de Dominis Arch Bishop
of Spalato, citteth for refutation of the Popes supremacy, Politia Ecclesiast.
lib. 5. cap. 2. the words are these, Hoc quod habuit Petrus hoc dedit,
solicitudinem quippe super Ecclesias, Dominationem nunquam, audi ipsum, non
Dominantes inquit in clerum, 1. Peter 5. 3. Et ne dictum sola humilitate, non
ettam veritate videatur, vox Domini est in Evangelio. Reges Gentium Dominantur
vos non lic. I ergo ^u inquit and aude tibi usurpare Apostolicus Dominatum aut
Dominant Apostolatum, plane ab alterutro prohiberis. This was written in the
12. Centurie, and is a full testimony, proving that Bernard thought not Papal
jurisdiction of divine appointment. Now sir, did you nor palpablie contradict
your self here, when formerly you equalized your Pope to Prophets, Apostles,
and made your universal High-Bishop jure Divino, by saying that the evil of
Schism occasioned his election at first; if so, it is juris humani at best, and
thus you agree with Hierom.

Secondly, You would father a contradiction on me, because I regrate our rents,
proceeding from the evil use of Gospell-light, as if we held not one confession
of faith. A child may conceive, that the abuse of Gospel Light, supposes the
light, but it is evil used practically, and this makes our breaches in other
things. It is beyond controversy, that the national strokes under which we
groan* have chiefly proceeded from the evil use of the Gospel. Light has come
amongst us, but we have walked in darkness. Will it therefore follow that we
are not one dogmatically in the orthodox confession of faith. Where is this
consequence founded? Neither does the Popedom cure rents, but rather make
them. Experience proves this cure to be the fomenter of the disease. For since
his usurpation, more controversies have been started in the Christian Church
then formerly were heard. And if this were the cure, it is admirable, that when
the case was in Corinth there is no mention of that (...).

Thirdly, You deny that it has been the sentence, or deeree ecumenical that
the Council was above the Pope. Was it not expressly defined by the Council of
Basil, and does not the 15 Act of the Council of Chalcedon say that the Roman
Church has no privilege above others from Christ. But the reason why at any
time they had it, was because it was the seat of the Roman Empire, and that the
Bishop of Constantinople has equal privileges with the Pope. Do not all
your Sorbonists prefer the council to the Pope? and all your Jesuits the
Pope to the Council? Where is your Unity then? for as Bellarmin says, In hoc
consistit summa rei, viz. ^n the Popes infallible universal supremacy,
without which there is no salvation to be ^^ad. Also ye make it a fundamental
article of your Creed, which is more then the opinion of private Doctors. And
the very truth is, it is the foundtion and key-stone of Popery. Quo sublato
omnia corruunt, as he says there in his Preface to the Treatise, de sum
Pontisice. De qua re agitur cum de primatu Pontisicis agitur? Breviter
respondeo, de summa rei, id enim quaeritur, debe^tne Ecclesia duitius
consistere, an vero dissolvi and concidere. Then ye betake your self to this
hold, that the Pope is above a Council not approved by himself, and the Council
approveed by him above the Pope. But as I said before, this gives no more to a
Council then to a Session, for if the Pope approve that, it is above his own
single approbation, in regard of the additame^t to it. The only question is
when they differ, whose sentence is to be preferred? And about this ye differ
much amongst your selves, consequently in fundamentals, for this is caput rei.

Fourthly, You quarrel with us for saying that perfect unity in all things is
not to be expected here. And yet it is express Scripture, 1. Cor. 13. 9. Phil.
3. 15. founded upon experience. How then call you it blasphemy? Unitas in
fundamentalibus, libertas in supra fundame^talibus and charitas in omnibus, is
a saying much commended by many; and did we blaspheme by uttering this golden
sentence? We are in charity with the Lutheran and Greek Church because they
hold the same rule with us, viz, the Scripture. The Reformed Churches have a
body of Confessions, in which they have Concord, and we in this Church have one
Catechism, and one Confession of Faith, in which we all agree. But to think
that because of some other differences, we are not for one GOD, one Faith, one
Baptism, it is absurd to speak so.

Question thirteenth, May there not as yet be an accommodation and union
betwixt you and us?

Answer, Will ye be like the Church at Rome, to which the Apostle Paul did
w^ite Romans is now against the Romans, witness, the point of Justification,
and subjection to the higher powers.

Secondly, Will ye take the Scripture for the only rule of faith, worship and
manners? We differ from none such. But ye regard

Thirdly, Those who have intended that work, have lost their labor and thanks
at all Cassander, Antonius de Dominis, Barnesius, Forbesius. What agreement can
the Temple of God have with Idols: 2. Cor. ^. 14.

Reply, In your 13. Section, you answer to a Question which no Catholic would
have made, if ye understand by an accommodation betwixt you and us, such as are
in Scottish Trysts. We granting something to you, and ye something to us. For
as to gain the whole world, a man should not lose his own soul, so* neither can
be quyt one article of his faith, without which it is impossible to please God.
But your way being better, asking only two conditions to make this so much
desired agreement. The first is, if ye will be like that Church of Rome, to
which the Apostle Paul did write his Epistle: And the second is, that we will
take scripture for a rule. We most willingly grant you both, not taking
scripture as every bungler who wresteth it, but according to the exposition of
the Church and the unanimous consent of the fathers. Appoint the meeting where
ye please on these terms. He challenge no more calumnies on this Question,
seeing now we are in terms of agreement, having sufficiently confuted them
before.

Duply, You say no Catholic would have moved the question. Are ye n^^ for
unity in the Lord amongst all Christians: where is this is strange. Have you
not seen Grotius and de Sancta Clara? who move the same wheel. At first you
seem to be against all accommodation, as much as against all reformation. You
cannot quite on article, not unum jot a says Bellarmin, otherwise your Church
might be declared fallible: therefore such as hanker after reconciliation with
you, unless they mind to come up your length, will prove fools in the end, and
lose all their labor. Yet on a sudden you forget your self, accepting of these
terms offered, but in repetition you embezle them unfaithfully.

For first, will ye be like that Church, to which the Apostle Paul did writ in
point of justification by faith, and subjection to the Magistrate? These two you
leave out, being conscious that ye are contrar to divine direction in both
these. And how comes it to pass, that when the Apostle chap. 16. saluteth so
many Saints at Rome, he omitteth the Pope? If he was then head of the Church,
and makes no mention of his supremacy, nor of their subjectio^ to him, which
is summa rei, one of your fundamentals, seeing chap. 13. he ordained them for
conscience sake to be subject to Nero. The world may see that the Apostle Paul
has been no Papist.

Secondly, When you propound the second condition, it is propounded lame,
barely, you say, that ye hold the Scripture for a rule^ but I said for the only
rule of faith, worship, and manners. Hold that, then ye renounce traditians in
matters of faith, for the law of the Lord is perfect, Ps. 19. The Popes
infallibility, and unive^sal supremacy; your latin worship, communion under
one kind, prayers to Saints, and for the dead, Purgatory, all which are clearly
confuted by Scripture. So if ye do not adhere to these conditions, the meeting
will be to small purpose where ever it be appointed. Justin Martyr Expos. recta
fidei, says. Amongst the children of the Church, matters divine must not be
ordered and directed according to men's reason and thoughts, but our speech and
interpretation of them, should be sitted to the sense and will of the Spirit of
GOD. Basil in Exercit. de Fide. It is a manifest defection from the faith, and
a clear evidence of pride, either to reject any of these things which the
Scripture contain, or to bring in (as a point of faith) any thing which is not
written in the word; and he cites that of our blessed Lord, John 10. 5. My
sheep hear my voice, a stranger they will not hear but flee from him. Hilar.
lib. 1. de Trinit. when we speak of divine matters let us give to GOD the
knowledge of himself, and let us with all veneration follow his sayings, for he
is a me^t witness to himself, who is not known but by himself,) Aug. lib. 6.
Conf. cap. 5. (Thou have persw^ded me O GOD, that not these men who believe
these books which thou in all Ages have founded upon thy authority, are to be
blamed, but such as believe them not, neither are they to be heard.) If any
perchance should say to me, whence know thou these books, to have been
ministered to mankind by the Spirit of the one and most true GOD, even that
very same thing was mostly to be believed. Aug. lib. 2. de Baptismo. contra
Donatist as, (Let us not bring false ballance^ wherein we may weigh what we
will, and as we will, according to our own arbitriment, saying, this is heavy,
that is light, but let us bring the divine balance out of the holy Scriptures,
as the Lords treasury, and let us weigh in it what is more heavy and weighty.
Yea, let us not weigh only, but also acknowledge scriptuval truths to be
weighed and determined already by the Lord. Si Scriptura habeat controversiam
ex eadem Scriptura, adhibitis ejus testibus termin^tur. Aug. de doctr. Chr.
lib. 3. cap. 28.

Question fourteenth, We are still gai^ing Proselyts from you, but few turn
off from us, and become members of your Church?

Answer, Your pelf and policy is greater

Secondly, Ye give indulgencies for looseness, this catches prophaine ones who
love to live at random, but without some such carnal design or prejudice, we
hear not that any turn off from us.

Thirdly, Have not sundry left Rome in Marquis of Galeacia. Mr. Smeton, etc.
yea, sundry have gone to Rome and been converted, by taking a distaste at their
worship and way.

Fourthly, Our run awayes, runagads, have to mourn before the Lord for their
Apostacy, traditions and vain inventions? He who walks according to the
scripture rule, peace and mercy shall be upon him, and upon the Israel of God.

Reply, In your last answer you say, our pelf and policy is greater then
yours, both which I grant, but glories in neither. Yet if Ministers
augmentations hold on, they will shortly equal our pelf, but not our Christian
policit, in employing it so well; our glorious and goodly edifices of Churches,
Hospitals, Monasteries, dispersing and distributing their rents to pious uses.
But the thrusting down of Churches, Hospitals, Monasteries, dispersing and
dissipating their rents, testify your want of policy, blind avarice and mad
passion. Secondly, You say, we give indulgencies for looseness, as if in
Catholic times, there had been greater looseness then since the Reformation.
Whereas the keeping of Lent, and Fasting days were abolished, Penance and
satisfaction for sin taken away, Celibacie in Church men thought a crime,
Laics allowed after divorcement to marry, all good works thought impossible,
the Commandments thought impossible to be kept, and that men sin of necessity
in their best actions, which, as it excuses all wickedness and sin; so it
gives way to all looseness and prophainness. Thirdly, You say, many quit Rome
in the integrity of their heart, such as the Marquess of Galeacia, and closed
on their peril with naked truth in your Church. To which I answer, that all
Heretics and Schismatics have quit Rome not in the integrity of their heart,
but in the blindness of their mind, and that with their own peril, eternal
damnation, closing with a very naked faith and Religion, not well clothed with
the least color of truth, but not with naked faith or belief, which Catholics
confidently and constantly assert, what ever you say to the contrar. And it is
no where else to be found, for they know there is but one faith, and one GOD,
and one true Church. Consequently united in the same faith, in all which
points as she was established by Christ and his Apostles, has continued since
their time visible in her Pastors and People in all Ages, holy and incorrupted
in her Doctrine, religious in her Sacraments and ceremonies, powerful and
glorious in her wonders and miracles, conversion of Infidels, in the which the
holy Fathers have lived, and all true Martyrs have died. Which only all new
upstarts and Sects do persecute and oppose, as Protestants at this day, under
the pretense of Reformation, and upon the same ground of wresting Scripture,
against the common consent of the Church and Fathers with them. For as all
divisions in Christianity have been from the Roman Catholic Church, so all
have turned both their arms and pens chiefly against her, but in vain, she
is builded on a rock, against which the gates of hell shall not prevail against
her. And so, who return from you to her, are neither run-awayes nor run-agads,
as you call them, but like the forlorn child, or lost sheep returned. Whose
example undoubtedly many more would follow, if they would consider, Faith
without unity amongst Protestants, a Church without a Head, a Body without
united Members, a Law without a Judge, a Temple without an Altar, Religion
without Sacrifice, Divine service without Religious ceremonies, Sacraments
which do not sanctify, Doctrine without infallibility, Belief without a
ground, Preachers without a call, Commandments impossible to be kept,
Exhortation to what is not in our power, Reprobation without works, Reward
without Merits, Sin punished where there is no Free Will, Scripture received or
rejected upon the catalogue of the Jews, GODS word patched up by men,
Reformation without authority, New-lights against old received ve^i^ins, the
Privat-spirit against the whole Church, single men's opinions against the
unanimous consent of the Fathers, in a word, wavering Pastors, unsettled
Government, unstable Faith. In the postscript there be a parallel patched
about our Reformations, which being composed of the gall of bitterness, without
verity or reason, deserves no answer, but that which Hezekiah commanded. Is.
36. 21.

Duply, You grant that ye are rich and politic, this is true, there is much
prophain Jesuited equivocation is mantained. But tell me if this be like the
Godly sincerity, and Gospel simplicity, which was the old Apostolic way,
and ground of their rejoicing. 2. Cor. 1. 12. If ye exceed us in sumptuous
buildings (which politickly you mistake for the policy mentioned by me) though
your pelf be greater then ours, we want not Hospitalls, Bridges, Temples,
according to our ability. But what is that to the doctrine which is according
to Godliness? The Turks exceed you as far that way as ye do us. And the
Temple of Diana at Ephesus exceeded you and them also.

Secondly, You deny that Popery fostereth prophanness, but it is too apparent,
and Duply. 2.
how can it be otherwise? If indulgencies bought and sold like an horse in a
market, tend not ex natura operis, in it self, to make men loose and profane,
let any sober man judge. For thus may they reason, shall I quite my lusts for a
little money, I know what will do the bussines, and put me in favor with God.
Why should I pluck out my right eye and cut off my right hand, when a little
time in pu^gatorie will do the turn, and a soulemasse, which I can have for
the Legacy of a sum of money will free me thence. But we with the scripture,
forbid men to deceive themselves, for they who do such things shall not it
herit the kingdom of heaven. So with us, nothing less will satisfy then
Gospel repentance, and the least ground of hope is not granted to those
hereafter, who turn not away hoar from their iniquities. How can this be
denied, seeing your latest Casuists, such as Escobar, Busenbaius and Diana the
Sicilian, have purposly devised latitudes for rendering profane men secure
about Duells, Sodomy, and other acts of uncleanness, which would make chaste
ears to ^ingle. And that men who in hainously are not bound to repent
imediatly, as it is fully proved by Reverend and Learned Mr. MENZIES in his
Papismus Lucifugus page 158. to 169. And when it is defended, that minus
probabile, may be chosen although it have no ground in scripture, contrar to
more probable grounds, and the stream of Doctors, does not this open a door to
make the may of Christianity broad? whereas the scripture calls it strait and
narrow. Thus ye gain proselites. And it is observable that man^ loose livers
in the land, who are adversarie^ to the power and purity of Religion, and hate
to be reformed, do incline to Popery. And to me it is not minus probabile, that
it is only upon this account. We are not against fasting, chastity,
mortification. Nor do we say, that men sin not willingly, or that good works
are impossible, yea we hold them necessar to salvation. Only we deny that fallen
man can be justified by the works of the law, otherwise we needed not a
Savior not a Gospell-remedy. It is your ordinar way to mistate questions and
then intend a skirmish which is easy work; this is a sinful and shallow
evasion.

Thirdly, You fall out with bauling expressions, which rational men cannot
value much Who art thou that judge another man's servant? remember thou shall
be judged. You talk much concerning the authority and unity which is amongst
you but some who were at Rome, and have come not long ago from you to us
again, tell, what sort of integrity, purity and chastity is amongst you. So
it is no wonder albeit many tongues and penn^ be employed to pull down that
whorish Babell, which ye call Zion.

Fourthly, You imply that none can be saved subjection to the Pope, as an
article of the Creed. If without this ^ man cannot be saved, albeit he believe,
and live like the Gospel, the Apostle Paul was no chosen Vessel, which is
contrar to Scripture; there was no Pope in his days, nor long after that. Your
Church has been visible by bell, book, and candle, fire, faggot, pomp,
policy. Your Pastors are more for the fleece then the flock. Ye are
superstitiou^ by addition, substractio^, multiplication, without any warrant.
Your Ceremonies are partly Paganish, partly Jewish, and for the most
Schismatic, so not religious nor venerable. Your miracles and wonders are
such, that it is good for you to have them wrought in America, and told in
Europe. Like are ye to him who comes with lies and wonder^, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9.
Your conscience can witness what Leger-demain is in these. And it is our way to
try miracles by the Scripture. I wish Infidels were converted to the Christian
faith, and not to a faction. By the Scripture, no^ by fopperies and military
Compulsators. Stephen, the Apostles, and some primitive Fathers were Martyrs,
but they died not in the Romish Faith as it is now mantained. And how can your
Church be called Catholic, which is a particular one, wherein be many
dissenters? It is not strange to us albeit ye indulge them who run away, and
Apostatize from us, but it is strange why they have done so, and what has
sascinated them to burst all bonds and swallow on a sudden the whole bulk of
Popery. It requires an Ostrich stomach to digest such iron. Where in did
Gospel Truths, Gospel Worship, or their mother and nurse weary them, testify
against her if they can?

Fifthly, You say, we have Faith without unity, then you grant us faith, and
our unity A Church without a head. We acknowledge no Pope head of our Church,
Christ is our head, and the visible Government of the Church is Aristocratical,
not Monarchical, the mystical Members of his Body are united in him; so we are
not a body without united members. Neither want we a Judge in controversal
matters. It is known that many points of Christianity cannot be judged by r^en,
because the Kingdom of Grace is within us, and consists not in meat or drink
but righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17. Who will say
that the hidden man in the heart, can be cognosced by any external living judge
on earth? The spiritual man ^udgeth all things, but he himself is judged of no
man, 1. Cor. 2. 15. The written word is the rule of this and other such cases.
For other matters we have Councils, and Church Rule^s appointed by the supreme
Judge, who are bound to discern according to Scripture, and all are appointed
to obey them in the Lord; so, we have not a Law without a Judge. The golden
Altur is our Altar, we have sacrifices of Prayer and Praises, and one living
sacrifice is better then many carcases, that is reasonable service, Romans 12. 1.
Then we have order and decency, and such positives as set forth the worship in
a Gospel way, without p^mpous observation therefore we lack not an Altar,
Sacrifices, and Ceremonies in such manner as Gospel-work under the New
Testament requires. Our Sacraments are instruments to seal and sanctify, our
rule is infallible, for it is Scripture; the grounds of our faith are such as
will not make us ashamed, for we have his revealed will and word for it.
Therefore it is a calumny to say, we have Sacraments which do not sanctify,
Doctrine without infallibility, and Belief without a ground. If our Preachers
had run unsent, the Lord had not sealed their Ministry with such success,
Ier. 23. 32. It may be spoken without vanity, to the praise of free grace, that
there be many real, sincere, serious, solid Christians in BRITAIN. Blessed be
the Lord, we go not without our Co^verts who can speak with any adversary in
the gate. And they will and do bless our Ministry upon the brink of eternity,
which has been the power of GOD to their Salvation. So our Ministry is not
without a call; we say not that any divine command is in it self impossible to
be kept, but that fallen man through his own fault is imperfect in obedience,
and without Christ can do nothing. John 15, 5. If you say more speak it out,
for it will be plain Pelagianism. Exhorrations and communications are means to
make us willing and obedient. It is not in our power to think a good thought as
of our selves, dare you deny this? Why then fall you fondly on us speaking with
the Scripture? Luke 17. 10. By grace we are saved freely, through faith and
eternal life is the gift of GOD, the reward is a free remuneration, and may be
without our merits; we grant free will in Augustins sense, and Jansenius
proves that this is, true liberty, by arguments which were never yet answered.
But we do disclaim Jesuitical indifferency, because it takes away divire
providence, the power of grace; and sette^h up anti-providences from the will
of man. Because we sin willingly, who can deny that we are punished justly?
Neither take we the Scripture Catalogue from the Jews: but make use of reason,
testimonies from old Writters, universal consent, to be a porch for e^trie to
the knowledge of the numerick controversy, and how can you say so of our
Catalogue, seeing we mantain no book to be Scripture, but such as ye allow. And
are ye not helped by the Jews herein as well as we? Only we lay that the
authority of the Scripture, depends not on humane testimony, as upon its
principal foundation, nor yet upon unwritten tradition: because divine faith
must be begotten by a divine testimony. And we believe the Scriptures
authority and truth side l^^ina, because the Lord has spoken it. In this true
faith must be finally resolved, else it is not divine. It is a calumny to say,
we patch the Word, seeing we make Scripture the only rule of our faith. There
be none in the Christian Church, who add such patches to the word of GOD as
ye. Our Reformation had authority both from Heaven and men on earth. The Laws
of the Land can restifie this, which are yet in vigor for it and against you.
And there may be new light in time of darkness, which was formerly dimmed or
put out, which light is the good old light, proceeding from the Father of
lights. If ye condemned this, the world should have still continued Arrian,
when it was over-clouded with it: and all Reformation even the Scripture one is
unlawful, see you not your absurdity here? Yea, it was prophesied, Dan. 12. 4.
that in the latter times knowledge should increase, and light also be extended;
but light without verity deserves not the name. Private men have the liberty of
discerning allowed to them, Acts 17. 11. 1. Io. 4. 1. Yea, such may have
publict spirits and be called to publict employments. But what you mean by this
I conceive not. For the Gospel worship which we mantain has the consent of all
the Scriptures, Churches, and primitive Fathers, as is formerly proved to the
full: We wish the hearts of all our Pastors may be established by grace, that
they may be subjected to him who has the government on his shoulder, and by
their faith working by love, glorify the chief Shepherd of the stock. We will
not recriminat ralling for railing, but it were easy to show, Ye have a Church
composed state-wayes, Your policy devou^eth all p^^ty; Your superstitious
vows against marra^ge all chastity; Your impeaching of the Scriptures, all
divine verity; Your blind allegiance to the Pope, all loyalty; Your
superstitious buskings, all purity; Your worship in an unknown tongue, all
fervencie; Your addition to the one Sacrament, and mutitation of the other, all
sincerity; Your universal infallible supremacy, all primitive antiquity.

It is not long since this Reply came to my hand, at the first view whereof, I
intended to take in and discuss arguments proposed by Dr. Vane, in that
Pamphlet entitled The lost sheep found. And these contained in another of the
same kind, called Presbytries trial. And to survey the other two entitled,
The Touchstone, and F^at lux. But finding the substance of all these in this
reflecter, and that he has little of his own, but makes malt for the most of
their barley; by answering this, all the four are macerially answered, which a
discerning Reader will find to be true. Now to close, I obtest all who read
this Vindication of the reformed Religion, to consider the cause seriously
without partiality, pride, passion, prejudice. Remember that, James 2. 1. Have
not the faith of our Lord Jesus with respect of persons, And the spirit of
truth lead you into all truth: The spirit of error and lies be rebuked and
resisted by the Lord: That a pure offering may be offered to Him, from the
rising of the Sun to the going down thereof.

FINIS.
A POSTSCRIPT, Containing an Advertisement and Advice to the Merchants of
DVNDIE, who travel abroad: that they be not ensnared with the fopperies of
Popery.
AFter the writting of this VINDICATION, I judged it expedient, to give this
word of Advertisement and Advice, to such as be called by their affairs, to
negotia^ in Countries where the Popish worship is only professed, and
mantained. Because many travelers return home from these places, as that
French fool came back from Rome, who passing through Ravenna, least he should
return empty to his friends, gathered in that Forest a multitude of bees, and
flees, which being closed into a cloth bag, he poured forth amongst his
relatives, to their prejudice and offense. And all they gained by his voyage
was made up of stings and buzings. So when traveller^ return from foreign
Nations, either Neutral, Nullisidians, or leavened with Popish saperstition,
what is their purchase? Nothing that can edify any. Will ever practical
Atheism, Gallioe^ temper, or tampering betwixt truth and error, advantage a
man at the long run? Not at all. These will sting like a serpent, more then
themselves, a wound and dishonor may they have by it, but nothing else.

The hazard which some Travelers tun cannot be unknown to you. For the man
who in this City has become Popish, and stingeth some, is thought by all that
know him, to have received the first dye thereof abroad, when he traveled
thither. And although the flecks of that pestiferous malady, broke nor forth
immediately after his return; till the Carduns Maledictus of prejudice against
some fellow Citizens made them appear, yet there probably he was first
infected. Now if he who was gifted above many Merchants, catched so sore a
back-ward fall abroad, that he has now turned his back on that Church, wherein
he was born and iostered. Have ye not reason with full purpose of heart to
cleave to the truth of GOD, which can only set you free. It is not for naught
that our Savior said to his Disciples, Luke 17. 32. Remember Lots wife.

It is certain that the Church of SCOTLAND is a great eyesore to Papists, and
they craftily lay snare^ to seduce her members at home and abroad. Their hooks
are feathered with variety of colors, and the Convent at Rome, de Propagan:
fide, furnishes many Emissaries, who spare no pains to make Proselyts. If any
PROTESTANT fall sick abroad where the inquisition is, then they threaten to
deprive him of burial, and putting on the Boars skine, would Hector and cudgel
him by mena^ing ways, from the pure reformed Religion. At home they are
clothed in Sheeps clothing, and with fair words deceive the simple, or such
who are willing to be deceived. Will it not then be expedient to take a long
and weigh these six Counsels for your conduct, that ye make not Ship-wrak of
Faith and a good Conscience.

Counsel first, Look on all places where ye cannot enjoy public ordinances
safely, as cages full of snares. Therefore act fervent acts of faith on Jesus
Christ, for through-bearing; and pray in faith, that ye be not deserted nor
lead into temptation. Faith is the victory whereby ye must overcome. 1. John 5.
4. By it ye may obtain the victory, and be more then conquerours. i. e. Ye shall
overcome before ye fight, whereas other Conquerours fight first, then overcome.
It is told in the life of Augustine, that when he was m^sing how to resist some
temptations, he heard a voice saying, In te stas and non stas, whereupon he
conceived that this was the meaning of it, thou cannot escape by ought which
thou can do, but must stand it our by borrowed strength from Jesus Christ.
Nothing will satisfy faith, nor uphold a man under trials, but divine
presence, when the Lord said to Israel, Ex. 33, that he would send an Angel to
attend them amongst their adversaries, they mourned, verse 4. because he said
that he would not go himself with them. Nothing ye resolve will preserve and
keep your garments clean in this case, but the strengthening presence of Jesus
Christ, through which ye can do all things, Phil. 4. 13. and without which ye
are able to do nothing. It concerns you therefore under no less hazard then
your standing or falling, not to grieve this holy Spirit, with spiritual or
carnal wickedness, lest ye deprive your self of his presence, and become naked
to your shame, in a strange land before superstitious men. Walk circumspectly,
and bewarre of spiritual pride, which is ordinarily punished, and sometimes
cured by a spiritual fall. Fear is faiths watch, and albeit the wicked fear
where no fear is, yet foresight of Soul danger joined with the fear of our own
wickedness, is a part of that wisdom recommended, Matthew. 10, 16. And blessed is
he who fears thus always, Pro. 28. 14. It is well observed by Augustine, that
albeit the Jews had many penal statutes, yet none for exile, the reason which
he gives, is, Ne exul hoc pacto Idololatriae per^cule exponeretur. For fear
lest abroad they should be exposed to the hazard of Idolatry. Then when ye are
absent from pure Ordinances, commercing with adversaries, in all that work,
should ye not walk like men on ice, for fear of a fall? The worst is to be
suspected in these places, Genesis 20. 11.

Counsel second, Take heed to your Conversation during your abode in Mesech. A
loose profane life staineth Profession, and will bring up an evil report on
Religion, it strengthens adversaries and causes them blaspheme that holy Name
by which ye are called, Ezekiel. 36. 20. The people are sore challenged for this,
that in a strange land they profaned the holy Name of the Lord, when they said
to them, these are the people of the Lord, and are gone forth out of his land.
But if ye be holy in all manner of conversation, and righteous in your
dealings, thereby the Reformed Religion is lustred, and adversaries if they be
not converted, will be convinced, that an evil tree could not bring forth so
good fruit: and whereas they speak against you as evil doers, they may be
ashamed who falsely accuse your good conversation in Christ. 1. Pet. 3. 16. Yea,
a close Christian carriage is in it self a guard against many errors of
Popery, and will make adversaries the more loath to trouble you. So has
Providence ordered it, that the Image of GOD, which after GOD is created in
righteousness and holiness, Ephesians. 4. 24. becomes awful to many men. And as the
Lord makes the beasts of the Earth to stand in awe of man, made according to
his Image, so ^nregenerat men are affrighted to have to do with such, Herod
feared John, Mark. 6. 20. knowing that he was a just man, and an holy. The
Wife of Pilat sent him word, to have nothing to do with that just man, Matthew.
27. 19. Reyner the Inquisitor gives this testimony concerning the Valdenses,
and Albigenses, who in substantials professed the same Religion with us; that
it was said, they were of old standing, lived justly before men, and believed
all things well, concerning GOD, therefore were the more to be feared. And
Plinius the second, giving an account to Trajan, how holy and harmless the
Christians were, was commanded not to follow after them any more. Therefore, as
ye would not give advantage to adversaries against you, and your Profession,
walk closely with GOD. And amongst strangers estrange him not from you. Qui
sciens recte non facit, amittit scire quod rectum est, says, August. de Not.
and Gratia. cap. 67.

Counsel third, Eschew all occasions which are ^pt to lead you into temptation,
and go not to these places or societies which may prove a snare to you. When
Peter went to the High-Priest^ hall, a small temptation, the accusation of a
Damsel did overcome him. And Naaman, 2. King. 5. craveth pardon for going to
the house of Rimmon, albeit he was then serving his Master. For the words may
be taken of the time past, and so they are translated Psalm. 51. in the tittle,
and Psalm 54. 1. Evah looked on the apple, and then did c^t. The Apostle Jude
gives a sure rule for your direction in such cases; Jude 23. Augustine in his
Confessions, Confess. lib. 6. cap. 7. 8. and 9. tells of his intimat friend,
that he once intended to see the Gladiatores, and against his consent would go
to the Theater, and behold that mad murdering exercise, our promised to him,
to guard against the temptations of the place, yet notwithstanding of this
resolution he was catched into the snare, and returned with an evil conscience.
When the Lord gives ^orth his Command^ negative, all appearances, occasions or
preparatory dispositions to evil are forbidden. What ever learned men may look
on at a distance, that they may the more easily refute that way of worship; yet
every one is not fit to view the camp of an adversary. In Comiti^s Augustanis,
anno 1530. history tells us, that the Protestant Princes in Germany would not
convoy Charles the 5. to the Mass, and processions, In festo Corporis Christ^
because they perceived a designed snare in it, and an offense. A snare set in
the sight of a bird will be avoided. Much more have ye reason to go by the
ditch, whom the Lord has made wiser then the ^easts of the Earth or birds of
the Air; that whore ^itteth on many waters, if ye stand on the brink and ^ook
long to these, your head may take a round, and ye fall into the deep. Wherefore
is it that there be such pompous schenick actings, charming, music, (...)
Casuists amongst Romanists, if not for ^^trapping those who go by. An old noble
man in this land, who lived and died a good Protestant, told me that when he
was young he traveled to Rome, and out of curiosity desired he might be
admitted to see the Popish ceremonies, monuments and rites, which the Conclave
at first refused, but the next day Bellarmin being present, who was absent in
the former diet, it was granted by his mediation. He in this was more wirry
then the rest, and did take the nearest way for ensnaring the Nobleman, albeit
it pleased the Lord to preserve him. Abstain then from all appearance of evil,
and knit not a snare to your self with your own hands. The fume of that cup of
fornication has made some drunk, make as quick dispatch as ye may home-ward,
some temptations are best overcome by resisting, and standing it out, Ephesians. 6.
14. 1. Pet. 5. 9. others are foiled better by flying, nor meddling, as Idolatry,
Adultery, Fornication, 1. Cor. 6. 18. 1. Cor. 10. 14. Flee fornication, flee
from idolatry, says the Apostle. Therefore, carry in this as men in infected
places, come away quickly, long, cit^, tarde, and linge^ nor there, lest ye be
taken up in the snare.

Counsel fourth, Be bussie in secret when the occasion of public worship is
denied to you. They who have nor the opportunity of a public market, says
one, should be the more diligent to have nurseries or store at home. In cases
of this kind, closing of the door, and secret work is necessar; then ye are
called to spend the Lord's Day in spiritual meditation, prayer, praises. So was
that divine man of GOD employed in the Isle Pathmos, and received rich alowance
from on high, Rev. 1. 10. When David was driven from the Temple, he had Temple
work alone, in the wilderness of Maon the Lord was no wilderness to him. When
Jacob was retired, ^e wrestled and prevailed; he found the Lord at Bethel, and
there he spoke with us. H^s. 12. 4. That is, the fruit of that work, and the
exampla^y carriage of this tender Believer belongs to the whole Israel of
GOD: much of the work of a Christian is transacted in secret, and we under the
Gospel have this privilege, which was not under the Law, that the Christian
sacrifice, reasonable service may be offered every where lo. 4. 23. 1. Tim. 2.
8. it is men when a Christian has fewest diversions, may enjoy much of GOD and
himself, use greatest freedom, have most access, and word his particular cases
best. One says, that Jesus Christ is sweet company, but frequently sweetest to
the sense alone. And what is more edifying for a particular Believer, amongst
Augustines works nor his Soliloquies? T^erefore in this exigence, me^itat much
on the Lords Word, his Works, your own weak^ess, w^nts, receipts, experiments,
the excellency of Jesus Christ, the bitterness of sin, of death, judgment,
eternity: and how precious your souls are beyond the gold of Ophir. Consider
ser^ously that no merchandise can avail you, if ye purchase not the pearl of
price; who ^^oweth the worth of that jewel? None but he to whom the arm of the
Lord is revealed. In your secret retirements the Lord may acquaint your hearts
with himself, and give you songs in the night. Baldwin in his cases propounds
some directions, page 206. how men shall be exercised when they are necessitated
to desert the public worship. First, If the administration of the Word and
Sacraments, be not embezeld nor corrupted contrar to the written word, then
none conscionably betake themselves to private exercise, in the time of public
worship, because it is contrar to that Heb. 10. 25. forsake not the assembling
of your selves as the manner of some is. The public has more of the promise,
Matthew. 18. 20. This by the context must be understood of such public meetings
as have power of binding and loosing. Micah fell into a sin not only of Schism,
but of Idolatry, when in that place where the Lord had called a Ministry, he
without a call set up private worship in his house to the prejudice of the
public, Judge. 17. This is his first position which he lays down as a
foundation. Secondly, If the worship be corrupted as in Popery, then Christians
should call an orthodoxe Minister, who is called of GOD to the work and has
the promise, Romans 10. 14. and go about their worship at home, for this he
cites Luther, Tom. 6. fol. 275. Thirdly, If no Minister can be had in the
place, where the Lord casts the lot of a Christian for the time, then he
should be diligent in reading and searching the Scriptures. If his ^ands b^come
weak here, he should take help from conference, ei^h^r with the dead who yet
speak by their books, or with the living. If he be a Master of a family, then
he may pray, read the word of GOD which is an ordinance, Deuteronomy. 11. 19. and
instruct his family, according to his ability. Now from these posi^ions, this
may be proportionably gathe^ed that when Merchants traveling in Popish
Countries stay there on the Sabbath, they should be well employed on that day,
by doing the work of the Lord diligently with both their hands. This is the way
to be free of the power of temptation throughout the week, and to make you
prosper the better in your affairs. Our success in temporalls has ordinarily
a connection with our through bearing in spirituals, as appears from the case
of Abraham's servant, Genesis 24. 14. 15.

C^ursel^ifth, When ye are deprived thus of the public worship, regrate your
misspent Sabbaths, mis-heard sermons, and that ye made so frequently that
feast day of the Lord a fast day, and starved your self without necessity; it
is the Winter-season, and a providenced retirement to you, which in deno^nced
as a calamity, Matthew. 24. 24. Beside the sins and snares of your calling
which are not few, the evil use of ordinances at home, may bring to your mind
this much; that it is just with the Lord morally to shut you up that ye cannot
come forth. Many Prophers, and righteous men desired to see the days of the
Son of man, which ye did see and depretiated. As in temporals, fullness of bread
procures famine: so in spirituals, when men who have the occasion will not
serve the Lord, Deuteronomy. 28. 47. Spiritual famine is threatened to such, Amos 8.
Therefore song much for a communion in public Ordinances with your mother
Church. And when ye remember her towers, bulwarks, and how a high throne in the
Sanctuary is for the Lord there, then let your soul be poured forth in you,
Psalm 42. 4, and with these who did hang up their harps, Psalm 137. by the
rivers of Babylon, lay bonds on your selves, never to forget your Jerusalem,
the valley of vision, and if the Lord return you home in peace, spit not in her
face, who is the joy of the whole earth, but glorify the Lord in the house of
his glory upon his own day, according to the prophecy Isai. 60. 7. (which now
to us is a precept) in the beauty of ordinances, as in former days, where the
man amongst the myrtle trees, clothed with a garment down to the foot, girt
about with a golden girdle, whose voice is as the sound of many waters, shall be
seen walking amongst the golden candle-sticks. That is festus dies Domini,
says, Ambrose lib. 2. de Ca^n and Abel, cap. 2. ubi perfecta virtutum gratia
est, ubi victor animus liber est a seculo. Then ye dedicat a day to the Lord,
when ye worship him in spirit and truth thus. Fill your heart in secret with
fixed purposes to enter on this work at your home-coming, seeing ye may better
know the worth of Ordinances by the want of them.

Counsel sixth, Pray much in secret for a discovery to Papists of their sinful
worship, the sight whereof is sufficient to confirm discerning men, in the
truth professed by us. It is lamentable that so many knowing men, should upon a
secular interest for upholding the pompous Papacy, detain the truth in
unrighteousness. When Ezekiel chap. 8. did see the image of jealousy he
mourned, and received with the rest of the mourners for the abomination of the
place, a mark of preservation chap. 9. so should ye do for these abominations.
Peccatum tuum est quod tibi non disp^^cet said Augustine. How shall your
displacency, be better attested, unless ye were called to a public confession?
Overcome their evil with good, and pray for them who are ready to presecute
you, that the Lord would turn them from darkness to light, and the power of
error to truth: As also, that he would enlarge the Gospel by the power of his
own Arm; that yet Rivers may run in that Dese^t, and the Myrtle may grow where
the Bramble is. The zeal of the Lord of Hosts can perform this. The times are
like the latter days being so pe^^illous, See Brightman in Apoc. Mr. Medes
Synchronismus, and concerning the Apostacy of the latter time. Master Durrham
on the Revelation, then it is that knowledge shall increase and Babylon fall,
if many mistake not his mind who governs all.

Roma diu titubans, variis erroribus acta, Corruet, and mundi desinet esse
caput.

Rome to^tering long, possessed with errors strong, Shall tumble down, and prime
no ^ore ere long.


FINIS.

