The Will, and Legacies, OF Cardinal Richelieu, The Grand Pollititian of
FRANCE; Together with certain Jnstructions which he left the French King.

Also some remarkable passages that has happened in France, since the death
of the said CARDINAL.

Translated out of the French Copy, by G. Dugres



January 5. printed by T. Fawcet. 1643.

The most Eminent JOHN ARMAN DU PLESSIS, Cardinal of RICHELIEV* the grand
Politician of France his WILL.
He has left to Madam the Duchess of Aiguillon, formerly called Madam
Cambalet, and his Niece. A Rent to be taken in the City of Rochell of Sixty
thousand pounds. His brave House of Ruelles, five leagues from Paris, and
20000. l. Another House, and lands of Two hundred and twenty thousand pounds
per annum. A million of Gold, besides the Silver ready coined, all the
movables, Jewels, Pictures, Statues, and silver Plate.
To the Son of Monsieur Du Pont de Courle, his Nephew. THe Dukedom of
Richelieu, and some other Lands, to the sum of 200000. l. per annum. The
Governourship of Brouages, and of the Islands of Poictou. The Admiralship worth
200. pounds per annum.
To the two Brothers of Du Pont de Courle. TWo hundred pounds per annum, in
Churchlivings. To the Marquis of Breze his Brother in law. THe Dukedom of
Fronsac, the Dukedom of Beaufort en Valler, between Saumur and la Flesche,
the Marquisat of Granduille, a House in Anjou of Five thousand pounds per
annum, which he shall enjoy with all the lands aforenamed, mounting to One
thousand pounds per annum. To the King. FIve thousand Crowne^ in Silver, his
Palace called Le Palais du Cardinal, and Lands belonging to it, to finish it.
The great Diamond Ring of the value of One thousand Crowns, his Chapel of
Diamonds praised to above One hundred thousand Crowns. Eight suites of Arras
imbroidered in Gold. Eight snites of movables complete Furnitures.
To the Daulphin. HIs Library praised to fifty thousand Crowns, and Lands
belonging to it to finish the brave College of Sorbonne. To the Cardinal
Mazarin his Successor. TWelve thousand Crowns in Church Livings per annum. To
Monsieur de Nogers a grand Statesman and his Executor. A Rubie of Eight huddred
Crowns. It seems that the Cardinal knew his Executor could help himself
well enough, being he left him so little. To Monsieur de Chavigny. ONe Diamond
of 100. Crowns, and some other Legacies to his men, and followers, which being
not comparable to the rest, are not here specified. To the Cardinal of Lions
his Brother, to Monsieur De la Mesleraie his Nephew, and the greatest Warrier
France has now, to the Grand-Prier of Champaigne, and to the Duchess of
Anguien his Niece, and Wise to the Prince of Conde his Son, nothing at all.
What Policy did persuade him to deal so with these his Kinsfolks, I know not:
Had he left nothing to never a Kinsman or Kinswoman, I should think, that
perhaps he would have the world know that he did not labor for his own
Kindred.


His Instructions to the King.
I. THat he should war three years longer with Spain, and then if he
pleased he might make Peace to his best advantage and glory.

II. That he keep always the Princes, and Nobles down, and let them come
near his Person as little as he can.

III. To take heed of the Prince of Conde, because he is a busy Spirit, and of
the Duke of Anguien his Son, because he is ambitious, and of a haughty spirit.

IIII. To mistrust always the Queen* because she is a Spanish-woman, and also
Mounsieur his Brother, because he is much inclined to Spain, as it has
appeared by his former doings and demeanors.

V. To make use of his old Ministers of State, because they are already full,
and if so be that he should take new ones, and Starvelings, they will devour,
and consume the People.

IV. That he should always keep a fair correspodency with the Protestants,
by reason that his most Potent and chief Enemy being the King of Spain, the
surest Subjects he can employ against him are the Protestants, for the Papist
Commanders and Governors of places may be corrupted by the Spanish-Gold, but
the Protestants will never be seduced by him, neither will they admit of him,
because of his Religion, and Jnquisition.

The King is very glad to see about him a great multitude of People, who
deliver and utter their minds freely to him.

The greatest Miracle the Cardinal did by his death was, that he made many
thousands of People speak, which were dumb before.

His Majesty does protest highly, that he will never entertain any favorite,
that has any Guards.

His Majesty asked Council of Mounsieur De Angoulesme what he was to do, who
Councelled him three things. 1. To choose a good and honest Council. 2. That he
should always have his Council nigh him* 3. Not to rely upon any body for
the Government of his Kingdom, but that he should take notice himself of
things.


The Cardinal Mazarin is not like to subsist long by reason that being a
Stranger, and one inclined to the Pope, he will be always suspected and hated.

Upon Monday last the Couucell was assembled at St. Germain, where the King was
present, and inquired into the businesses.

Upon Saturday last he sent for the Ambassadors to come to him the next day,
unto which he gave audience, and told them he would entertain as good
correspondencie as before, and rather better.

The Declaretion formerly made against Mounsieur the Kings Brother, about the
Treaty with the King of Spain, was lately proved, and enregistred; Mounsieur
Munier and Silleren, Counselors of the great Chamber, spoke very much in
Mounsieurs behalf alleging, that it was ill to condemn a person of his
quallity before he was heard, since that favor is not denied to men of far
less condition, and most guilty; That it is to draw the hatred of a Son of
France, and to breed a hartburning between two great Brothers, and besides
that this should redound upon the Kings renown, and that it was fit to gather
all the enquests, and informations together before his sentence, but
notwithstanding all these reasons. Le Roy la ainsi Voulu.

Yet Mounsieur De Senetene was sent to him to Bloys, with a moderation, and
hopes of suppression of that Declaration, in case that he behaveth himself
better. This was a great piece of policy, to show that France was still
governed by the Cardinals Genius, even after his death.

The Marshall of Breeze is in great favor with the King, he was lately with
Mounsieur Bassompierre, and labors much for his liberty, the King answered
him, he must stay a while.

There is great disscention between the Marshall of Breeze, and my Lady, by
reason of the Will, the Prince of Conde, and the Duke of Anguien his Son, take
part with the Marshall of Breeze, and good reason too, because the Cardinal
left them nothing, they endeavor to have the Will annulled, if it holds, the
Duchess of Aiguillon shall enjoy 800. M. per annum, besides the Gold, Silver,
Plate, and movables she has already. The Earl of Dublin was lately shot with
a Pistol by Mr. De Bonnivet.

It is thought that Trafflicke and Commerce, will be forbidden with Romans, by
reason of the Audience denied by the Pope, unto the Ambassador of Portugal,
and discontent offered to the French Ambassador, which both left Rome in a
great rage and fury.

FINIS.

