Jeremiah's CONTEMPLATIONS On Jeremiah's LAMENTATIONS: OR, ENGLANDS Miseries
matched with SIONS Elegies.

Being Described and unfolded in five ensuing Scenes;

By JEREMIAH RICH, Student.

JOB 22. v. 21. Acquaint thy self with God, and be at peace, thereby good
shall come unto thee.

LONDON: Printed for JOHN STEVENSON, and are to be sold at his shop, at the
Sun below Ludgate Hill. 1648.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, ELIANOR RICH, Countess of Sussex and Warwick,
Vicountesse Baroness Fitzwalter, Lady Egremond, Burmel, Mortimer, and Leez,
Beloved Consort to the Right Honorable, Robert, Earl of Warwick, Baron of
Leez, and Lord High Admiral of England: JEREMIAH RICH wishes health here, and
happiness hereafter.
HAving (most Honored Lady) perused the Lamentations of Jeremiah, I found them
suitable to the Complaints of England; and when I called to mind, that these
two Ladies, Israel and England, were the Darlings of God, the Daughters of
Heaven, the Wonder of the Earth, and yet the Envy of the World; and then
beheld them in the bitterness of Sorrow, and in their silent sadness,
despised, disgraced, rejected, depopulated, distracted, and abused; I could not
choose but sometimes bathe my Subject with my Tears, and following the
president of the sad Prophet, wish, that mine eyes were Rivers of Waters, that
I might weep day and night for the slain of the Daughter of my people:
Indeed, Israel was elder in Joy, and England younger in Sorrow; the Wars of
Israel was farther from our apprehension, the Woes of England nearer us in
relation: And who that sees her sequestered Husband, her disobedient Children,
her frowning Brethren, her bowing Battlements, her weakened Bulwarks, her
numerous Enemies, and divided Armies, but will say, The glory of England is
departed? But it is not so: for through the Gate of Mercy we may epsy a
Door of Hope; I rather take these Divisions for a Purge, that will purify; or
a Qualme, that will qualify; or an Antidote, to expel Poison; and the dark
Cloud of Englands War, to be a short Thunderclap, to clear the corrupted
Air,

Madame, these Contemplations are sad, yet Divine; as Divine, fit for all
times; and as sad, only fit for these.

When I first composed them in Measure, I intended them for my private Solace;
but through the importunity of some (whom Nature has bound me to obey) I have
committed them now to public Censure, which I must expect to be hard enough;
yet far more charitable, if they fly through the world under the shadow of
your Honors wings.

These (Honorable Lady) are the First Fruits of my Poetry (either Moral or
Divine) which I humbly offer to your Honor: To commend them, I cannot; and
discommend them, I will not: Few will deny the goodness of the Subject,
though many may carpe at the Object; and these will only be the Scholars of
Zoylus, who find fault with all things, yet can mend nothing.

Think it not presumption (my Honored Lady) that I have intruded so far
upon your Goodness, in presenting so unworthie an Offering; and let the Error
consume in his Zeal, who is no less, nor can beg to be any more, then your
Honors servant,

JEREMIAH RICH.

TO THE READER.
THe orient luster of Virtue shines through the interposing Cloud of Envy,
and Love lasheth Malice sometimes with Rods of Roses. This little Manuel (dear
Reader) may keep thee from future falls, and guard thee from present fears.
It may be a Glass for thine eye, a Lantern for thy foot, a Weapon for thine
hand, a Curb for thy tongue, and a President for thy Pen. If by any thing here
thou gainest profit, lay its memorial foundation in a building of practice:
And if thine eye behold an Error, rebuke me silently, and interre it in the
sepulcher of Oblivion. I say no more, but wish thee all perfection in perusing,
understanding in the reading, and charity in the judging of these five
Scenes, which at least was intended well by him who is at thy service,

JEREMIAH RICH

To his Friend JEREMIAH RICH, Upon his Contemplations.
RICH, to thy praise, thou art enricht with wit
Beyond thy years; thy friends are proud of it.
I Have read thy Contemplations, and admire
That Youth unto such Gravitie should aspire.
The holy Prophet, with inspired skill,
Pensil'd the Funeral Song of Israel,
And thy laborious Pen has here descri'd
The fears of England for her former Pride;
Thou have not lasht the Errors of this Age
With fained Dreams on the vainglorious Stage,
But in a holy, mild, and gentle style
Lamentest the Transgressions of this I Will.
Go on to write, and we will not cease to praise,
And to the highest pitch thy Merits ra^se:
Such honor as the ancient Romans gave
To their admired Poets, thou shall have;
We will, in sign of thy deserved renown,
Impale thy Temples with a Laurel Crown.
ROBERT SLATER.

The Authors Entertainment.
'TWere folly to disgrace, or else commend
This Book; Oh Reader, if thou art my friend,
It is enough: and wherefore then should I
Set a dull Candle to thy darkened eye,
Until the day appear, but that thy sight
Would be amazed with that glorious light
That shines in midst of darkness, lest it rise
Too soon, and quickly dim thy darkened eyes?
Now, if this Candle falter in its glory,
Blame me, not that Colestiall Story
That was my Subject; for too bright a day
May cause a Travailer to lose his way:
But if to guide your feet this Candle shine,
Mine is the labor, but the gain is thine.
Go on then, Reader, read and understand,
And may thy heart be bett'red by my hand
To all Eternity, and let it be
The Epilogue of Englands Tragedy:
And so adue; yet thus much I make known,
Read it to purpose, or let it alone.
Farewell.
printer's or publisher's device John Aston
Jeremiah's CONTEMPLATIONS UPON Jeremiah's LAMENTATIONS.
CHAP. I.
Verse 1.
HOw sad does Sion sit? how does she hide
Her face in mourning? Like a forlorn Bride
Whose husband is departed, when deaths charms
Does separate Lovers from each others arms;
How does she weep? the famous City now
Is weak and desolate, her Bulworkes bow
Their proud imperious necks to the vain glory
Of the proud Enemy, and is tributory.
(2)
Her lovely cheeks, and her enchanting eye,
Where sat enthroned a Princely Majesty,
Are bathed in silent streams of flowing fears,
As if she would make them lovely with her tears:
Among her amorous Lovers there are none
Can give her comfort, but increase her moan;
Nay all her Lovers they forsake her too,
And do as all dissemblers use to do.
(3)
Victorious Judah she does prisoner lie,
Fettered in chains, in strong captivity;
Against the prisoners cry she stopped her cares;
And now the rampant Lion's full of fears:
Now glorious Judah, she that bore the bell
From the twelve Tribes of warlike Israel,
Now dwells among the heathen: and the head
Of Kingly Sion is dishonored.
(4)
Those fragrant walks, and those alluring ways,
Do seem to mourn, because no mirth, nor praise,
No Feast, nor Sacrifice is in her gate.
Ah! lovely Land, how art thou desolate!
The holy Priest with tear bedewed eyes
Laments and sighs: the maidens Lover dies,
And now poor Sion must her boddy dress,
In dark, in dismal, mournful heavines.
(5)
Her thundering Foes are lofty, they are high
That are the Actors of her Tragedy;
Her Pride and Insolence first brought this Rod,
Nor is it more then just that Isreal's God
Should sometimes lash his own: since their own Crimes
Spurred on their ruin to these dismal Times.
The Fathers sins have wrought the Childrens woe:
The Childrens grief the Fathers overthrow.
(6)
That lovely beauty which did often shine
More glorious than the day with grace divine:
Those amorous glances once which had the art
To blind the Lovers eye and steal his heart,
Are now deformed; and the ashy hand
Of death has spoiled the glory of the Land.
The Royal Princes which possessed the Throne
Of Kingly Majesty are fled and gone.
(7)
Now sad Jerusalem sits and calls to mind
All her Rebellion: Ah she was unkind
To sin against her Lord, who checked Kings
For Sions sake, and gave her pleasant things;
Had she but clave to him, as he was just,
She had not laid her honor in the dust;
Nor been a scorn for fools which sometimes say,
What gained Israel by the Sabbath day?
(8)
And wonder not Jerusalem is so mocked
Of all that hate her; for her sins have rockt
Her senses to a slumber, none do show
The sad approaching of her overthrow;
The lovely City now they much despise,
Who sometimes honored her, their lofty eyes
Look scornful one her in her misery; thus
That face is loathed that was so amorous.
(9)
Her shame lies hid to none both foe and friend,
Yet she remembered not her latter end,
Therefore her fall was wondrous sudden; oh
Why went poor Sion slumbring to her woe?
And who shall comfort poor Jerusalem now?
O glorious God look on my miseries, thou
Art alsufficient, thou can blow aside
The hopes of Mortals in their height of pride.
(10)
And now the furious Foe has stretched his hand
On her rich Ornaments, and pleasant Land:
And 'cause he thought this not enough to do,
Thy Sanctuary is polluted too:
Although O Lord thou once did give command
That no false stranger in a foreign Land
Should dare to come with his unhallowed eyes
Where thine Anointed offer Sacrifice.
(11)
Ah me, who shall relieve me with some bread?
Our hearts are faint with hunger, fear and dread
Has filled my tottering soul, where shall I fly
That Famine find me not and so I dye?
My Garments, Jewels, Bracelets, and my Rings,
Houses, and Vineyards, all my pleasant things
I give for bread unto the angry foe;
Thou see O Lord our souls are wondrous low.
(12)
Look back ye travelers, O cast your eye
Ye wandering strangers that are passing by;
If you have any pity come and see
If any Nation were so low as me;
What sorrow is like mine? what sufferings can
Compare with Sions, that befalls man?
While the displeasure of my angry God
Sweeps off my glory with his lashing Rod?
(13)
The burning fury of the high Jehove
Makes faint my heart, his jealousy above
Prevails against me, and I sit in doubt
How to get in his favor, or how out
Of his displeasure; ah there is a net
Spread for my feet: a scorching furnace her
To burn me from my dross, that I may be
Refined from sin, and Satan's Empery.
(14)
All my transgressious as a heavy yoke
Are fastened by his arm, and every stroke
Is laid upon my neck: my heart is weak
Since my accused soul those Laws did breako
Which I was bound to keep; the Almighty hand
Of Isreal's God has wasted Isreal's Land;
My glory is departed, and mine eyes
Behold no means for ever to arise.
(15)
Those mighty Warriers which did shelter round
The Gates of Sion, whose brave deeds redound
To Isreal's glory, and their Enemies wonder,
Lie bleeding on the ground, and trodden under;
The Lord has called a counsel to consound
All Judah's glory on the Crimson ground;
The bleeding bodies of the young men join,
He trod them under as they tread the Vine.
(16)
For these things do I weep, mine eye, mine eye,
Does wash my Cheeckes; oh, what felicity
Can sad Jerusalem have in these diasters! nay,
Those that should comfort me arefar away;
My Land is desolate, all my friends are lain
In strong Captivity, and my Children slain:
My God has left me to the Enemies power,
Ah, who will caseme in this troubled hour?
(17)
Now lovely Sion sits with silent moanes;
She would implore some help by her deep groans,
Alas, but there is none; the furious Foe
Desires nothing but her overthrow.
The Lord has laid a mighty siege about
The Tents of Jacob: and she sits in doubt
Of her deliverance, while her Foes deride
And loath her Actions as a wanton Bride.
(18)
And yet our God is just and righteous too,
Though sad Jerusalem knows not what to do;
The Royal City dow does mourn because
She often rebelled against his righteous Laws.
Ye neighboring Nations that Spectatours be,
That sometimes look upon my Tragedy,
Behold my Virgins and my young men go
To long Captivity and ling ring woe.
(19)
My dearest lovers which should have relieved me,
As sometimes Lovers do, they quite deceived me;
The Priest, and Elders both for hunger fail,
Their looks are wan, their countenance is pale,
Their bodies weak, and giddy is their head,
Their strength does fail their wills for lack of bread;
They seek for food and find their labor vain,
Famine, and Death does in the Kingdom reign.
(20)
Yet O my Lord, how do my bowels yearne
For mourning Israel, the Foes are stearne,
My bowels swell, my heart is turned too
With woe and grief, what shall poor Sion do?
How can Jerusalems sorrows but possess*
My troubled soul with woe and heaviness?
At home the Famine reigns, the people dye,
Abroad the Sword does complete misery.
(21)
Jerusalem knows I daily fit and weep;
Ah, had security nere lulled asleep
This glorious Nation, earths admired prize,
We should not then have drencht our watery eyes
In tears for Isreal's woe, nor been so sad:
But now our Enemies skoffe, our Foes are glad;
Our Nation once was high and glorious,
But now are poor; Lord make our Enemies thus.
(22)
Oh Lord let all their sins come up to thee,
And do to them as thou have done to me;
Puff all their glory out, and let them dye
Like to false joy in midst of misery;
And let us be delivered by thy Will
Though we have sinned and often done wondrous ill;
O hear my sighs, do not forget my moanes,
My ^eart is faint with often repeated groans.
CONTEMPLATION.
ANd is it so? has Isreal's God forsaken
The Tents of Jacob? Is their City taken,
And all their young men slain? does the most high
From his own Israel turn back his eye?
Does he withdraw himself, and let the Foe
To glory in poor Isreal's overthrow?
Is Judah spoiled, and do the Enemies swell,
While their black Actions often prosper well?
Does sweet-fac'd Sion mourn? woe and alas,
It Is so indeed, how came these things to pass?
Oh how mine eyes could send a flood of tears
To wash this Paper, while my deafened ears
Are roused with this allarum, which is hurld
By heavens appointment through the circled world.
But shall we think God is unjust in this,
To scourge his Children if they do amiss?
If the wide world had not some sufferings, sure
The lives of Nations would be too secure;
Yet heaven's not easily moved to send his Rod,
'Twas Isreal's sins offended Isreal's God.
But if the best of Saints so ill do fare,
Where shall the crew of damned Sinners share
But in eternal darkness? whose black Tomb
Shall scare the first, but give the last their doom.
Go on then Sinners, plunder, kill, and spoil,
Those harmless Lambs, it is but for a while;
The time is wondrons short, this Inch of time
Thou may do much: thy swelling heart may clime
Unto the top of envy, and it may
Hazard eternity in a short lived day;
Perhaps a year may finish up thy Course,
And then thou Son of Beliall death will force
Thy soul to long eternity, and thou must thither;
How will thy trembling knees then knock together
When thou shall know Death summons thee to dye,
With thoughts of torment in Eternity?
And last of all; Is mourning Isreal's Land
So soon subdued by heavens immediate hand?
Then let not England, though the best of three
Distempered Lands, dream of security.
The Nations who possessed the aforesaid place,
Had greater measure of Celestial grace,
And yet they were destroyed; can there be peace
In Englands Borders unless sin does cease?
Turn to thy God O England, lest his hand
Does overturne the glory of the Land.
The black mouthed Swearer, he does rend in sunder
His Makers Name with Oaths like claps of thunder;
The proud man's scornful eye does hate to see
His beggered Neighbor fallen in misery;
The lives of Harlots in their capring Schools
Are kept by young men, Natures blinded Fools;
The covetous muckworme he himself has sold
To live in service to the God of Gold;
A little after comes his Son, and he
Throws all away in prodigality;
Wonder of wonders, why's not Englands glory
As dim as Sion's, made a bloody Story
For other Lands to read her downfall, why
Does sin survive and yet not England dye?
Why is not London that was sometimes famous
To the wide Universe now held as heinous
As was poor Sion? ah her sins abound!
Why dyed she not when she received a wound
In the last fatal War? why has this place
So much of blessing and so little grace?
Why does not fire range in every street?
Methinkes 'twere just that Sword and Famine meet,
While War did tumble all our Bulworkes down,
And strangers get the glory of the Crown.
Indeed 'twere just it should so, while that we
Are lulled asleep in sad security.
The Prophet here laments, his weeping eyes
Are washed with tears, because the miseries
Of Sion was approaching, often he
Was bathed in tears for their calamity;
But we so far from pitying of our Land
Thus sunk in sin, that with a mighty hand
We add unto her woe by sin, and think
The eye of heaven does but sit and wink.
Oh glorious God, who art that holy one,
Lovely in beauty; whose most royal Throne
Is borne by winged Cherubins most high,
Where mighty Angels praise thy Majesty;
What is this microcosmus? what are we
That thou O Lord should take felicity
In weak and feeble man, whose borrowed breath
Does every minute journey to his death?
Why should thou labor with this piece of earth
Thus to protect him whose abortive birth
Does but begin his woe; yet sleeps secure?
The Sun, the Moon, and Stars are too impure
In thy most glorious eyes; then what is man
But a deserver of black Hellican.
Yet oh our God which art the King of Kings,
Lord of earths Territories, our pleasant things
Did all come down from thee; England did flourish
When thy Almighty Arm so long did nourish,
And did so long protect us, death and fear
Were strangers to our Borders, we were dear
In thy beloved eyes; but ah, our woe
Was our rebelion, and our overthrow
Is from our selves; our blasted Land had been
Counted earths Paradise but that for sin;
Yet Lord unite the Kingdoms, let them be
No more a Stage for that dull Tragedy
We fear is yet to play; Let it once cease,
And sound us now a harmony of peace;
One Act is past along, oh let thy hand
Give to the rest a powerful countermand,
And let us now be lead by truth and love,
Those amorous Sisters which do dwell above;
And in the Laws of love, let Englands face,
Be dressed with ornaments of blushing grace;
And then the last of our harmonious Scenes
Shall tell the world what it is the Gospel means;
Those faithful laborers in this Vineyard shall
Advance the work with hearts heroical;
The Epilogue is joy which ends the Play,
The Church begins to see a happy day,
Her steps are lovely, sorrows have their date,
For love does conquer envy, govern hate.
CHAP. II.
Verse 1.
HOw soon is glory dim? the Lord does shroud
The face of Sion with a darkened cloud;
His anger darkneth Iudahs borrowed light,
And her bright glory is as black as night;
Her beauty is deformed, and that eye
Where sat enthroned Princely Majesty
It quite extinguished, and the angry hand
Or heaven has spoiled the pleasant promised Land.
(2)
The Lord has mixed gall in Iudahs cup,
And in his fury he has swallowed up
The strength of Sion, and her famous City
Is turned to ashes, for he had no pity
Upon poor Sion, all her holds are humble
To his high hand; her high battlements tumble,
To Prince and People folly is imputed,
And the proud Enemy has the Land polluted.
(3)
The Lord has cut Ierusalems strength and horn,
And all the treasure that did once adorn
The royal Land of Israel's battered down;
His countenance he masked with a frown;
He has withdrawn his warlike hand, whereby
The Camp of Israel made their Enemies fly;
But now his anger burns round about
The Land of Jacob, who can put it out?
(4)
And as an Archer bends his angry Bow
To do some ruin suddenly, even so
He scatters his Arrows which do vary,
His right hand threatens as an Adversary,
And every thing on which the curious eye
Did take a prospect, did by Famine dye;
The house wherein they called upon his name
Is levelled even by a surious flame.
(5)
What wrong can Mortals do? their fury high
Is a weak blast; but ah mine Enemy
Is my offended Lord, his wrathful cup
Is powered out, and he has swallowed up
My Palaces, and holds are levelled, he
Has brought my glory into misery;
He has increast my sorrows, oh mine eyes
Pumpe floods of tears, with silent nightly cries.
(6)
And as a flowred Garden barren made,
So is his Tabernacle quite decayed,
And we are now even as a desolate Nation,
The Lord has quite destroyed his Congregation;
The Lord has caused the solemn Feasts to cease,
And all her Sabbaths; ah what little peace
Can mourning Sion see in any thing,
When God despises both her Priest and King!
(7)
The Lord has quite refused his holy place
Where the high Priest did offer to his Grace
Their rich Oblations, as they daily do;
His Sanctuary he abhors too;
The strength and fortress of the pleasant Land
Is given up into the Enemies hand,
Who with unhallowed mouths make harmony
As in the day of high solemnity.
(8)
The Lord long since has threatened to destroy
The Land of Israel, and eclipse her joy;
And now her earthly right she must resign
Again to him that gave it; for a Line
Is streacht about our Borders, and we doubt
How long this Line of woe is measured out;
The earth laments, the walls do seek redress,
The Land does mourn in woe and heaviness.
(9)
Her Gates are sunk, her mighty Bars destroyed,
The Citie's open; how can we avoid
The fury of the Foe? her Princes gone
Among the Gentiles, we are left alone;
The Law is blotted out, and none can lend
A word of comfort when our miseries end;
The Lord speaks not by vision, not by dream,
To tell a period of our dismal Theme.
(10)
The Elders they whose knowledge could confute
Great learned Orators, are still and mute,
They hide their heads in dust, their aged eye
Is taught to weep, and sometimes wish to dye;
Their loins in sackcloath they have guirded round,
And silently they mourn upon the ground;
The amorous Virgins mourn, their clothes are rent,
Their beauty is like sorrows monument.
(11)
Oh how mine eyes are blinded with my tears
Pumpt from my sorrows? I am big with fears;
My Liver's powered out upon the ground
For our Lands loss, and Kingdoms deadly wound;
The tender Infants in the streets do lie
Imploring bread, a little to supply
Their hungry souls, but yet they with vain moanes
At last do dye with often repeated groans.
(12)
A little bread the hungry Children cry
Most dearest mother ere we quickly dye;
The mother weeps as fast; she feign would give
Her life for food, that so her Child may live;
But as the dying Soldiers heart does pant
Laboring for life; even so the Infants faint
For lack of food; the pretty Infant he
Sleeps with deaths Lullaby on his mothers knee.
(13)
What need I call a witness for thy woe,
To what shall I compare thy sorrows? oh
Most glorious Judah! who is like to thee,
Blasted so soon, so soon in misery?
How shall I comfort thee, O fairest Land!
Alas thy ruins are beyond the hand
Of Art to limne or draw; thy breaches be
Like mighty surges in the unruly Sea.
(14)
Thy Prophets did delude thee, whilst that they
With Lies foretold thee of a Sunshine day;
Their lying lips would not declare thy Lust,
Nor tell thee, Earthly Glory soon would rust:
Then might thy Times to prosperous State been turned,
Thy Land not ruined, nor thy City burned;
But now it is levelled even by their Lies,
Destruction posted on false Prophesies.
(15)
And as the foraine Traveller does pass,
He shakes his head, and sighs (woe and alas)
His wondering eyes admiring at the Land,
Which once was glorified with Heavens high hand;
Is this the City, then the Traveller cries,
Whose fame invited all the Nations eyes
To look upon her beauty! This the Town,
Called Earths perfection, and her high Renown!
(16)
Even thus the Lord has done his will on us,
The face of Sion is most leperous,
Her hideous Crimes are in her forehead read,
The Lord has done what he determined,
For he has turned her Regal Glory down,
The Heathen sway the Scepter, wear the Crown;
Our Foes on Earth do flourish, they do rise,
It prospers well with Sions Enemies.
(17)
Why go thou weeping then? oh Sion why
Art thou thus troubled? heaven cannot lie,
Though thou thy self art false, what he commands
Is finished by his unresisted hands;
Thy horrid sins first furrowed up his brow
With angry frowns, and there is no pity now
Dwells in his royal bosom, but the foe
He makes to glory at thy overthrow.
(18)
And now our sinking souls begin to call
Unto the Lord; oh battered ruined wall
Of dismal Sion, once like shining beams
Of heavens glory; Let tears run like streams
Along thy lovely cheeks, both day and night
Take they no rest, but let thy conscience fright
Thy soul from slumber, lest thy darkened eye
Be lulled asleep in sad security.
(19)
Arise and cry the first approaching hour
Of silent night; and let thy floudgates power
Forth streams of brackish tears, mixed with a groan;
Lift up thy hands before the lofty Throne
Of high eternity; for the famisht Child
Whose Parent's dead: and so the Babes exiled
From their dear mothers arms, their lingering breath
Longs and waits for a welcome death.
(20)
Behold O Lord our God, to whom, to whom,
Have thou sent forth this heavy sudden doom?
Oh whom have thou thus lashed? shall we eat
Our dearest Children up for want of meat?
Those pretty newborn Babes, whose harmless eye
Nere knew a sin; must such sweet Infants dye?
And are our Priests and Prophets mangled hear?
Oh that mine eyes were drowned in a tear.
(21)
Oh that mine eyes with silent tears were drowned;
The young and old lie grovelling on the ground;
The warlike youngmen, and the amorous face
Of spotless Virgins, death does now displace,
And lays them in their monuments; they bow
Their weak mortallity to heavens fierce brow:
If these the ruins be of our sad day,
With floods of tears I Will weep my self away.
(22)
Thou bring'st my foes about my naked wall;
Thou giv'st them cause to glory in my fall,
And they do do it: wherefore do thou lay
Woes to my soul as in a Solemn day?
Thy wrath was kindled, few or none remain;
To escape from killing, it was counted vain:
Those that I nourished with mine own Cup,
My raging Enemy has swallowed up.
CONTEMPLATION II.
THe laboring Watch is idle, if the Spring
Be not wound up; and thus in every thing
There is a Motion; for the Soul does trace
The Laws of Nature, or the Rules of Grace:
Our hearts are cold, and various, like the Moon,
Each minute changing; if the righteous Sun
Shine not upon us, all the world may mark
Our Motion standing, and our Glory dark.
But when the high Creator shows his face,
And clothes the Mortal with diviner Grace,
The brave Heroic heart aspires to shroud
His Contemplation loftier then a Cloud.
What amorous beauty in the world can shine
Like to the Graces of a Soul Divine?
No black Disaster here can ever mask
That lovely Face, no troubles stay her Task;
No mists of misery eclipse her motion,
Nor no delusion hinder her devotion.
The Soul is full of Raptures, and her eyes
Reaches Eternity, above the Skies;
Th'amorous Soul on Earth is wondrous coy,
Desiring nothing else but heavenly joy.
Yet can it be, as this lamented story
Makes evident, that Heaven should hide Glory
From such an honored Soul, which even (...)
Has glorified from all eternity?
And does he give the Enemy his own Place?
Has God, like Janus, got a double face?
Does the base Enemy so high aspire,
Whom often he threatens with consuming fire?
Yea, and their prosperous State does often redowne,
To magnify the honor of Heavens Crown.
The Usurer, whose back bears all the Curses
Of his poor neighbor, could he fill his Purses
By being godly, he would venture too
To pray to Heaven, as the godly do;
And could the base Adulterer bring to pass
His filthy ends, and meet a hand-smooth Less
Each Sabbath day at Church, this fellow he
Would be an ugly hearer constantly:
The proud man he would make an ugly face,
And pray, and hear, if this would give a place
Of gain and honor to his high Ambition;
Thus holy Writ should serve each base condition.
But now, the glorious Soul which Heaven aspires,
His heart is warmed by Diviner fires;
His life is circumspect, his blushing face
Wears the high ornaments of heavenly Grace:
This Soul is nobly righteous, and it leanes
On its Creator in the most extremes.
If sin assaults the Soul, it soon will fly
To the high mansion of Eternity
For its protection; there, with trembling fears
She bathes her bosom with repenting tears:
The lovely Heaven borne Soul has no false ends;
The fear of Enemies, nor the love of friends,
Shall never ensnare her from those Joys above;
For why? th'amorous Soul has fixed her love
Upon her glorious Savior: nevertheless,
She often may sit in woe and heaviness,
And be in many an earthly contemplation;
When Heaven brings War and Ruin on a Nation,
Then earthly reasonings may whisper loud,
When Heaven is cov'red with a sable Cloud
Of bloody War and Famine, when they pour
Those dismal drops in such a dreadful Shower
On one distracted Kingdom, then what way,
When darkness does eclipse the light of day,
Is there for souls to wander, when its eyes
Are bloudshot to behold those villainies
Which bloody Actors play; when War shall reign
In height of envy, numerous bodies slain
Embracing gentle earth; when death shall veil
Man in mortality, all faces pall
Because of hungry famine; when the Child
For want of friend and food is far exiled
From present necessaries, and therefore lies
With deaths pale Image in his tender eyes;
And when heavens darts shall fly like Sim and Jim,
The soul is sad, her funeral lights burn dim;
When life is turned to death, and food to fear,
She sometimes weeps as did the Prophets here;
Yet with a laden heart, and watery eye,
The soul does sometimes mutter this reply.
Unconstant state of earth, shall any he
That is but dust, direct eternity
By his vain babbling? can mortal man
Guide the Celestial Orbs by wisdom? can
He rule the earth by power? can he stay
The Steeds of Phoebus, and tie up the day?
Nay, can he rule himself, or guide his mind?
Are not his ways as wavering as the wind?
And will thou teach thy Maker? since thy birth,
What have thou been thou piece of moving earth?
What, has thy tottring soul no faith at all?
Or is thy love to heaven so wondrous small?
Has all this Un verse so little rest
To give a tired heart? and yet possessed
With love of this low earth my Savior died,
That through his death I might be glorified;
And shall I now resuse to dye for him?
Has fin made these dark eyes so quickly dim?
No, let this earthly man through fire be tried,
My soul shall live with him for whom I died;
Where in the Canopy of his beauteous breast,
I shall sleep safe with undisturbed rest;
Have I so little power to control
The assaults of sin and death? Alas poor soul!
Be gone my numerous fears, away, away,
After a tempest comes a shining day;
See, see, what dazzling glory is behind
You darkened cloud, look up my muzzled mind,
Fly on the wings of contemplation; see,
Thy journies end is high Eternity.
And this, dear Reader, does most often redowne
To heavens honor, when earths troubles drown
The Saints sometimes in sorrow; earth's a toy,
And this disjunction fits the soul for joy;
When on the other side, if heaven should give
A royal Legacy that Saints might live
On earth most long and happy, then might vice
Count heaven a pain, and earth a Paradise;
And if the world should often hear or see
That Saints did live in high prosperity,
Each wretch would turn a Saint for his own end,
Looking for earth by making heaven his friend.
But now go on brave soul, do thou contemn
All wordly pomp; a royal Diadem
Shall crown thy arched brows, thy present pain
Thou will not reckon when thou come to reign;
Heaven shall receive thee, earth shall raise thy name
In spite of sinners or their blasted fame;
And as thy body rests in deaths dark tent,
This verse shall stand upon thy monument:
This valiant mortal by a second birth,
Enjoyed a Crown in heaven, conquered earth.
CHAP. III.
Verse 1.
WHerefore should Mortals labor thus to shroud
Their public Sorrow, in a darkened Cloud
Of Silence? Why should Blackness cover all
The mourning March of Sions Funeral?
I am the Man of Sorrow, and Heavens Mark;
I am the chasened Bird, the early Lark:
His furious Rod has seized upon me;
On me, the Monument of Misery.
(2)
Who ever saw this glorious Eye of Day
Eclipsed in Darkness? And this Ball of Clay
Wrapped in a Sable Mantle, like black Night
Covering the world with Mists, whose Terrors fright
All Mortals in their slumbers? Thus mine eyes,
Dimmed with their tears, do weep whole Elegies
Of Lamentations, while his hand has dressed
My Soul in Troubles, banished from her Rest.
(3)
My Soul is sad enough, I need no more
Such change of Torments then I had before;
I need no other Foe, to come and slay
My dying self: and why then all the day
Does my incensed Lord against me stand?
Why at a Mortal does he turn his hand?
What will he fight with Earth? Alas, before
Much time is spent, we shall be seen no more.
(4)
How soon is Beauty lost, and Natures Book
Quite blotted out, and with an earthly look
Departs this troubled world, soon broke as Glass?
The fleshes Glory, is but withering Grass:
Sin brings in Sorrow, Grief makes Beauty old,
The Dross is intermingled with the Gold;
The least of Heavens displeasure, if he frown,
It is enough to bring Earths Glory down.
(5)
Dull piece of feeble Earth, and mortal Man,
A show of something, yet art nothing; can
The Almighty not consume thee, lest he shall
Build up a Work against a tottering wall?
What means The Almighty hand of the most high
Thus to surround us, whose mortality
Will bring us soon to Dust? each day we fall,
Ensnared with Sorrow, Bitterness, and Gall.
(6)
Times black hair'd daughter night, that locks all eyes
And hearts in silent slumbring lullabies;
This swarthy nurse with dark and horrid theames,
That frights all mortals with her nightly dreams,
Does with her curled mantle and her charms,
Inchant my soul to slumber in her arms;
Thus lulled in woe to misery I went,
As hearses march to their dull monument.
(7)
Oh why does the Almighty hedge us round?
Can this base earth be lower than the ground?
The lightfoot Roe-buck with his threatening horn
Swallows the ground up; and his eyes do scorn
The swift pursuer, we enclosed about
Where food cannot get in, nor Famine out;
What grief or sorrow do I not possess
In chains of darkness, woe and heaviness.
(8)
The helpless Infant who with grief is pressed,
Seeks Sanctuary in his mothers breast;
And where should hungry souls direct their cry,
But to the Palace of eternity:
And yet O Lord, how often do we Implore
Relief of thee, for we are wondrous poor;
But when our torments make us cry aloud,
Thou wrapst thy glory in a glo^my cloud.
(9)
The prison is most dreadful to the eye
Of the sad soul that wears Captivity
About his shackled heels; the gingling chain
Afflicts the prisoners memory with pain:
Thus we are captived, ah, what shall we do,
Incles'd, inchained, and imprisoned too;
My soes, my blows, my crooked ruined ways
Cuts off with scosse the number of my days.
(10)
Can endless love be angry? will wrath never
Be pacified, will it live for ever
In the Almighties bosom, and his mind
Never harbor pity, but be still unkind
Against his chosen people, thus to tear
Like a sierce Lion or a surious bear?
Why does thy Rod in secret places lie?
Alas poor we are ever in thine eye.
(11)
Thus vain is worldly pomp, the slourishing crown
Of earthly glory must be trampled down;
The shadowed beauty of man's little world
Survives a moment, then away it is hurled
Into a mist of nothing, all my ways
Are turned backward, and my numerous days
Are now cut shorter; thus to every Nation
By sin comes ruin, death, and desolation.
(12)
The skillful Archer with his threatening hand
Draws forth his Arrow, and his eyes do stand
Full fixed on the Mark; his furious breath
Sends early summons of ensuing death
Unto the thing he aims at: so, even so,
My angry God has bent his angry Bow;
Where shall I hide me? Oh, the world's too narrow,
To hide a mortal from his flying Arrow.
(13)
It Is vain, my trembling heart, for to endever
To take thy self to flight, for that can never
Save thee a minute from his flying Dart,
'Twill quickly reach thee: Oh my dying heart,
His winged shafts have hit me; Oh the pain
Of a sad wounded Soul on earth: how vain
A thing is Pleasure, Pride, and Profit? why
Does man so hug deceitful Vanity?
(14)
Scoff on, my angry Foes, and let your wiles
Be painted over with deceitful smiles;
Be merry Gallants, let your Laughter rise,
With Tones of Music, to the lostie Skies;
Drink Healths to Sions Ruin; and yet know,
This is the Churches glory, and thy woe:
No Kingdome's conquered, but it is by loss,
No Saint is crowned, but he wears the Cross.
(15)
Urge me no more, my soul is filled with Gall,
And bitter-tasted Wormwood: Is this all
The joy that Earth can yield? Oh, what delusion
Has lying Vanities, to bring confusion
Upon a tottering soul! A flattering Kiss
Of Earth robs man of everlasting bliss;
Thus Folly is exalted, for a Toy
Poor short-lived man does part with endless Joy.
(16)
Man's Work is vain, his Treasure is but travel,
Man pines in pain, his Greatness is but gravel;
We fast, we famish too, these are our mones,
Our teeth, in stead of food, are broke with stones.
Thus do we suffer by th'immediate hand
Of Heaven, and the beauty of our Land
Is turned a heap of ashes; while we have
On Earth no Heritance, but in the Grave.
(17)
Thus my o'r-whelmed Soul beeame a stranger
To Joy and Peace; and dwelling near to danger,
I sometimes taught my most discensolate heart
These following words: Ah timorous flesh, why art
Thou filled with fears? the time is almost here,
When thy Redemption, Sion, draws near:
My Soul forgot her songs, for glory dies
Like shining Glo-wormes to benighted eyes.
(18)
Ah sinful soul, has Satan got such scope
Of man's bad reason, that there is no hope;
Not trust thy God fond Mortal? did thine eye
Or ear perceive him ever falsify
With his poor Creatures, but he succor sent?
Go rocky heart, away thou monument
Cut out of marble, do not hurt my sense
With unbelief, with shame and diffidence.
(19)
And yet 'twas reason (when I called to mind
The monstrous earthquakes, and the huffling wind
Which turned Isreal's glory upside down,
And gave the foes the honor of the Crown)
That I should weep, when I remembered all
The bitter wormwood and the poisonous gall:
Weep gentle heart, pumpe from my watery eyes
The silent streams of mourning Elegies.
(20)
My soul is sad indeed, it is truest moan
When the poor Orphane sits and grieves alone;
Alone said I, ah me, I need not, we
Have thousand spirits more in misery,
Whose burdened sorrows overwhelme their kind;
What are our words, alas they are but wind;
Only remembering mine afflictions, they
Shall humble me in this my cloudy day.
(21)
The Malefactor smiles to think on favor
From the stern Judge; Sinners have a Savior,
Yet they are always angry, and cast down,
As if their glory were in earths base Crown;
A Crown! what if thou have a Crown? earths glory
Is various, vain, false, and transitory:
Considering this, sad heart thou have good scope
To rest thy tired self and live in hope.
(22)
I cannot hold, my heart must needs confess;
Be witness endless love, judgments were less
Then our transgressions; when they cried aloud
To the high heavens, and earths darkened cloud
Looked angry at our solly; oh if thou
Should blast us into nothing, even now
Our souls should justify thee, 'cause poor we
Know, heaven loved us from eternity.
(23)
As often as Phoebus lights the darkened skies
With mourning rays, dazzling all mortals eyes
With fullness of his glory; Writers say,
A blushing Evening brings a Sunshine day;
Even thus our Sun spreads-forth Caelestiall wings
Of brightest glory, and away he flings
Those hasty mists of darkness, which infold
The tried Silver, and corrupts the Gold.
(24)
But Heaven is my Souls portion, and my part,
Filling the vastness of my Soul, my heart
Cannot contain the treasure of this wealth,
It Is sick of Love, and yet in perfect health;
Glory and honor does attend the man
With highest joy, that has this Dowry: can
There be a lack? though Famine be so near,
Fear darkneth Faith, and Faith destroys Fear.
(25)
The tired Traveller in Summer days
Seeks for some cooling shade, to keep the rays
Of hot Apollo from his fainting head;
When flaming Phoebus, and his fiery Steeds
Are in their high Careere, the Dog-starre flies,
Barking with heat through Heavens Canopie;
Christ is this cooling shade, his Kingly mind
Rewards the worker; he that seeks shall find.
(26)
Thrice happy Traveller, that this journey made,
To seek a shelter in this pleasant shade:
What greater portion on the Earth then this?
And in the Heavens what higher Paradise?
Mortals you are cousen'd, worldly Wit and Strength,
Pride and Vainglory fails poor man at length:
Where then is sure protection from all harms?
I Will tell thee where, it is in The Almighty's arms.
(27)
The Warlick Horse, whom Nature does bedeek
With strength and vigor, and his thundering neck
Is dressed with youth and fortitude, his eye
Sends furious summons to the enemy;
While strength is in his loins, his courage can
Breathe out defiance to the armed man:
It Is good in youth to taste afflictions loss,
He that will wear the Crown, must bear the Cross.
(28)
Can thou be silent, when thy God is near?
Can thou be sad, and have no cause of fear?
Can thou be dazzled with thy sins reflection?
Can thou be fearful, when thou have protection?
Why do thou mourn for Sions misery?
Pride was the Prologue to her Tragedy;
Rather then murmr for deserved ill,
Close thy lips ever, Soul be silent still.
(29)
A Child of Heaven early does begin
To honor virtue, and to trample sin
Under his careless feet; his scornful eye
Takes but slight notice of Earths vanity:
Sweet-fac'd Humility is Honors Mother,
He that has one, will quickly have the other;
They both are matched with Glory, happy he
That comes to Honor by Humility.
(30)
Is it such honor to be humble then?
Are mourning mortals most the happiest men?
Where lies their glory, says the world? for we
See no such honor in humility;
They Are 'tyr'd with rags, and they are fed with fears,
Reproaches, scandals, and the peoples jeeres:
And is this honor? yea, and this story
Is the Saints evidence for highest glory.
(31)
Time darkeneth the Skies, Time brings the Day;
Time glads the eyes, Time puffes all joy away;
Time builds a Kingdom, Time o'rthrows a Nation,
Time writes a story of their desolation:
Time has a time, when Time shall be no more;
Time makes some rich, and Time makes rich men poor;
Time is, when God will be his Churches friend,
When Times eternity shall never end.
(32)
For though, fond man, thou taste afflictions sorrow
This gloomie evening, joy will come to morrow;
Indeed a night or two thy sorrows may
Eclipse thy glory, but a shining day
Will soon appear, to glad thy longing eyes,
Like shining Phoebus in the blushing Skies:
Man shall find mercy, sinners may intrude
To rest their souls in mercies multitude.
(33)
The chafing Horse breaks through th'armed Ranks
With his proud Rider, and his bleeding flanks
Are witnesses of haste; his courage brave
At last is cooled, and measures out his grave
Upon the bloody earth: thus we begin,
Rid by vainglory, and spurred on with sin,
To break Heavens high Command; so Death is just,
Our pride and honor lies in the dust.
(34)
And yet his blessings are far more then blows;
Men use to trample down their conquered foes
Under their Horses fetlocks, few will give
Their wounded enemy an hour to live:
Yet Isreal's God, whose high victorious hand
Can crush the sinful prisoners of the Land
Into a piece of nothing; still his strife
Is but to give dead man eternal life.
(35)
Have we a Right to these Terrestrial Toys,
And yet a Title to Celestial Joys?
This is on Earth, and that above the Skies;
The first, the Promise; and the last, the Prize;
He that has this, will quickly have the last,
Glory comes posting, when our griese is past:
If God deny us not this Earthly Ball,
He Will give us Heaven, which is best of all.
(36)
He takes no pleasure when he does subvert
The Cause of man, nor does it glad his heart
To over-turne a mortal in his pride;
He takes no glory, for to blow aside
The prosperous state of man; it is his badnesse,
That brings him misery when he may have gladness:
If sin brings sorrow then, and blindness blows,
Blame thy bad deeds (O man) they are thy foes.
(37)
What King can clip the flying wings of Time,
With all his Majesty? Although he climb
Unto the top of Honor, can his Power
Stay swift-foot Phoebus chafing Steeds an hour.
To wait upon him? Or what Prince can say,
I Will bring to pass my purpose the next day?
Unless the Lord command these earthly things,
The least is higher then the reach of Kings.
(38)
The world shall pass away, and all therein
Shall be no more, as if they had not bin;
As if they never were, they all shall fade;
They all were moving since they first were made:
Each word of God is good, and there is no Clause
Of threatening ruin in those righteous Laws
To him that keeps those blessed Commands, for he
Reward shall have unto eternity.
(39)
Why weep'st thou then (O man) why does thine eyes
Implore relief with watrie obsequies?
Why do thou teach thy heavy heart to mourn
In silent corners? why do thou adorn
Thy Soul in sable weeds? why do thou dress
Thy self in sorrow, woe, and heaviness?
Oh, why complainest thou? it is thy sin
Bars out thy joy, and brings judgments in.
(40)
Search every corner of thy self, sad Soul,
Try all thy actions, let not darkness roll
Thee in her lulling arms, but now embrace
The glorious purchase of Heavens proffred grace;
Yet mourning Soul return, yet sinner wake
From thy security; go, hie thee, take
Thy well-prepared vension, Heaven will stay,
And double bless thee, ere he part away.
(41)
The Sun being set, all mortals go to rest,
Our sorrow rises; then each soul's possessed
With fear and horror, and each man complains
Of mighty losses, and of little gains;
We lift our hands to Heaven sometimes for aid,
We cast our eyes up when we are afraid;
But when do Hearts, and Hands, and Eyes, agree
With Faith and Love, Truth and Sincerity.
(42)
Oh Sin, my fatal Foe, how bad is gain
Contracted from thee? pleasure is but pain;
How false is sinners joy? their Mines are moss,
Their work is toylesome, yet their labor's loss;
Their blossome's blasted with a minutes breath,
Their light is darkness, and their life is death:
Sin does destroy the glorious Soul, for why,
The Soul that sins shall be sure to die.
(43)
Ah me, how quickly does this house of man
Decay? his ways are like a feathred fan,
Which wav'reth with the wind; his strength and prime
Is wondrous weak, and his swift-posting time
Is very short: though sometimes he be high,
Like a tall Cedar, which does dare the Sky,
And swells in his pride; a little Rub
Of ficknesse makes the Cedar but a Shrub.
(44)
Where shall we hide us? is there never a mountain
To o'r-shadow us? or a pleasant fountain
For tired Souls to bathe in, while the Cloud
Of Thunder is blown over? may we shroud
Our Souls in no protection, while our tears
Shall wash our bosoms, and invite the ears
Of Heaven to listen, that our cries may be
Lodged in the Palace of Eternity?
(45)
Th'glory is departed, Isreal's Land is taken,
Judah's hollow-hearted, therefore is forsaken;
And in the dust does Sions honor lie,
To be a Proverb for the passers by:
Who is more slighted, and who more reviled,
Then the bad Servant, or the stubborn Child?
If Heavens Children disobedient be,
Their sure reward is Earths indignity.
(46)
The looks of Envy, and the mouth of Fame,
Act both their hateful Parts, to wound and shame
Our Souls: Oh this unwelcome hour!
Why is our glory in the enemies power?
And what can we expect from these our foes,
But wry-mouthed slander, slaverie, and blows?
Oh Lord deliver us from the enemies hand,
And blast their malice with a counter-mand.
(47)
May not the first suffice; Fear, and a Snare?
Alas, it is enough; what mortal dare
Challenge a single Duel with these here?
Fear brings a Snare, and Snares begets Fear;
The next is Hate, and Ruin, and these be
The four Contrivers of our Tragedy:
Lord strike the Epilogue, and change the Stage,
And make a Golden of our Iron Age.
(48)
As when Apollo does his glory shroud
Behind the Curtain of some darkened Cloud,
The Air, lamenting Phoebus absence, poures
Upon the Earth some drops of weeping showers;
Thus does our Sun set, and our sorrows rise,
Darkning the light of our benighted eyes,
And makes our floud-gates send forth showrie streams,
For the sad loss of Heavens illustrious beams.
(49)
Will not the Heavens clear? and will the Day
Never break these chains of Night and come away?
Why does this Cypress Girdle often bind
The circled world? Ah, are we still confined
To sit in these dark shadows? Must our tears
Be still as constant as our nightly fears?
Our eyes are springs, whose streams can never stay,
Rise sweet-fac'd Phoebus, rise, and bring the Day.
(50)
Although my heavy heart be thus oppressed,
Although my tottering soul be kept from rest,
Although mine eyes with looking up are blind,
Although my misery has o'rwhelm'd my mind;
Yet, Lord, cast but a splendor from thy Throne,
My heart shall cease to grieve, my soul to groan;
Mine heart, my mind, my tongue, and memory,
Shall all in one set forth thy Majesty.
(51)
The eye is but the prospect of the heart,
A little member, yet it does take part
Of every sorrow, and our inward grief
The eye relenting, does implore belief:
The heart is hid, so are our secret fears,
But the eye shows them with its gushing tears;
What my still troubles are, mine eyes do speak,
And were it not for tears, my heart would break.
(52)
Run not so fast, O ye my following Foes,
Let me a little breathe between your blows;
Strike not so thick on my disarmed head,
Let not your cruel hate so far be led,
To bring me as a Bird into Deaths snare;
Let me have freedom, howsoe'r I fare:
Let me but serve my God in his high Hill,
And do your worst, my Foes, do what you will.
(53)
Pride and Presumption did me once commit
To the low Dungeon, where my soul did sit
Inveloped in darkness, and cold clay,
Not making difference 'twixt the night and day;
And on the mouth of which they cast a stone,
To keep me sure; or fearing that my moan
Should reach the ears of Heaven, thus their doom
Interred and laid me in Earths hollowed womb.
(54)
The Aspiring surges of the swelling Ocean,
(That sometimes kiss the Clouds) whose motion
Is backed with Thunder; Ship and men
First tossed up toward Heaven, then again
They come as swiftly downward to the brinke;
Sometimes they soar aloft, and sometimes sink:
Sometimes my Faith did blow a pleasant gale,
Till I was sinking, then my Faith did fail.
(55)
Out of the bowels of Earths hollowed Womb
I sometimes whispered; Ah, is this my Tomb?
Am I interred in Earth? and am I sent
To lie for ever in this Monument?
Ah, has the Lord forgot his grace? and why
Does wrath so long lodge in The Almighty's eye?
Breathe joy to my sad Soul, dear Lord, thy breath
Gives light in darkness, and a life in death.
(56)
How unbelieving is the heart of man?
How base and fearful, and how vain? who can
Know the delusions that are lodged there?
How far from Faith, how full of slavish fear,
My Soul can witness? Lord, thou hear'st my cry,
What need I then use this tautologie?
But that it strengthens Faith, which would decay;
The more thou promisest, the more we will pray.
(57)
Love, Power, and Fear did all at once agree,
In a low heart to make a harmony:
First, Love does cloth the Soul with sweetness, and
Heaven gives base Earth a powerful countermand,
And therefore rises as a Lion strong,
And thus proclaims; Who dares to offer wrong
To this most amorous Soul, while Heaven is here?
Blessed is the heart, where dwells Love, Power, and Fear.
(58)
The valiant Champion, whose deeds may claim
A share of Honor, and the breath of Fame,
His Truth and Valor has no other Laws,
For the desending of the weaker Cause,
But love to Faith and Virtue; even thus
Heaven makes his Name on Earth most glorious,
By blowing of our dangers, and our harm,
With power, and wonder, from his Warlike Arm.
(59)
My Lord, I Am wronged, th'accused Prisoner cries,
Th'Indictment's false, th'envious Witness lies;
You know, my Lord, the man tells nothing true,
I will appeal to Heaven and to you;
Yet may the blinded Judge, against the Laws,
Hang the poor Prisoner, and condemn his Cause:
But, Lord, thou art a Witness of our state,
Our Judge, our Father, Friend, and Advocate.
(60)
Rocks cannot save thee, nor high mountains hide thee,
Seas will not have thee, nor the Earth abide thee,
Day not adorn thee, darkness not protect thee,
Thy foes will scorn thee, and thy friends reject thee;
Night cannot hide thy black-mouthed malice, nay,
Thy mistie mid-night's like the midst of day;
And if the glorious day shall show my wrong,
It is not long to day, it is not long.
(61)
And as the dazzling beams of Heavens bright eye,
Rising aloft in his high Majesty,
Discov'reth all disasters which are hurld
With shades of darkness in the mantled world;
Even so, my God, thy piercing eye, thine care,
Is quick in seeing, and most swift to hear,
Thou see their consultations; judge my Cause
By the true tenor of thy righteous Laws.
(62)
Ah foolish enemy, why do thou wrong
Thy silly self? I know, thy envious tongue
Would poison those whose actions God does love,
But they this piece of hatred are above;
Thy plots or black compliance (O thou Drone)
What needst thou whisper, when thy heart is known:
But yet go on, thou shall not lose thy hire
In the infernal Lake of furious fire.
(63)
Does mirth become a fool? it is not fit
They should be merry that have got no wit:
Did I say wit? it is wisdom that I mean;
There may be wit where wisdom never was seen:
If wisdom were with wit, their Songs would be
Not dressed with Lines of nonsense Poetry:
Sing on vain Drunkards, laugh, your merry jeeres
I doubt will change, there is a time for tears.
(64)
Reward of good, is glory; and the hire
Of Satan's instruments, is endless fire;
His work being done on Earth, he shall commence
In never dying flames, Hels recompense:
Strike them with dreadful thunder, Lord, and flashes
Of fearful Lightning; lay on thy lashes
Upon their naked shoulders, let them see
Thy wrath pursues them to eternity.
(65)
And since they would thy Precepts disannull,
Lord make them stupid, let their brains be dull,
Let them not see where Truth and Error lies;
Give them a deafned care, and blinded eyes,
Give them a sinking soul, that may soon faint,
Make it erroneous, hard, and obstinant:
O make their memory loathed, when they shall vade*
From the worlds prospect, like an evening shade.
(66)
Three Acts are past along our bloody Stage,
And there is two to come; our mournful Age
Is a sad president to all eyes; O may
Our enemies fall fill up the following Play:
Now let our enemies act their dismal part,
Let each foe strike his fellow to the heart,
So let them dye; Lord blast them, let them be
The Epilogue of our sad Tragedy.
CONTEMPLATION III.
WHat means the Joy that Worldlings take on Earth,
Triumphing in false Glory, and vain Mirth?
Why are their faces dressed with flourisht smiles
Of joviall merriment, and yet the whiles
Their souls do sink with sorrow? Can they bear
The checks of Conscience with so little care?
What? is the Soul asleep, while mortals act
Their merry Comedies, while they contract
Guilt on th'accused Conscience, while they lie
Rockt in security, with this Lullaby?
What means the prosperous pomp of such a Blade,
Whose earthly honor may a while persuade
The world there is no God; the sinners state
Does always flourish, and is fortunate?
He Is decked with antic Robes of the best fashion,
He blasphemes Heaven in each Recreation:
Look on the wretch; he has all earthly glories,
Brave Buildings, stately Works, Heroic Stories
Wrought with laborious Needles, where the hand
Of curious Art does give a countermand
To the worlds ignorance; while Natures eye
In looking, prayseth Ingenuitie.
He has both wealth and wit, a warlike arm
That Is strong and valiant, often in offering harm,
High honor, great advancement, praise of men,
And love of Ladies, which are offered when
The man is full of Money: thus he walks
In his vainglory, and he always talks
Of great affairs; his Honor does defy
To tell the Truth, and yet he hates the Lie
Should be returned on him, while his face
Is a red emblem of sins black disgrace.
Vile wretch, how safe thou art, while Conscience she
Does lie intombed in obscurity?
There is a time for flames, or else for fears,
A time for torments, or a time for tears.
Retire into thy Closet, take thy Pen,
Go muse on the mortality of men,
Write the disasters that attend the Crown
Of earthly Royalty; go thou wretch, sit down
In thy retired Chamber half a day,
Let Conscience speak, and Conscience thus will say.
Ah man, obdurate man, why wast thou borne
Into the world, or why did Heaven adorn
Thy Soul with immortality? why did Love,
Whose rare transcendencie is far above
The worlds desert, or reason, ever stretch
Those sweet embraces to so vile a wretch,
To so deformed a wretch as thou? O piece of Clay,
Did thou deserve it, blinded sinner, say?
What can thou answer me, proud mortal, why
Thou should not have thy judgment now to die?
What art thou, feeble Earth? a little dust;
What Is Beauties blossom? it will quickly rust;
What is this spacious Universe, but a Theme?
What is man's dignity, but an idle Dream?
What is thy wealth? a weathercock of woe;
And what is honor, but man's overthrow?
And what are all thy friends? they pass away
Like short-lived Actors in a Tragic Play:
Friends, wealth, wit, honor, beauty, have no power
To save thee from the King of fears one hour.
Bid now farewell unto those hours, whose strife
With thriftlesse joy has spun a weary life,
A life of vanity, whose very name
Masketh the ornaments of Virtues fame;
Yet dearest soul return, yet hark to me,
Yet be thou mindful of eternity;
Yet hear poor Conscience speak, since time almost
Has run his swift-foot hours, and thou art lost:
Did I say lost? Ah, Soul, th'rt happy then,
If Earth could hide thee in her darkened Den:
If thou were lost indeed from Heavens bright eye,
If Death could shade thee in obscurity;
If Earth, and Sea, and Hell, and Death should wind thee,
In their dark shadows, yet thy Judge would find thee.
And then, Oh then, the sinner being found,
How will the eyes of the Almighty wound
Thy now condemned Soul? while thou before
The high Tribunal howling, shall implore
Some Rock to over-shadow thee, yet denied
That slender shelter; how will thou abide
Before the dreadful Throne, from whence shall come
Thy damned Sentence of eternal Doom?
And is this all? No; then thou shall retire
To never-quenched flames of furious fire,
Whose everlasting fuel shall extend
To all eternity, and never end.
In Hells dark, hideous, and hollow Vaule,
(Where souls converse with fiends) for every fault
There is a several plague: Gluttons are fed
With scalding Lead and Brimstone; and the dead
Besotted Drunkard, as he every day
Drunk Healths to Hell, to pass the time away,
So in eternal torment, endless toil,
His throat is washed with quaffes of burning oil:
The stubborn Child the wrathful Furies hold,
with long-tormenting lashes;
Th'Usurer drinks whole Draughts of molten Gold:
And there the cruel Murderer does lie,
Always a stabbing, yet can never dye:
There lies the Wanton, who Loves fire did feel,
Stretched upon torturing racks of burning Steel;
Heat by eternal flames, blown with the breaths
Of thousand thousands never-dying deaths.
Then dearest Soul repent, it is not too late
To beg for mercy, that most glorious Gate
Is seldom shut; come spend thy after-yeares,
If thou have any, in repenting tears;
In true repenting tears bathe often thy breast,
Let not thy slumber lull thee to thy rest,
Till thou have got a pardon: do thou know,
How highly glorious is th'overthrow
Of Sin, and Death, and Hell? what royal favor
Is in the lovely eyes of such a Savior?
What chaste embraces, and what sweet communion?
What rare discoveries, what ravished union?
What present providence from Earths annoyes?
What after-evidence of endless joys?
What wise directions through threatening harms*
What safe protections in The Almighty Arms
Of such a blessed Savior, whose sweet b^
Gives health in sickness, and a life in death?
And this would change thee, sinner; this, even this
Would turn thy Closet to a Paradise:
This sweet Repentance would adorn thy face
With Heavens amors, and with blushing grace
For thy fore-past Rebellion; this would give
A learned President, how thou might live
To reign in endless glory; this would try,
If thou do live before thou come to die.
Read this third Chapter, mark but who they be
That Heaven exposes to calamity;
The Prophet here cries out, I am the man
Whose back is galled with lashes, therefore can
Another look for safety? Shall Heavens Child
Be lost, be lasht, rejected, and reviled
Of the worlds Peacocks; and shall not thou,
A sinner, feel the furrows of his brow.
See how their Land's defaced, their Wives defiled,
How Famine kills, and brings the hungry Child
To his untimely grave, whose friends are lost;
Virgins are ravished, newborn Infants tossed
Upon the soldiers Spears the women ripped
Up great with Child, and so the Babe is stripped
From the Bed of his Creation: Elders lies
Having Deaths prospect in their aged eyes,
Embracing lowly Earth with tears, to trave
A little favor to find out their Grave.
See while their City burns, their eyes are drowned
In streams of flowing (...), they do abound
In fullness, yet have wane: oh, ask not why;
They long for life, and yet they wish to die;
The tenderest love is mixed now with hate;
They Are full of people, yet are desolate;
They have some pleasure, yet it ^s but pain;
Their gain is loss, and yet their loss is gain.
For, from the thirty Verse of this third Chapter,
Our ears sometimes may drink a heavenly rapture
From the harmonious Spheres, which even then
Dropped down these Elegies from the Prophets pen,
And tells the world, that Heaven takes no delight
To over-turne a mortal from his right
On Earth; it is his wicked sinful ways,
That brings in Death, to cut his short-lived days:
Thus Love is mixed with anger, sweets with sour,
Joy midst of sorrow, weakness matched with power;
Honey is mingled with our poys'ned gall,
Love with our Lashers; Love's the cause of all.
Love's in our labor, Love is in our loss;
Love wears the Crown, and Love must bear the Cross;
Love makes our Union, Love's in our division;
Love's our direction, Love's in our derision;
Love's in prosperity, Loves in disaster;
Love is our servant, and yet Love's our Master;
Love seems to be a foe, yet Love's a friend;
Love did begin our woes, and Love will end
Our dismal dangers; Love commenced the fray,
And Love will turn our Night to shining Day.
Our Land had been too too unfortunate,
Like ruined Sion, but that Love does wait
Upon the hand of Justice, and is Crowned;
Love gives a Salve, when Justice gives a Wound.
What need we then grudge at Calamity?
What is Mortality to Eternity?
Since our best actions are but gilded air,
And words are wavering wind: is it so rare
For us to suffer trouble? do we merit
With our Rebellion? that we should inherit
The Palace of high Glory, and not think
That Men's eyes will shut? Love sometimes winks,
To try our p^rchas'd Graces, and to know
Our best of carriage in the worst of woe.
But what is the cause then, that the Proph^t here,
In the tumultuous storms of trembling fear,
Does pray against his foes? what, is it well,
To cry our worst of enemies down to Hell?
Yea, it is well; not as they are to us,
Disquiet, hateful, base, malicious;
For here, in stead of soes, they are our friends,
While they conduct us to our journeyes ends
The best and nearest way; and then our breast
Does more embrace that undisturbed rest,
In swelling soft eternity; beside,
Our strength of faith could not so well be tried
As by the force of envy: but as he
Which is our foe is Heavens enemy,
We ought to beg for his soon dissolution,
For his conversion, or for his confusion.
Even so let them all perish, let each foe,
O Lord, be dashed with one, one final blow
From thine Almighty Arm: as thou have made
Them moving shadows, so, much like a shade
Let them soon vanish; let thine enemies die,
And be forgot, like their loathed memory.
And then, oh then, when the world shall behold
The Dross is purged from the purest Gold,
Which once was intermingled, then each knee
Shall bow unto thy sacred Majesty
With lowly adoration, and thy Name
Shall be exalted with eternal fame;
And with a low incomparable grace,
Thy Saints shall sing in thy most holy place
Those ravished Halelujahs; though we here
Do bathe our silent bosoms with a tear.
CHAP. IV.
Verse 1.
HOw dull's the finest Gold? how quickly dim
Is the bright Glory of that Diadem
That once adorned Jerusalems Brows in State?
Where is the King, the Priest, and Potentate?
Her Priests do faint, and in each corner swound;
Those orient Pearls are scatt'red on the ground,
As if they were most needless; high and low
Do all fall blasted, to complete our woe.
(2)
Where are those Noble Worthies Fame presents,
Sons of high honor, Natures ornaments,
And Sions glory; in whose serious eye
Knowledge was seated in high Majesty,
To judge each loose offender? Ah me! may
Such Clouds of Thunder now be Clods of Clay?
Can the high Potter make such Vessels poor?
Away vain honor, and delude no more.
(3)
Is Love and Nature banished and exiled?
Can the fond Mother once forget her Child?
She can, and will, she does: Oh wondrous strange!
How does the Glory of Jerusalem change?
The careless Ostridge, and the swinish Bore,
The poisonous Dragon, and the Lions rose
For lack of food, yet give their young the breast,
But Famine lulls these Babes to endless rest.
(4)
Alas, poor Babe, why does thy dying soul
Strive to live longer, and thy heart control
Deaths summons to the grave, whose ashie hand
Shall pass thy soul into the promised Land?
His tongue is parcht with thirst, he cannot speak,
He would implore some Bread, but none will break
It to his pining soul; at last his eye
Is closed, in slumbring endless Lullaby.
(5)
How is our labor Alchymiz'd to loss?
How is our Gold and Silver turned to dross?
How is our Beauty metamorphos'd? how
Does furious Famine furrow up our brow?
He that did feed in Silver, drank in Gold,
Now starved for hunger, almost pined with Cold;
And she that once could boast of honored birth,
Lies now embracing of her Mother Earth.
(6)
And is there nor a Cause, oh wretched we,
That we are followed with Calamity?
Are not our sins more great then Sodomes Cries,
Which pierced the Air, and filled the Azure Skies
With Clouds of dreadful Thunder? Goods and Names,
In the descending and aspiring flames,
Were burnt to ashes in a hasty hour,
By the Almighties unresisted power.
(7)
Those comely Nazarites, whose lovely faces
Resembled Snow, inricht with amorous graces
Of uncontroubled Love, and were more red
Then polisht Saphir; on whose hoarie head
Were threads of tangled Gold in stead of hair,
Where Love united Art, Neglect, and Care;
Love, Art, and Beauty, Honor, Grace, and Wit,
Were the indowments of a Nazarite.
(8)
How quickly are they blasted? even now
Deformity hangs lurking on that brow,
That was a while so fair, now black as coals,
Pined with the anguish of their hungry souls;
Love is deformed, Grace is unregarded,
Wisdom despised, Honor unrewarded,
Their skin is with'ted; now the Nazarite he
Is a black emblem of Deformity.
(9)
There are degrees in Death, yet all do tend
To usher man unto his journeyes end:
Some die for love, and some by hate do die;
Some end their days through pining poverty,
And some by too much riches: some, the Sword
Does part in sunder; others, by a word
Receive their Deaths alarm: all must fall,
But Death by Famine is the worst of all.
(10)
A Feast is made for mirth, but mourners shall
Attend our Banquet to our Funeral,
And see the tender Mother, full of fears,
Bathing her Infant with her watrie tears;
Yet must she kill the pretty harmless Dove,
The Laws of Famine blot the Line of Love:
Go sweet-fac'd Babe, this feast was not for laughter,
Thou go before, thy Parents follow after.
(11)
Come, let us be sad, O Sion, let our eyes
Pumpe floods of tears, to drown this sacrifice
Of indignation, lest the aspiring flames
Lick up our Kingdom, and consume our names;
The Sword does range, and now the fire does climb
To meet the Stars, and scorch the wings of Time;
The proudest Pinnacle, and the highest Tower,
Is far too weak to grapple with their Power.
(12)
Come, let us be sad, Oh Sion, while our tears
Confute the Nations that were full of jeeres:
Why was the darkened world so blinded? why
Did the proud King think Heaven would falsify?
Why would you not believe, that the high hand
Of powerful Babylon should take our Land?
Know now, vain mortals, Heaven's not like to you,
For he is faithful, holy, just, and true.
(13)
Oh sin, now have thou drawn thy Curtain round
The darkened world? and how are mortals drowned
In thy in chanting streams? the Prophet lies,
The Priests are foolish that are counted wise,
The wise and hardy sinners courage cooles,
And those are wisest that are counted fools:
Even the jest man, although he suffer here,
The day of his Redemption draws near.
(14)
Have you beheld the blind, with what a pace
He walks along, guarding his tender face
And body with his staff, for fear of hurt,
And yet at last he tumbleth in the dirt?
Thus blind men wandered, and for want of eyes
They tumble in the bloody sacrifice
Of many a bleeding body, which by hate
Were hurt and slain, poor, vile, unfortunate.
(15)
Depart, polluted Israel, cry the foes, depart
From Sions territories; set not your heart
Upon her glory, that so quickly dies;
Your feet, your hands, and your unhallowed eyes
Are too unholy; now no prayers will pierce
The Ears of Heaven, the spacious Universe
Will give you no prosperity; for why,
Sin is the cause that makes man's glory die.
(16)
Dare man, that feeble Worm, and transitory
Forgotten Dream, think it a piece of glory,
To war against The Almighty? Can he make
The Earth to tremble, or by Power shake
The fabric of the World, or blast the name
Of the proud enemy, in their height of fame?
But as you have begun your mischief, so
The Lord shall make an end, presumptious for.
(17)
How blind are our vain eyes with solly? Can
There be a certain help from Helpless man?
We thought the Egyptians Army sure would save
Our starved bodies from the hungry grave,
But they were weak; and now our foes affaile us,
Our foes offend us, and our friends do fail us:
Can any mortal save himself from harm?
Put then no trust (O man) in thy weak arm.
(18)
Like tired Hearts we are ensnared round
With light-foot Hunters, and the following Hound,
And now our tired souls, for lack of breath,
Yield themselves prisoners to pursuing Death:
Our Sun is set, the laboring sands are run
From Times swift Hower-glasse, our Day is done:
It Is done indeed, Time always did attend us,
Time did begin us, therefore Time must end us.
(19)
The Ioftie Eagle, in his high Carriere,
Aspires to touch the starrie Hemisphere,
And in his height of pride, he feign would be
Inheriter of Luna's Canopie;
Eagles are not so swift, to make their way
Through the light Air, as is this Ball of Clay,
This uncollected man, whose hate does meet
My wandering footsteps in the desolate street.
(20)
The King, our Royal King, our verybreath,
Was a sad offering, sacrificed to death,
Whose down fall sinkes our souls; yet what was he,
But a weak emblem of mortality?
His dignity a dream, his honor fades
Like morning shadows, or the evening shades;
Has Wealth, Health, Honor, and Preferment wings?
So have their hopes, that put their trust in Kings.
(21)
And now, Oh Edom, joy falls thick on joy
On thy poor self; our torments were a toy
To thee; laugh on, or rather learn to steep
Thy soul in sorrow, teach thine eyes to weep:
O Land of Vz, the Cup comes o'r to thee,
The Cup of Poison and Calamity;
The world, the Edom which did ring thy name,
Shall see the sorrow of a sinners shame.
(22)
But, gentle Sion, now the Heavens are clear,
The morning rises, and thy darkened sear
Is set, the glorious luster of Heavens eye
Disperseth darkness from th'Orient Sky:
Our Woe is past, but Edom next must be
Our following fellows to Captivity;
Whose sad destruction to the world will show
A second mourning Monument of Woe.
CONTEMPLATION IV.
HOw Orient is bright Phoebus in each Ray,
Promising the glory of a Sunshine Day
^n some bright newborn Morning? but ere he
Aspires the height of Heavens Canopie,
O'r-rid in highest Noone, his beauty shrouds
It self in sable Curtains of dark Clouds,
The Heavens now look angry, and the Air,
That was so calm, so clear, so pleasant, fair,
Is dressed with horrid darkness, while in sunder
The Spheres do seem to rend with claps of thunder,
And dreadful fiery flashes, which do fly
More swift then thought along the darkened Sky.
Ah world! thus various art thou, and thus strange?
Thus apt to alter, and thus apt to change?
Thus often do promise, and more often do break,
While thou pretendest power, and yet art weak?
Sometimes thou have a Smile, sometimes a Frown;
Sometimes thou sett'st us up, then pull'st us down;
Sometimes The Heavens are clear, and sometimes dark,
The Morning calm, yet in th'Evening hark
What showers and dreadful thunder-cracks there be,
Ere Phoebus cooles him in the Western Sea:
Sometimes we have our health, and ease; then, oh,
A little sickness brings us wondrous low;
Sometimes we have wealth, and then our winged store,
Like Hawks, fly from our fist, and we are poor
In a short moment; sorrow comes too soon
Upon the back of joy, and like the Moon
We vary: sometimes Love makes Envy cease,
Sometimes we live in War, sometimes in Peace;
We rise aloft, we aspire, we sit on high,
Then we descend, decease, lie down and die.
The often changing of the various weather,
Is a true emblem; whither will thou, whither,
O Earth, conduct us? but, me thinks, our eye
Knows too too well thy various vanity.
And for our president, poor Sions loss
Will teach us well, their Gold was turned to dross,
Their precious stones to pebles, and their place
A ruined heap, their honor to disgrace;
Their fullness now is Famine, and their Soil
Is barren too, their pleasure is a spoil;
Their beauty is deformity, their power
Is weak, and in few waste and flying hours
The hope of Earths eternitie's cut off,
The Land is lost, the Kingdom is a scoff
To the wide Universe, their Comedy
Is metamorphos'd to a Tragedy,
Their highest dignity is disregarded,
Their wisdom slighted, honor unrewarded.
What Nation fought with greater braverie
Then warlike Israel, which their foes slaverie
Could often manisest? what Valor might
Be matched to theirs, while in each bloody fight
Each longed to be the foremost, to inga^
A troop of Lions in their rampant rage,
Was a poor sigure of their noble hearts,
While Heaven was darkened with those numerous darts
That flew along the Air, backed with the breath
Of Fury, and each Arrow ripped with Death.
There might you hear the wounded Heathen, cry
To their false gods, while that the blashing Sky
Did echo their implorement, The Earth being hid
With heaps of murthred Heathens; here a head
Lies tumbling, while the base unwor thy brain
Is found too foolish to be knit again
Unto the for lorne shoulders, or complie
In any Plot, or treacherous Villainy.
Not far from that, there lies a Hand and Arm,
With signs of peace, too feeble for a harm
Against poor Sion; there a Leg does lie,
Which should have served his Master for to fly
To some strong Rock of Resuge; now the day
Has crossed his speed, he cannot run away:
There was brave Gallantry in Isreal's eye,
Each strove with honor who the first should dye;
Fighting on heaps of their bemang led foes,
They made renown to wait upon their blows;
Where in the Clouds of Darts, with winged speed
Death galloped through the Armies with a Reed,
To measure out the Graves of them which he
Had sent to wander to eternity.
Thus valiant Israel, who now does yield,
Has slain their threescore thousand in a field;
While Heaven did ead them, then high Isr'els name
Rode on the wings of everlasting fa^e;
The Stars did light in order, and the Moon
Stood still, and in the (...) height of Noone
Sw^ft Phoebus did his (...) Horses stay
From t^ Careere and length'^ed out the day,
To see those games of Death p^y'd, where each blow
Foretold the enemy of his ov^hr^w.
But where is that Valor n^w that Royalty
So quickly turned into (...)?
What, slav'd themselves (...) serve even them
Which once were servants to Jerusalem?
What, must their Crown be veiled must they go down,
While Heathens arch their temples with their Crowne'
Are they subdued by the Conquered,
And must the blind man by the blind be led?
If this be true, this Motto then makes known,
Thy power was Heavens (Sion) not thine own;
And had thou been obedient to his will,
Thy warlike arm might have subdued still
Those thy unconquered foes: then, like a Bride,
Heaven would have guarded, loved, and dignified
His own peculiar people; then his Arm
Would have embraced thee, and have banished harm
From these thy ruined Borders; then his Eye
Had loved thee with Celestial jealousy.
Ah, holy Land, if thou were ruined thus,
How shall we fare, what shall become of us?
If thou were smitten, as the Prophets pen
Does manifest, we monumonts of men,
Drunk with the wine of solly, how shall we
Escape from a more dolesome Tragedy?
I often read, Israel was of one mind,
But Englands ways are wavering, like the wind;
Israel was circumspect, and serious,
But England blind, unconstant, various:
Their Armies fought like one, one armed man,
We numerous multitudes of Divisions; can
We look for peace in this distracted mould,
Not knowing who to help, nor where to hold.
The Citizens implore the Armies may
Disband, the valiant Soldier asks his pay
Ere he lays down; some foolish fellows fling
Libels abroad, of Loyalty to the King;
But it is false: alas, their wicked aim
Is to involve the City in a flame.
A fourth Contriver, with his shallow crown,
Holds best to pull the two Assemblyes down;
He rayles against the Peers and Commons too,
Reviles them all, yet cannot tell you who
It is that does disturb him: others chat
Against Divines, yet cannot tell for what;
Another he would have new Members chose,
And yet he knows no ill by none of those;
The rest would have a new Militia hold,
Yet can they find no fault against the old:
Thus, in their various minds, and mutinies,
The people fall to Contrarieties.
The poor would have Meat at a lower rate,
But that the Farmers and the Butchers hate
Should ever take effect: some think, that Beer
Is brewed too small, and that it is sold too dear:
But him the Victualler does soon advise
To be content, because they pay Excise.
Another says, did not the rich men sweep
Up all the Cloth, Clothes would be better cheap;
And him the Clothier presently persuades,
Were not for these, they could not keep their Trades.
The Courtier he does out of zeal defy
The Parliament, swears he is for's Majesty;
One cries him up, another cries him down;
A third would have the Prince to wear the Crown;
A fourth will none of that, says it is a thing
Not needful, that there should be any King.
The Separate rayles at all the Priests attendants,
The Presbyterian checks the Independants:
Alas, says one, how could we ever look
For better times, since that the holy Book
Of Common Prayer went down? then those that went
But for a Token, had the Sacrament:
What, are we wiser then our Fathers? they
Without the Service-Booke would never pray.
But now this fellow's silenced by another,
That thinks he is somewhat wiser then the other:
Quoth he, what difference 'twixt the Church and Stable?
The Service-Booke was most abominable,
A Library sent from Rome, wherein was it rare,
They prayed for foul weather when we should have fair:
And why is humane Learning thus affected?
The Seribes and Pharisees they were neglected
By our dear Savior, he cast lovely eyes
Upon the simple, and refused the wise.
And thus, good Reader, there is no confusion
Like that, which has such strong delusion
Of liking and disliking; some disprayse
The man, whom others would have Fortune raise
To high preferment: Ah, what has our Lands,
But double tongues, false hearts, divided hands,
And a distracted brain, a poisonous breath
Of Envy, and a life expecting death,
Or death in midst of life? oh, why are we
The only Monuments of Misery?
Most blessed Faith and Love, you never vary
From your first blessedness, nor act contrary
Unto your blessed Natures from above,
Love dotes on Faith, and Faith ingendreth Love.
O glorious God, thy Saints never disagree
In Heaven, when they possess high dignity,
Loves Banner is displayed about thy Throne,
Thy holy Angels are no more then one:
But man (oh that wretch man) is like The Ocean,
Who now is calm, and has a gentle motion,
And in a moment makes his billows run
Aloft, and shoots his surges at the Sun.
And since Divisions to destructions tend,
What follows ruined England, but her end?
Cease then, oh England, from this pitch of Pride,
And end, oh, sad Divisions end beside
Your selves; Earths Power, Device, and all
The help of Hell can never work our fall.
Come sweet-fac'd Virtue, come, and banish Vice;
Come Union, make our Land Earths Paradise;
Come Loves triumphant Laws, and you shall be
The Presidents of our Tranquillity.
You orient glittering Pearls, that Earth count Toys,
Show us some glances of Celestial joys,
By Virtues raritie; Truth, Peace, and Love,
You are those Sisters which do dwell above,
Archt in the highest Glory, are no less
Then Royal Twins in matchless blessedness.
Oh, if our blackness may not blast your bloome,
Or if our stamm'ring words may find a room
In your most sacred ears, let Truth expel
Those damned Errors that arise from Hell,
And let harmonious Peace heal up our Skarre,
And give a counter-mand to threatening War;
And then the last and loveliest of the three,
^et Beauty look upon Deformity,
And make us like to you: oh, let our shame
Love your blessed memory in immortal fame;
And as you move in your harmonious Spheres,
So guide our earthly bodies; let our tears
Wash off Deformity, which did annoy,
Make us an emblem of Loves highest joy;
Or else we shall (if not by you thus blessed)
^ine out those days we number to our rest.
CHAP. V.
Verse 1.
REmember, Lord, our evils, let them be
Charactered in Gold, in thy blessed Memory,
That lasting Register, that righteous Scroule;
Conscience, Vice-royall to the immortal Soul,
Shall stand to witness, while the sinner cries
To some vast mountain, to eclipse his eyes
From the Tribunal Throne; then, Lord, make room
For Fury, let the enemy have his doom.
(2)
Our fair Inheritance, like a short Song,
Is done, and gone, and thus we pass along;
Like Times benighted Shadows, so are we
Tired in pursuit of Earths Vanity,
Yea, Vanity indeed: were it not thus,
Why is the world so constant various?
Why should our Houses, Vineyards, and our pain,
Be our enraged enemies present gain.
(3)
Our dearest Fathers, in their honored Age,
By Death were summoned from Earths troubled Stage,
And now they slumber, now they rest, and lie
Rockt in Deaths Chariot, with lost Lullaby:
Our tender Mothers having lost their Loves,
Mourn like th'amorous Widowed Turele-Doves;
And we their sons, who live in desolate Tents,
Are silent Ruins of their Monuments.
(4)
The pleasant Rivers, whose sweet erystall streams
Refresht our souls with plenty, like the beams
Of orient Phoebus, when he makes his way
To cloathe all mortals with a Sunshine day;
Yet these our Waters and our Wood is sold
By weight and measure for the price of Gold,
Nay, more then Gold, our Bondage, that may tell
Coin with affliction has no parallel.
(5)
The almost-tyred Horse would rest his Load
From his galled shoulders in the dustie Road,
But for the Driver; thus poor we would borrow
An inch of respit, for an age of sorrow:
We are as Horses to th'eitlemies yoakes,
Laden with burdens, and pursued with strokes
Of our foes envy; now we know how blessed
Is the rare royalty of purchased Rest.
(6)
What heapt-up Plenty had our flourisht Land
Once for to glory in, when her high hand
Was stretched to other Nations in relief?
For wealth and honor she was counted chief
Among Earths Royal Princes; now even she,
Of late inthroned in Earths Majesty,
Is sold to Egypt, and to Ashur, so
We earne our bread, to linger out our woe.
(7)
And it is just we should so, while that we
Live in known Folly and Iniquity:
Our Fathers they have sinned, we bear their Names,
And their Rebellion, and why not their shames?
Our Fathers finn'd, and died, and are we better
Then our forefathers? was not man a debtor
Since the old words Creation, by folly? why
Does sinful man then think so much to die?
(8)
What in the world is more accounted vain,
Then servants for to rule, or fools to reign
Over th'honour'd Age? even such are we,
While we are captived to Captivity:
Thus Earth is various, and man's renown
Is but a Dream, not worth the writing down;
And if his glory be an idle Theme,
Who can expect realitie in a Dream?
(9)
Famine is feeble, yet the hungry soul
Is strong and valiant, and he dares control
A thousand eminent dangers, if that he
May feed his hunger and necessity:
Thus with the peril of our dearest breath,
We got our living in the spite of death,
In bondage, slaverie, labor, toil, and pain,
While the Sword randevouz'd upon the plain.
(10)
Those Alabaster bodies, whose rare faces
Were dressed with sweetness, fit for th'imbraces
Of undefiled Love; now, now, alas,
Those flourishing flowers are but like the grass,
The withering dying grass, parcht up with heat,
Black as the Oven; thus for want of meat,
Poor Sion is deformed with sin and shame,
While War and Famine has eclipsed our fame.
(11)
Now wickedness is ripe, now sin does climb,
Now Pride aspireth to the wings of Time;
Now fire is kindled in th'Adulterers eye
With hideous flames, whose wandering sparkles fly
To catch at every object which he may,
Showing black impudence in height of day,
Deflowring Maidens, and defiling Wives,
They make their mem'rie stink like their loathed lives.
(12)
The valiant Prince, whose Royalty did shine
Through Clouds of Envy, now the foes combine
By Death to dim his Glory, and the head
Of the wise Elder is dishonored:
Base Earth, these are thy gifts, and therefore we
Dishonor Virtue, by our honoring thee;
Let thine own servants love thee, which do spend
Time in vain folly, to an idle end.
(13)
How is illustrious Sion now declined
From her high Dignity? her young men grind
In the laborious Mill; the flowred Age,
Whose strength and valor taught them to engage
In fields of bloody War, when the proud foe
Could often witness their own overthrow,
Though now we are in woe, our Children cry
Under their heavy burdens; till they die.
(14)
Those Laws are cancelled too, which sometimes we
Did memorize in immortal memory;
The holy Elder sits not in the Gate,
With Heavens authority, to predominate;
Our mirth is alcumiz'd to funeral Songs,
And like sad Elegies, to tell our wrongs
To other Nations, while our following tears
Feeds our sad eyelids, as our mirth the ears.
(15)
The royal Tones which sometimes was afforded
From the rare Instrument, whose strings recorded
A well-measur'd evennesse, whose sweet story
Emblem'd the harmony of highest glory,
And Loves eternal joy; now all is gone,
Our Dance is ended, merriment is moan,
Our Music metamorphos'd, and our mirth
Sings this sad Song; oh false deluding Earth.
(16)
Oh false deluding Earth, honor and power,
And all thy glory, is as a swift-run hour,
Whose hasty minutes, whose laborious sand
Does run to over-take the wandering hand
Of Sols beshadow'd Dyall; thus our Crown
Of Earthly Royalty, Time trampleth down:
Woe to our souls that we have sinned, for why,
Sin makes up misery with mortality.
(17)
Therefore our hearts are sad, therefore our sleep
Forsakes our eyelids, therefore do we weep;
Therefore our souls are heavy, like a stone,
And our bathed bosoms Monuments of moan,
Or Brazen Epitaphs, if such there be,
Which keep the dead in lasting memory;
Leave me a while, my tears bid me adue,
Mine eyes ere long shall do as much for you.
(18)
Because of the high mountains which surround
The fair Jerusalem, my head is drowned
With my tormenting tears; that lofty Hill,
From which the Traveller might look his fill
About the promised Land, when midday Sun
Surveyed the circled word; now Foxes run
Upon those ruined Territories, which is
In spite of Envy the worlds Paradise.
(19)
But ah, why do we murmr? what, shall he
That is but Dust, dispose Eternity
To his fond reasoning? Lord, thou shall remain,
Although mortality be counted vain,
And soon shall vanish, yet thou art for aye,
Thou art not mortal, as the sons of Day;
And if thy Throne before all Time begun,
Then thou shall rule when Times swift race is run.
(20)
Wherefore so soon do thou forget us then?
Or why so long are we, poor sons of men,
Forgotten of thee? wherefore did thou make us
A pleasant Paradise, and then forsake us?
Can Souls stay here on Earth, when Death bereaves them?
Can Bodies live, when once the Soul does leave them?
Can Mortals prosper then, when God does dress
His face with anger, and forgetfulness?
(21)
Turn us, O Lord, and we shall turn indeed;
And if thou turn us not, our Land may bleed
In after-Ages, since no power at all
Is in fond man, since man at first did fall;
Renew those ancient days, that prosperous time,
When Sion once was seated in the prime
Of Princely Royalty; why have thou hurled
Deformity on the glory of the world?
(22)
But ah, what solace can poor Israel spy
Within this darkened Orb, when Heavens bright eye
Is furrowed up with frowns? if thou reject us,
What Land can save us, or what Arm protect us?
Oh, dearest Lord, how does thine anger pain
Our fainting Souls? oh, how exceeding vain
Is the worlds dignity? alas, our years
Begun with troubles, and must end with tears.
CONTEMPLATION V.
OUr laboring sands are run, yet Reader stay,
There is an Epilogue to the Tragic Play,
And it shall not be tedious; yet what he
That dips his Pen in Divine Poetry,
And on so rare a Subject, but must spend
Some weary hours ere his Work will end.
But ah, how dull is my dark Genius in this story?
I do but veil sweet Loves Celestial Glory
With a black Curtain, while the holy Writ
Is dressed with Lines of my unworthy wit:
Oh, I could rail aloud at my dull Muse
For this her ignorance; I could accuse
My dulled Pen; my hand, that ere I took
Such heavenly Oracles, to make a Book
Of such poor valuation; and often times
In anger I could rend these idle Rimes
In thousand pieces, for my Glass is run,
And I must end before I have begun.
For should I now my Subject here define,
Each line's a sentence, and each word a line
In these high Oracles: but I do wrong
The Reader much, to keep him off so long
From the last Contemplation, which may smell
Like costly Odours, some may like it well;
Then pray good Reader, that it may be blessed,
Something He show thee, study out the rest.
It was a Custom, when the Arcadian Kings
Would ask an Oracle for weighty things
Of god Apollo; they durst not presume,
Without a Cloud of Smoke, and rich Perfume,
To smother their Oblations, with their Cry
To urge the ears of the deaf Deity.
These blinded Heathens have out-stript us; they,
Although they knew no God, would sometimes pray;
When imminent dangers were even at the door,
Each cried unto his god, each did implore
Some help from unknown Powers; they would cast
Their bodies on their knees, they would mourn and fast,
And yet could have no answer; all their pain
Was labor lost, their gods themselves were vain.
But oh, deluded England, though thy knee
Has rockt dull man into a lethargy
Of sensual pleasures, and have glut his sense
In a fools paradise of Earths evidence;
Though we have slept in thy embracing arms,
Dreaming of Heaven, till these numerous swarms
Of fears did come and wake us; yet we know,
We have a God, that with one final blow
Can turn this spacious Universe aside,
And blast Hells Princes in their height of pride.
Yet do but mark how far we are behind
The Heathen world, that were both deaf and blind,
Yea, dead in ignorance: we all can say,
That prayer is prevalent, yet few do pray,
And fewer pray aright; few that can tell
The truest way, few do this duty well,
And those that do it best, how slack they be?
Where is the man that prays constantly?
Yet what more comely, then this sweet devotion?
Prayer is the wings that gives the Soul a motion
To high eternity, it is the hand
That reaches Clusters from the promised Land
Of sweet illustrious glory, it is the Arms
Tha^ ^he Soul wears against ensuing harms.
Prayer backed with Faith, is of far greater force
Then Warlike footmen over the trampling Horse;
It conquers mighty Armies, wins the field,
Strengthens the weak, and makes the mighty yield,
Gives feet unto the lame, eyes to the blind,
Courage to Cowards, virtue to the mind,
And honor for disgrace, Credit for shame,
In stead of bad reports, a righteous Name;
It gives us food, when Famine does commence,
It blunts the Sword, and stops the Pestilence;
It gives the sick recov'rie of his health,
And sends the poor man unexpected wealth,
And what is more desired, who can tell?
It open'th Heaven, and it conquers Hell;
It makes the Furies tremble, makes them flee
To that low Vault of black eternity,
With all their Plots of mischief, which the Arts
Of Fiends contrived, it blunts the fiery darts
Of Satan, and it gains a Royal Crown
Of endless glory, and unmatcht renown:
And when the Earth is dry, like parched Grain,
It flies to Heaven, and it fetches Rain;
And if the Corn be drowned in water, then
Prayer Jocks up those stormy showers again:
It calmes the swelling Ocean, and it tames
The burning Furnace, and the fiery flames;
It stays the Lions force, without a wound
It lays the sons of Anak on the ground;
It gives the tired Soul a little breath,
Gains immortality, and conquers Death.
And is (...)? Then for our troubled Times
Here is a Copy of Prophetic Rimes,
That tells the world there is a Death at hand
Unto the foes of Heaven, and our Land:
Mistake not, Reader, if at all thou lack
The sense hereof, this is no Almanac:
I do not speak an end of Englands Wars,
By the strange motion of the wandering Stars,
(Though it be plain) it would not be so well,
To write Predictions, or to parallel
The wondrous course of Heaven, and each Star:
No, no, good Reader, it is no Calendar,
For they may sometimes lie; but even you,
Whom it concerns, shall find this Book is true.
The holy Prophet with inspired skill
Foretold your Doom, he never used his Quill
In vain; what man ere found the Prophet ly'd?
He writ your Ruin, when he prophesied,
And then he prayed for it too; if prayer may
Not work your fall, why did the Prophet pray?
But to our Scene, why are our soes so hearty
In their dark deeds? there is a praying party
Waits at the gate of Heaven for a Seal,
To bind the Furies up in burning Steel,
And send the foes of Heaven to travel on
Fearful Cocytus, and black Phleaeton,
And the infernal Styae; then you shall share
In endless torments of the Churches Prayer.
Nay, you will know the price of Prayer, before
That Death has quite wiped out Dame Natures Skore,
When your sick souls upon your lips shall sit,
And Death shall 'rest you with a high Court Writ,
And when thy feet and han^^ by Death are bound,
And all about thee seem to dance the Round,
And when thy envious eyes are almost blind,
And when Hells hort or has possessed thy mind
With their tormenting fears, and when the Bell
Shall tell thy torturing Conscience, that new Hell
Is ready to receive thee; when the thing.
Thy couz'ned Soul did love, are o^ (...) ^ings
(...) fly away; when they shall sell and pawn
Thy ^pt-up goods, and when the Curtaine's drawn,
And all thy friends shall leave thee, with a Cry,
And Death begins to close thy darkened eye.
How would thy Soul then prize one hour, to pray,
And give a thousand worlds, that Death would stay
His summons but a while, and let him speak
A word to Heaven, though his words be weak?
But now it is too late: alas, the ears
Of Heaven's shut, and neither cries nor tears
Cannot avail: what can the sinner say?
His heart is hardened, and he cannot pray:
Oh, that he could! then one repenting story
Of faithful prayer, turns misery to glory;
And then an Habeas corpus comes apace,
To bring the Prisoner to another place;
This changes Death for Life, all misery
Into a Palace of Eternity,
Makes him to be Loves Monument; beside,
Death is no Jayler, but a gentle Guide.
If Prayer have this power, then why am I
So long in telling you their destiny,
That are the bloody Actors of these Times,
And sons of Horror? why do these my Rimes
Wrong thus your patience, and my weary Pen
Not character the rudeness of these men?
I Will tell you why, indeed I did intend,
But know not to begin, nor how to end.
Is the world mad? do giddie mortals see
Their Souls consist of immortality;
And shall th^^ short lived Stage, this transitory
Unworthy (...), still be the worldlings glory?
Why is the Land in such a hurry? why
Does Envy lodge in every lofty eye?
Why are our enemies of their wits bereaven?
Why, in their fury, do they rage at Heaven?
And why thus ruin Earth? and think it well,
To cut their passage to the Gates of Hell
With their bloud-thirstie Blades? what shall I say?
There is a godly party that does pray,
My foes, for your sad Ruin; these are them
That are the Citizens of Jerusalem,
And the worlds wondrous Warriors, whose clean hands
Are winged battlements for these weakened Lands.
By such as these, the Assyrians mighty Host,
Whose General blasphemed Heaven, and did boast
Of Fortitude and Valor, yet did run
With fear and horror, ere the fight begun;
And yet they had good cause to run and ride,
A hundred, fourscore, and five thousand died
That dismal evening, by an unseene Arm,
And Death did triumph in that numerous swarm
That measured out their graves; others did fly,
When none pursued them, with a mighty Cry.
'Twas Prayer deliv'red Paul, the Churches pain
Set Peter loose, knocked off his gingling Chain,
And saved Barnabas: if it be so,
Then this fore-tells our enemies overthrow;
Sing, Drink, and Swear, Curse, Vapor, Spoil, and Play,
The Church ere long will keep a holy day
In memory of your Ruin, for mine eye
Beholds the Day is near when you shall dye,
And your black Actions fall, it is very near,
In a dark Cloud; my foes you well may fear,
It Is even at your doors, I am sure you shall
Have both a sudden and a final fall;
And in your graves, when you shall sleep in dust,
Your glory dies, your Brazen Records rust,
Like to your rotten Names, you shall lay down
A weary body, and a wicked Crown:
Then a weak Child may travail by your grave,
Nay, trample on your honor, yet not have
(...) at his bosom; you will be
(...) Death lulls you to eternity.
(...) this all proud man can ever do?
(...) ^owning Envy, sleep in ashes too.
(...) oh, had now my hand an Eagles Quill,
(...) write high Rhethorick, or had I skill
^o picture those rare pleasures in my Lines,
Or paint those orient beams that ever shines
In Loves illustrious Glory; I could spend
Perpetual Ages, ere I made an end
Of embling Immortality for those
That are the friends of Heaven, and the worlds soes;
Those brave heroic hearts, that ever are
Above the Clouds, upon the wings of Prayer
And lofty Contemplation; those who fears
Sins guilt and horror, and with silent tears
Do bathe their amorous eyelids: but I Will miss
The Caract'ring so rare a Paradise,
Lest I am lost, and you too soon be drowned,
Sweet Readers, in amazement, and I wound
Your bosoms with Loves arrows, lest your eye
Should slumber too much in Loves Lullaby:
Who can describe their glory, lest he be
Himself wrapped first into eternity?
And so dear Land adue, let Loves sweet Boy
Crown thee with harmony of Peace and Joy,
And purest milke-white Robes, cast off thy moanes,
And let thy voice utter some ravished Tones,
(...) a well-measur'd evennesse; let thy days
Be past in purity, and spent in praise:
Oh do but banish sin, then a few years
Will wear out quite the mem'rie of thy fears;
Then Heaven will puff away this darkened storm,
And arch thy brows in a victorious form,
Give thee all Royalty, and thou shall ride
In Honors Chariot, and be dignified;
Adorn thy beauteous face with Virtues Gem,
Impale thy glory with a Diadem:
For present times thou shall have Lessons sent,
For after-Ages a learned President;
He will not leave thee, if thy gentle eye
Can learn the part of the Spouse loyalty.
England farewell, go dearest Nurse adue,
Forget not Heaven, he will think of you;
His lovely Arms thy body shall surround,
If thy archt brows be with sweet Virtue crowned:
Though I may fall, yet let this Infant be
Thy Guider, and a Monument for me.
FINIS.

