A BRIEF DECLARATION OF THE LORDS SUPPER WRITTEN BY BISHOP RIDLEY.

Imprimatur,

Liber cui Titulus, [A Brief Declaration of the Lord's Supper, etc.]

Guil. Needham RR. in Christo P. ac D. D. Wilhelmo Archiep. Cant. a Sacr. Dom.
Junii 7. 1688.
A BRIEF DECLARATION OF THE Lords Supper, WRITTEN By Dr. NICHOLAS RIDLEY,
Bishop of LONDON, During his IMPRISONMENT.

With some other Determinations and Disputations concerning the same Argument,
by the same Author.

To which is Annexed

An Extract of several Passages to the same Purpose, out of a Book, Entitled,
DIALLACTION, written by Dr. JOHN POYNET, Bishop of Winchester in the Reigns of
E. 6. and Q. Mary.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, M DC LXXX VIII.

THE PREFACE.
THE Doctrine of Transubstantiation maintained by our Adversaries of the Church
of Rome, is so gross, and highly repugnant to the first principles of reason,
and universal sense of mankind, that directly to defend it would be no less
impossible than unsuccessful. Artifices therefore were necessarily to be
invented, which might palliate the deformity of so monstrous an Opinion; and
divert inquisitive persons from a direct examination of it, by amusing them
with confident assertions and extraneous Controversies. Among these, the
difference of Opinion between the first Reformers and present Divines of the
Church of England has of late been proposed and urged with the greatest
vehemence; as if the first Reformers had believed somewhat equivalent to
Transubstantiation; and our present Divines, by asserting no other than a
figurative Presence of the material Body of Christ, had degenerated from the
belief of their Forefathers.

We might justly admire the unreasonable confidence of those men, who are not
ashamed to propose so manifest and gross a falsehood, and esteem it the highest
folly; if we did not remember that it is taken up to defend a desperate Cause,
which admits no better Remedies. Can any Man in his right wits believe that so
many hundred Martyrs should suffer death, and spend their blood for so
inconsiderable a nicety, as was the difference between them and their
Persecutors in the Doctrine of the Eucharist, if these late Representers may be
believed? That both Parties should dispute so earnestly and vehemently against
each other, and yet after all agree in the main? That the Romish Bishops should
treat the Reformers as Heretics for denying Transubstantiation; and the
Reformers lay down their lives rather than acknowledge it; and yet neither the
first to have defined it to be true, nor the last believed it to be false? Such
crude Positions can find no entertainment, but in a mind already fitted to
receive Transubstantiation it self, that is, devoid of Sense and Reason.

If we enquire the Reasons and Arguments, wherewith our Adversaries maintain
such incredible and extravagant assertions, we shall find them to be no other
than these, That the first Reformers taught and asserted a Real Presence of the
Body and Blood of Christ in the Sacrament; That they maintained the Body and
Blood to be verily and indeed taken and received by the faithful Communicants;
That they frequently affirmed the natural and substantial Body of Christ, that
very Body which was taken by him of the Virgin Mary, to be present in the
Sacrament. These very expressions are at this day used by the Divines of the
Church of England; whom yet our Adversaries pretend to have departed from the
belief of their Forefathers in this matter: So that if they prove the first
Reformers to have believed a material presence of Christ's Body, they will
prove our Present Divines to believe the same. For the whole Controversy will
come to this issue, Whether they believed any material Presence of Christ's
Body, or any part of it, either by conversion, substitution, or union? If they
positively disowned this, as most certainly they did; then whatsoever
expressions they might use, they could believe no other than a figurative
Presence of Christ's Body properly so called; which our Adversaries now traduce
under the name of Zuinglianism. And, indeed, if we give them leave to explain
themselves, they tell us, That in such expressions they use the terms of Real
Presence, Nature and Substance, not as Philosophers, but as Divines; and that
by denying the Eucharist to be a figure only, or a naked figure, they mean no
more, than that it is a true and real communication of the virtues and benefits
of his Body, not only a mere figurative commemoration of them, which is the
true notion of Zuinglianism.

To prove this, and vindicate the honor of the first Reformers and modern
Divines of our Church, and demonstrate the entire conformity of the belief of
both; it is thought convenient to cause some one Treatise of the first
Reformers concerning this Subject to be Reprinted, that so every one might
judge for himself, whether the pretensions of our Adversaries be indeed true
and just; or rather the Present is entirely conformable to the precedent
Doctrine of the Church of England. To this end, among all the Writings of the
first Reformers, this Treatise of Bishop Ridley, which we here publish, will
conduce most, by reason of the great and eminent Authority of the Author, which
was so highly considerable beyond that of any other Reformer, that he may
justly be esteemed the Standard of the Doctrine of the Church of England at
that time. Not only the assurance of his great learning and eminent station in
the Church, renders this probable; but that great part which he had in managing
the Affairs of the Reformation, and the extraordinary deference paid to his
Authority, and trust reposed in him by all Convocations, and the whole body of
the Reformers, demonstrate it. None can reasonably be put in competition with
him, except Archbishop Cranmer; and he also in his disputation at Oxford
professed, that he received his Opinion concerning the Eucharist from Bishop
Ridley. This the Romish Clergy were so sensible of in the time of Queen Mary,
that by a plausible calumny they endeavored to persuade the World, that the
private opinion of Ridley was the only foundation of the Doctrine of the
Reformed Church of England: For Brooks Bishop of Gloucester, Fox's Martyrol.
Vol. 3. p. 425.
Queen Mary's Commissioner, disputing against him in the public Schools at
Oxford, used this among other Arguments, What a weak and feeble stay in
Religion is this, I pray you? Latimer leans to Cranmer, Cranmer to Ridley,
and Ridley to the singularity of his own Wit: So that if you can overthrow the
singularity of Ridley 's Wit, then must needs the Religion of Cranmer and
Latimer fall also. To which I may add the words of Dr. Fecknam, Abbot of
Westminster, in his Speech in Parliament, Primo Elizabethae, made in defense of
the Church of Rome, which I have seen in Manuscript. Dr. Ridley, the notablest
learned of that Opinion in this Realm, did set forth at Paul 's Cross the real
presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament, with these words, which I heard,
staying then present; how that the Devil did believe the Sacrament of God was
able to make of Stones Bread: And we English people, we do confess that Christ
was the very Son of God, and yet will not believe that of Bread he made his
very Body Flesh and Blood; wherefore we are worse than the Devil: since that
our Savior by express words did more plainly affirm the same, when at his last
Supper he took Bread, and said unto his Disciples; Take ye, eat, this is my
Body, which shall be given for you. And shortly after, the said Mr. Doctor
Ridley notwithstanding this most plain and open Speech at Paul's Cross, did
deny the same.

Whether Fecknam has truly represented the words of Ridley, is uncertain. But
from the last words of this passage it is manifest, that some, even in that
time, taking occasion from this Sermon, had charged Bishop Ridley with
asserting a Material Presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament: and that he
constantly denied himself to have meant or intended any such presence. In this
therefore, and such like expressions, he intended only (as himself assures us)
to oppose those, who so lightly esteemed the Sacrament, Ibid. vol. 3. p. 35.
as to make of it but a figure. For that but makes it a bare sign, without any
more profit. But to clear his intention in this matter from all remaining
suspicion of any kind of Material Presence, I will annex a larger explication
of it in his own words, in his last examination before the Queens
Commissioners, September 30. 1555.

In like sort, as touching the Sermon, which I made at Paul's Cross, you shall
understand, that there were at Paul's, and diverse other places, fixed railing
Bills against the Sacrament, terming it Jack of the Box, the Sacrament of the
Halter, Round Robbin, with suchlike unseemly terms. For which causes, I, to
rebuke the unreverend behavior of certain evil disposed persons, Preached as
reverendly of that Matter, as I might, declaring what estimation and reverence
ought to be given to it; what danger ensued the mis-handling thereof; affirming
in that Sacrament to be truly and verily the Body and Blood of Christ,
effectually by Grace and Spirit. Which words the unlearned understanding not,
supposed that I had meant of the gross and carnal being, which the Romish
Decrees set forth, That a Body having life and motion, should be indeed under
the shapes of Bread and Wine.

This Treatise was written by Bishop Ridley during his imprisonment, a little
before his death, and several Copies of it dispersed abroad; of which, some
being carried beyond Sea, Dr. Grindall, and other English Exiles, conceived a
great desire of causing it to be translated into Latin, Ibid. p. 374.
and Printing it. The Bishop hearing of this, desired that by all means they
would lay aside their resolution, till they should see how God would dispose of
him. Accordingly it was omitted till his death. Immediately after his Martyrdom
it was Translated into elegant Latin, but in a Paraphrastical way, and Printed
at Geneva 1556. in 12s. The English Copy was Printed at London 1586. 12s. which
we have now caused to be faithfully Reprinted; adding to it out of Mr. Fox's
Martyrology, diverse Speeches, Disputations and Determinations upon the same
subject, which might farther illustrate and confirm his Opinion.

Lastly, Because the late Bishop of Oxford, in his last Treatise, disputing of
the ancient Opinion of the Reformed Church of England concerning the Eucharist,
and as his Cause required it, maintaining the same assertion with our
Adversaries, That some material sort of Presence was then believed; does
mightily urge the Authority of the Learned Dr. Poynet, Bishop of Winchester, at
that time proposed in his Diallection; and because that Book is not in English,
I have selected and annexed several passages out of it, which may demonstrate
what was indeed his notion of the Real Presence; That he denied all manner of
Material Presence, and perfectly agrees with Ridley in explaining the nature
of it: And consequently, that he is foully either Misrepresented or Mistaken by
the Bishop of Oxford.

A BREEF DECLARATION OF THE Lords Supper. WRITTEN By the singular Learned Man,
and most constant Martyr of Christ, NICHOLAS RIDLEY, Bishop of LONDON,

Prisoner in Oxford, a little before he suffered Death for the true testimonye
of JESUS CHRIST.

ROMANS VIII. For thy sake are we killed all day long, and are counted as sheep
appointed to be slain.

Nevertheless, in all these things we overcome through him that love us.

Printed at LONDON, 1586. And Reprinted for Ric. Chiswell, 1688.

TO THE READER.
Understand good (Reader) that this great Clark and blessed Martyr, Bishop
Nicholas Ridley, sought not by settinge forth any notable piece of learned
woork, the vain glory of the World, nor temporal freendship of men, for his
present advancement, much less he hunted heerby for Bishoprics and Benefices,
as al his adversaries, the enemies of Christ's Truth and Ordinance commonly
do: but having consideration of the great charge of Souls committed unto him,
and of the account thereof, which the Justice of God would require at his
hands, intending therwithal to be found blamles in the great day of the Lord,
seeing he was put a part to defend the Gospel: He not only forsook Lands,
Goods, World, Friends, and himself with all, and testified the Truth
specified in this Book by his learned mouth, in the open presence of the World:
but also to leave a sure Monument and Love Token unto his Flock, he has
registered it by his own Pen in this form ensuinge, and sealed it up with his
Blood. Forasmuch then as he has proved himself no vain disputer, no
wethercocke, nor hipocrite, seeing he has willinglye given his life for the
Truth, and in as much also as his love and most constant christen Conscience
speaks unto thee (gentle Reader) I beseech thee for Christ's sake and thine
own, lend him thine indifferent heart and pacient hearing.

A BRIEF DECLARATION OF THE Lords Supper.
MANY things confound a weak memory: A few places well weighed and perceived,
lighten the understanding. Truth is there to be searched, where it is certain
to be had, though God does speak the truth by man, yet in man's word, which
God has not revealed to be his, a man may doubt without mistrust in God.
Christ is the truth of God revealed unto man from Heaven by God him self, and
therefore in his word the truth is to be found, which is to be embraced of
all that be his. Christ bids us ask, and we shall have: search and we shall
find: knock, and it shall be opened unto us. Therefore our Heavenly The
blessed Martirs prayer.
Father, the Author and fountain of al truth, the bottomless Sea of al
understanding, send down we beseech thee, thy holy spirit into our hearts, and
lighten our understanding with the beams of thy heavenly grace. We ask thee
this, O merciful Father, not in respect of our deserts, but for thy dear
Son our Savior Jesus Christ's sake. Thou know, O heavenly Father, that the
controversy about the Sacrament of the blessed body and blood of thy deer
Son our Savior Jesus Christ, has troubled not of late only the Church of
England, France, Germany, and Italye, but also many year ago. The fault is
ours (na dout) therefore, for we have deserved thy plague. But (O Lord) be
merciful, and relieve our misery with some light of grace. Thou know (O
Lord) how this wicked world rolleth up and down, and reeleth to and fro, and
cares not what thy will is, so it may abide in wealth. If truth have wealth,
who are so stout to defend the truth, as they? But if Christ's cross be
laid on trueths back, then they vanish away straight, as Wax before the fire.
But these are not they, O Heavenly Father, for whom I make my most moan, but
for those silly ones, O Lord, which have a zeal unto thee: those I mean, which
would Note.
and wish to know thy will, and yet are let, holden back, and blinded by the
subtilties of Satan and his ministers, the wickedness of this wretched world,
and the sinful lusts and affections of the flesh. Alas Lord, thou know that
we be of our selves but flesh, wherein there dwells nothing that is good.
How then is it possible for man without thee (O Lord) to understand thy truth
indeed? Can the natural man perceive the will of God? (O Lord) to whom thou
give a zeal of thee, give them also (we beseech thee) the knowledge of thy
blessed will. Suffer not them (O Lord) blindely to be led for to strive against
thee: as thou did those (Alas) which crucified thine own Son, forgive
them (O Lord) for thy dear Sons sake, for they know not what they do. They
do think (Alas, O Lord) for lack of knowledge, that they do unto thee good
service even when against thee they do most extremelye rage. Remember, O
Lord, (we beseech thee) for whom thy Martyr Stephen did pray, and whom thine
holy Apostle Paul did so truly and earnestlye love: that for their
salvation, he wished himself accursed for them. Remember (O heavenly Father)
the prayer of thy dear Son, our Savior Christ upon the cross, when be
said unto thee, O Father forgive them, they know not what they do. With this
forgiveness, O good Lord, give me, I beseech thee, thy grace, so here breefly to
set forth the sayings of thy Son our Savior Christ, and of his
Evangelists, and of his Apostles, that in this aforesaid controversy, the
light of the truth, by the lantern of thy word, may shine unto all them that
love thee.

Of the Lords last supper do speak expreslye the Evangelists, Matthew, Mark,
and Luke: but none more plainelye nor more fully declares the same, then does
S. Paul, partly in the tenth Chapter, but specially in the xj. chapter of his
first epistle to the Corinthians. As Matthew and Mark do agree much in words,
so do likewise Luke and S. Paul. But all iiij. no doubt, as they were all
taught in one school, and inspired with one spirit, so taught they as one
truth. God grant us to understand it well. Amen.

Matthew sets forth Christ's Supper thus,

When even was come, he sat down with the xij. etc. As they did eat, Jesus took
bread and gave thanks, brake it, and gave it to the disciples, Math. 26.
and said: Take, eat: this is my body. And he took the cup and gave thanks,
gave it to them, saying, Drink ye al of this: for this is my blood of the new
testament that is shed for many for the remission of sins, I say unto you, I
will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine tree, until that day,
when I shall drink that new in my fathers kingdom. And when they had said
grace they went out.

Now Mark speaks it thus.

And as they eat, Jesus took bread, blessed, and brake, and gave to Mark 14.
them and said, take, eat, this is my body. And took the cup gave thanks, and
gave it to them, and they all drank of it. And he said unto them: This is my
blood of the new testament, which is shed for many. Verily I say unto you, I
will drink no more of the fruit of the vine, until that day, that I drink that
new, in the kingdom of God.

Here Matthew and Mark do agree not only in the matter, but also almost fully
in the form of words. In Matthew, gave thanks. Mark has one word, Blessed:
which signifies in this place al one. And where Matthew says, Drink ye al of
this, Mark says, they al drank of it. And where Matthew says, of this fruit
of the vine; Mark leaves out the word this, and says, of the fruit of the
vine.

Now let us see likewise, what agreement (in form of words) is between S.
Luke and S. Paul.

Luke writes thus,

He took bread, gave thanks, brake it and gave it to them, saying; Luke 22.
this is my body which is given for you, this do in remembrance of me.
Likewise also when they had supped, he took the Cup, saying, this Cup is the
new Testament in my blood, which is shed for you.

Saint Paul sets forth the Lords Supper thus,

The Lord Jesus, the same night, in the which he was betrayed, took 1 Cor. 11.
Bread, and gave thanks and brake, and said, take, eat, this is my body
which is broken for you. This do in remembrance of me. After the same manner he
took the Cup, when supper was done, saying, this Cup is the new testament in my
blood. This do as often as ye shall drink it in remembrance of me. For as
often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye shall show the
Lords death, until he come.

Here where S. Luke says, which is given; Paul says, which is broken. And
as Luke adds to the words of Paul spoken of the Cup which is shed for you,
so likewise Paul adds to the words thereof, this do, as often as ye shall
drink it, in remembrance of me. The rest that follows in S. Paul, both
there and in the tenth Chapter, pertains unto the right use of the Lords
Supper.

Thus the Evangelists and S. Paul have rehearsed the words and work of
Christ, whereby he did institute and ordain this holy Sacrament of his body
and blood to be a perpetual remembrance unto his coming again of him self,
I say that is of his body given for us, and of his blood shed for the remission
of sins. But this remembrance which to thus ordained, as the author thereof
is Christ, both God and Man, so by the almightye power of God, if far passes
al kinds of remembrances, that any other man is able to make either of him
self, or of any other thing. For whosoever receives this holy Sacrament thus
ordained in remembrance of Christ, he receives therewith either death or life.
In this (I trust) we do al agree, For S. Paul says of the godly receivers in
the tenth Chapter of his first Epistle unto the Cerinthians, The Cup of
blessinge, which we bless, is it not the pertaking or fellowship of Christ's
blood? And also says, the Bread which we break (and means at the Lords
Lable) Is it not the partaking or fellowship of Christ's body? Now the partaking
of Christ's body and of his blood unto the faithful and godly, is the
partaking or fellowship of life and immortality. And again of the bad and
ungodly receivers, S. Paul as plainly says thus. He that eats of this
bread, and drinks of this cup unworthily, is gilty of the body and blood of
the Lord. Note.


O how necessary then it is, if we love life, and would eschew death, to try
and examine our selves, before we eat of this bread, and drink of this cup,
for else assuredly, he that eats and drinks thereof vnworthilye, eats and
drinks his own damnation, because he esteems not the Lords body, that is,
he reuerenceth not the Lords body with the honor that is due unto him.

And that which was said, that with the receite of the holy Sacrament of the
blessed body and blood of Christ is received of every one, good and bad,
either life or death: it is not meant, that they which are dead before God, may
heerby receive life: or the living before God, can heerby receive death.

For as none is meet to receive natural food, whereby the natural life is
nourished, except he be borne and live before: so no man can feed (by the
receipt of this holy Sacrament) of the food of eternal life, except he be
regenerated and borne of God before. And on the other side, no man here
receives damnation which is not dead before. Thus hethertoo without al doubt,
God is my witness I say so far as I do know, there is no controversy
among them that be learned, in the Church of England (concerning the matter
of this Sacrament) but al do agree, whether they be new or old, and to speak
plain, and as some of them do odiously call either other, whether they be
Protestants, Papists, Pharisees or Gospellers. And as all do agree hithertoo,
in the aforesaid Doctrine: so all do deteste, abborre and condemn the wicked
heresy of the Messalonians which otherwise be called Eutichets, which said
that the holy Sacrament can neither do no good nor harm. All do also condemn
those wicked Anabaptists, which put no difference between the Lords Table and
the Lords meat, and their own. And because charity would, that we should, (if
it be possible, and so far as we may with the sauegarde of good conscience, and
maintenance of the truth) agree with all men: therefore me thinks it is not
charitablye done to burden any man (either new or old, as they call them)
further, then such do declare themselves, to dissent from that we are
persuaded to be truth, or pretend thertoo to be controversies, where as none
such are in deed: and so to multiply the debate, the which the more it does
increase, the further it does depart from the unity, that the true Christian
should desire.

And again this is true, that truth another needs nor will be What it is to
lie. The slanderous lies of the Papists.
maintained with lies. It is also a true proverb, That it is even sin to lie
upon the Devil. For though by thy lie thou do never so much speak against
the Devil, yet in that thou lie in deed thou woorkest the Devils work, thou
do him service, and take the Devils part. Now whether then they do godly
and charitablye, which either by their Pen in Writing, or by their Words in
Preaching, do bear the simple people in hand, that those which thus do teach
and believe, do go about to make the holy Sacrament (ordained by Christ
himself) a thing no better then a piece of common Bread: or that do say,
that such do make the holy Sacrament of the blessed body and blood of
Christ, nothing else but a bare sign or a figure, to represent Christ none
otherwise, then the Ivye bushe does represent the Wine in a Tauern, or as a
vile person gorgiouslye apparalled, may represent a King or a Prince in a
play. Alas let men leave lying, and speak truth everye one, not only to his
neighbor: but also of his neighbor, for we are members one of an other
says Saint Paul. The controversy (no doubt) which at this day troubles the
Church (wherein any mean learned man, either old or new, does stand in) is
not, whether the holy Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, is no better
then a piece of common bread or no: or whether the Lords Table is no more to
be regarded, then the Table of any earthly man or no: or whether it is but a
bare sign or figure of Christ and nothing else or no. For all do grant, that
S. Paul's words do require, that the bread which we break, is the partaking
of the body of Christ, and also do grant him that eats of that bread, or
drinks of that cup unworthily, to be gilty of the Lords death, and to eat
and drink his own damnation, because be esteems not the Lords body. All do
grant, that these words of S. Paul, (when he says: If we eat. it
aduantageth us nothing: or if we eat not, we want nothing thereby) are not
spoken of the Lords Table, but of other common meats.

Thus then betherto yet, we all agree. But now let us see, Wherein the
controuerfie consists.
wherein the dissension does stand. The understanding of it, wherein it cheeflye
stands, is a step to the true searching forth of the truth. For who can
seek well a remedy, if he know not before the disease? It is neither to be
denied nor dissembled, that in the matter of this Sacrament there be diverse
points, wherein men (counted to be learned) cannot agree. As, whether there be
any Transubstantiation of the bread, or no: any corporal and carnal presence
of Christ's substance, or no. Whether adoration (due only unto God) is to be
done unto the Sacrament or no? and whether Christ's body be there offered in
deed unto the heavenly Father, by the Preeste or no? and whether the evil man
receives the natural body of Christ or no. Yet nevertheless as in a man
diseased in diverse parts, commonly the original cause of such diverse diseases
which is spread abroad in the body, do come from one chief member, as from the
stomach, or from the head, even so all five aforesaid do chiefly hang upon
this one question, which is, What is the matter of the Sacrament? whether is it
the natural substance of bread, or the natural substance of Christ's own
body? The truth of this question truly tried out and agreed upon, no doubt
shall cease the controversy in all the rest. For if it be Christ's own
natural body, born of the Virgin: then assuredlye (seeing that all learned men
in England so far as I know, both new and old, grant there to be but one
substance, then I say, they must needs grant Transubstantiation: that is, a
change of the substance of bread, into the substance of Christ's body. Then
also they must needs grant the carnal and corporal presence of Christ's body.
Then must the Sacrament be adorred with the honor due to Christ him self,
for the unity of the two natures in one person. Then if the Priest do offer
the Sacrament, he does offer indeed Christ him self. And finally the
murderer, the aduouterer, or wicked man receiuinge the Sacrament, must needs
then receive also the natural substance of Christ's own blessed body, both
flesh and blood.

Now on the other side, if after the truth shall be truly tried out, it shall
be found, that the substance of bread is the natural substance of the
Sacrament, although for the change of the use, office and dignity of the
bread, the bread indeed Sacramentally is changed into the body of Christ, as
the water in Baptism is sacramentally changed into the fountain of
regeneration, and yet the natural substance thereof remains al one, as was
before: if I say the true solucion of that former question (whereupon all these
controversies do hang) be, that the natural substance of bread, is the
material substance in the Sacrament of Christ's blessed body: then must it
needs follow of the former proposition (confessed of all that be named to be
learned, so far as I do know, in England) which is that there is but one
material substance in the Sacrament of the body, and one only likewise in the
Sacrament of the blood, that there is no such thing indeed and in truethe, as
they call Transubstantiation: for the substance of bread remains still in the
Sacrament of the body, then also the natural substance of Christ's humain
nature, which he took of the Virgin Mary is in Heaven, where it reigns now in
glory, and not here enclosed under the form of bread, then the godly honor,
which is only due unto God the creator, may not be done unto the creature
without idolatrye and sacrilege, is not to be done unto the holy Sacrament.

Then also the wicked, I mean the impenitent murtherrer, aduluterer, or such
like, do not receive the natural substance of the blessed body and blood of
Christ. Finally, then does it follow, that Christ's blessed body and blood,
which was once only offered and shed upon the Cross, being auaylable for the
sins of all the whole world, is offered up no more, in the natural substance
thereof, another by the Priest, nor any other thing. But here before we go any
further to search in this matter, and to wade (as it were) to search and try
out (as we may) the truth heerof in the Scripture, it shall do well by the
way to know whether they that thus make answer and solucione unto the former
principal question, do take away simply and absolutely the presence of
Christ's body and blood, from the Sacrament ordained by Christ, and dulye
ministered according to his holy ordinance and institution of the same.
Undoubtedly they do deny that btterlye, either so to say, or so to mean.
Heerof if any man do or will doubt, the books which are written already in
this matter of them, that thus do answer, will make the matter plain.

Now then will you say, what kind of presence do they grant, and what do
they deny? Breeflye they deny the presence of Christ's body in the natural
substance of his humain and assumpt nature, and grant the presence of the same
by grace: that is, they affirm and say, that the substance of the natural
body and blood of Christ is only remaining in Heaven, and so shall be unto
the latter day, when he shall come again in glory, (accompanied with the
Angels of Heaven) to judge both the quick and the dead. And that the same
natural substance of the very body and blood of Christ, because it is united
unto the divine nature in Christ the second person of the Trinitle. Therefore
it has not only life in it self, but is also able to give and does give
life unto so many as be or shall be partakers thereof, that is, that to all that
do believe on his name, which are not borne of blood (as S. John says) or of
the will of the flesh, or of the will of man, but are borne of God: though the
self-same substance abide still in Heaven, and they for the time of their
pilgrimage dwell here upon Earth: by grace I say, that is, by the life mentioned
in John and the properties of the same, meet for our pilgrimage here upon
earth, the same body of Christ is here present with us. Even as for example,
we say, the same Sun (which in substance) never remoueth his place out of
the Heavens, is yet present here by his beams, light and natural influence,
where it shines upon the earth. For Gods Word and his Sacraments be (as it
were the beams of Christ) which is Sol iustitiae, the Sun of righteousness.

Thus have thou heard, of what sort or sect soever thou be, wherein does stand
the principal state and cheef point of all the controversies, which do
properly pertain unto the nature of this Sacrament. As for the use thereof I
grant there be many other things, whereof here I have spoken nothing at all.
And now least thou justly might complain, and say, that I have in
openinge of this matter done nothing else, but dug a pit, and have not shut
it up again: or broken a gap, and have not made it up again: or opened the
book, and have not closed it again: or else to call me what thou listest, as
neuterall dissembler, or what soever else thy lust and learning shall serve thee
to name me woorsse: Therefore here now I will (by Gods grace) not only shortly,
but so clearly and plainly as I can make thee to know, whether of the
aforesaid two answers to the former principal state and cheef point does like
me best: yea and also I will hold all those accursed, which in this matter
that now so troubles the Church of Christ have of God received the keep of
knowledge, and yet go about to shut up the doors so that they themselves will
not enter in nor suffer other that would. And as for mine own part, I
consider but of late what charge and cure of soul has bin committed unto me,
whereof God knows, how soon I shall be called to give accounte: and also now in
this world what peril and danger of the laws concerning my life I am now in
at this present time. What folly were it then for me, now to dissemble with
God, of whom assuredly I look and hope by Christ to have everlasting life?
Seeing that such charge and danger both before God and man, do compass me in
round about on every side: therefore God willing I will frankly and freelye
utter my mind, and though my body be captive, yet my tung and my pen as long
as I may shall freely set forth, that which vndubtedlye I am persuaded to be the
truth of Gods Word. And yet I will do it under this protestation, call me
Protestant who lusts, I pass not thereof. My protestation shall be thus: that
my mind is and ever shall be (God willinge) to set forth sincerelye the true
sense and meaning (to the best of my understanding) of Gods most holy
word, and not to decline from the same, either for fear of worldly danger,
or else for hope of gain.

I do proteste also due obedience and submission of my judgment in this my
writing, and in all other mine affairs unto those of Christ's Church, which be
truly learned in Gods holy Word, gathered in Christ's Name and guided by his
Spirit. After this protestation, I do plainly affirm and say, that the
second Answer to the cheef question.
question and principal point, I am persuaded to be the very true meaning and
sense of Gods holy Word: that is, that the natural substance of bread and
wine is the true material substance of the holy Sacrament of the blessed body
and blood of our Savior Christ: and the places of Scripture whereupon this my
faith is grounded, be these, both concerning the Sacrament of the body and also
the blood.

First let us repete the beginning of the institution of the Lords Supper
wherein all the three Evangelists, and S. Paul almost in words do agree,
saying that Jesus took bread, gave thanks, brake, and gave it to the Disciples
saying: Take, eat, this is my body.

Here it appears plainly, that Christ calls very bread his body. For that
which he took, was very bread. In this all men do agree. And that which he
took, after he had given thanks, he brake: and that which he took and brake,
he gave to his disciples: and that which be took, brake, and gave to his
Disciples he said him self of it: This is my body. So it appears plainelye
that Christ called very bread his body. But very bread cannot be his body in
very substance thereof: therefore it must needs have an other meaning. Which
meaning appears plainelye what it is, by the next sentence that follows
immediately, both in Luke and in Paul. And that is this.

Do this in remembrance of me. Wher-vpon it seems unto me to be evident,
that Christ did take bread, and called it his body, for that he would thereby
institute a perpetual remembrance of his body: specially of the singular
benefit of our redemtion, which he would then procure and purchase unto us by
his body upon the Cross. But bread retaining still his own very natural
substance, may be thus by grace, (and in a sacramental signification) his body:
whereas else the very bread which he took, brake, and gave them, could not be any
wise his natural body. For that were confusion of substances, and therefore
the very words of Christ ioynes with the next sentence following, both
enforces us to confess the very bread, to remain still, and also opens
unto us, how that bread may be and is thus by his divine power his body, which
was given for us. But here I remember I have red in some writers of the
contrary opinion, which Christ did take, be brake. For say they, after his
taking, he blessed it as Mark does speak. And by his blessing, be changed the
natural substance of the bread into the natural substance of his body: and so
although he took the bread, and blessed it, yet because in blessing he changed
the substance of it, he brake not the bread, which then was not there, but
only the form thereof.

Unto this objection I have two plain answers, both grounded upon Gods word.
The one I will here rehearse, the other answer I will differ, until I speak of
the Sacrament of the blood. Mine answer here is taken out of the plain words
of S. Paul which does manifestly confound this fantastical invention, first
invented (I ^een) of Pope Innocentius, and after confirmed by the subtle
sophister Duns, and lately renewed now in our days, with an eloquent style and
much finenesse of wit. But what can crafty invention, subtiltye in sophismes,
eloquence or finenesse of wit Mar. Antho. Constan. Gardenar.
prevail against the infallible Word of God? What need we to strive and
contend what thing we break, for Paul says, speaking undoubtedly of the
Lords Table: The bread (says he) which we break, is it not the partaking or
fellowship of the Lords body?

Whereupon it follows, that after the thanks giving it is bread which we
break. And how often in the Acts of the Apostles is the Lords Supper signified
by breaking of bread? They did persevere (says S. Luke) in the Apostles
Doctrine, Communion, and Acts 2. 20.
breaking of bread. And they brake bread in every house.

And again in an other place when they were come together to break bread, etc.
S. Paul which sets forth most fully in his writing both the doctrine and
the right use of the Lords Supper, and the Sacramental eating and drinkinge of
Christ's body and blood, calls it five times bread, bread, bread, bread, bread.

The sacramental bread is the mystical body, and so it is called The second
reason.
in Scripture, 1 Cor. 10. as it is called the natural body of Christ. But
Christ's mystical body is the congregation of Christians. Now no man was ever
so fond, as to say, that that sacramental bread is transubstantiated and
changed into the substance of the congregatione. Wherefore no man should
likewise think, or say, that the bread is transubstantiated and changed into
the natural substance of Christ's human nature.

But my mind is not here to write what may be gathered out of Scriptures for
this purpose, but only to note here breefly, those which seem unto me, to be
the most plain places. Therefore contented to have spoken thus much of the
Sacramental bread: I will now speak a little of the Lords cup.

And this shall be my third Argument grounded upon Christ's The third Argument.
own words. The natural substance of the sacramental Wine remains still,
and is the material substance of the Sacrament of the blood of Christ:
Therefore it is likewise so in the sacramental Bread.

I know that he that is of a contrary opinion, will deny the former part of
mine Argument. But I will prove it thus by the plain words of Christ
himself, both in Mathewe and in Mark. Christ's words are these: after the
words said upon the cup: I say unto you, says Christ, I will not drink
hencefoorthe of this fruit of the vine tree, until I shall drink that new in
my fathers kingdom. Here note how Christ calls plainly his cup the fruit
of the vine tree. But the fruit of the vine is very natural wine. Wherefore the
natural substance of the wine doothe remain still in the Sacrament of
Christ's Blood.

And here in speaking of the Lords Cup: it comes unto my remembrance the
vanity of Innocentius his fantastical invention, which by Paul's words I
did confute before, and here did promise somewhat more to speak, and that is
this: if this Transubstantiatione be made by this word, Blessed, in Mark said
upon the bread, as Innocentius that Pope did say: then surely seeing that
word is not said of Christ neither in any of the Evangelists nor in S.
Paul upon the cup: There is no Transubstantiatione of the Wine at all. For
where the cause does fall, there cannot follow the effect. But the
sacramental Bread and the sacramental Wine do both remain in their natural
substance a like, and if the one be not changed, as of the sacramental Wine it
appears evidently: then there is no such Transubstantiatione in another of
them both.

All that trust and affirm this change of the substance of bread The Papists,
affirm they wot not what.
and mine into the substance of Christ's Body and Blood called
Transubstantiation: do also say this change to be made by a certain form of
prescripte words, and none other. But what they be that make the change,
either of the one, or of the other: undoubtedly even they that do write most
finelye in these our days, almost confess plainly, that they can not tell.
For although they grant to certain of the old authors, as Chrisostom, and
Ambrose: that these words This is my body, are the words of consecration
Gardener to the 48. Objection.
of the Sacrament of the body: yet say they, these words may well be so
called, because they do assure us of the cousecration thereof, whether it be
done before these words be spoken or no.

But as for this their doubt, concerning the Sacrament of the body, I let it
pass. Let us now consider the words which pertain to the Cup. This is first
evident, that as Mathewe much agreeeth with Mark, and likewise Luke with Paul
much agreeeth beerein in form of words, so in the same form of words in
Matthew and Mark is diverse from that which is in Luke and Paul: the old
authors do most rehearse the form of words in Mathewe and Mark: because I
ween they seemed to them most clear. But beer I would know, whether it is
credibly or no, that Luke and Paul, when they celebrated the Lords Supper
with their congregations, that they did not not use the same form of words
(at the Lords Table) which they wrote, Luke in his Gospel, and Paul in his
Epistle. Of Luke, because he was a Physician, whether some will grant, that he
might be a Preesse or no, and was able to receive the order of preesthood,
which (they say) is given by the virtue of these words said by the Bishop:
Take thou authority to Sacrifice for the quick and the dead. I can not tell,
but if they should be so straight upon Luke either for his craft, or eis for
lack of such Peter and Paul had no such preesthood as the Papists have.
power given him by virtue of the aforesaid words: then I ween, both Peter
and Paul are in danger to be deposed of their preesthood, for the craft either
of Fishinge, which was Peter's: or making of Tents, which was Paul's, were more
vile, then the science of Physic.

And as for those sacramental words of the order of Preesthood, to have
authority to sacrifice both for the quick and the dead, I ween Peter and
Paul (if they were both a live) were not able to prove, that ever Christ
gave them such authority, or ever said any such words unto them. But I will
let Luke go, and because Paul speaks more for him self: I will rehearse
his words: That (says Paul) which I received of the Lord, I gave unto you.
For the Lord Jesus, etc. And so he sets forth the whole institution and
right use of the Lords Supper. Now seeing that S. Paul here says, that
which he received of the Lord, he had given them, and that which he has
received and given them before by word of mouth: now he rehearses and writes
the same in his Epistle, is it crediblye that Paul would never use this form
of words, upon the Lords cop, which (as he says) he received of the Lord,
that he had given them before, and now rehearses in his Epistle? I trust no
man is far from al reason, but he will grant me, that this is not likely so to
be.

Now then, if you grant me, that Paul did use the form of words, which he
writes: Let us then rehearse and consider Paul's word, which he says,
Christ spoke thus upon the Cup.

This Cup is the New Testament in my blood, this do: as often as ye shall
drink it in the remembrance of me.

Here I would know, whether that Christ's words spoken upon the cup were not
as mighty in woork, and as effectual in signification to all intentes,
constrictions, and purposes, (as all our Parliament men do speak) as they were
spoken upon the bread. If this be granted, which thing I think no man can
deny: then further I reason thus. But the word (Is) in the words spoken upon
the Lords bread does mightily signify (say they) the change of the substance
of that which goes before it into the substance of that which follows after,
that is, of the substance of bread into the substance of Christ's body, when
Christ says: This is my body. Now then if Christ's words which are spoken
upon the cup, which Paul here rehearses be of the same might and power, both
in woorking and signifying: then must this word (Is) when Christ says: This
Cup is the new Testament, etc. turn the substance of the cup into the
substance of the new testament. And if thou will say, that this word (Is)
another makes nor signifies any such change of the cup, Although it be said of
Christ, that this cup is the new testament, yet Christ meant no such change as
that. Marry sir, even so say I, when Christ said of the bread, which he
took, and after thanks given, brake, and gave them, saying: Take, eat, this is
my body, he meant no more any such change of the substance of bread into the
substance of his natural body, then he meant of the change and
transubstamiation of the cup into the substance of the new Tellament. And if
thou will say that the word (Cup) here in Christ's words does not signify
the Cup it self, but the Wine or thing centeined in the cup, by a figure called
Metonymia, for that Christ's Note well the Papists error consuted.
words so meant, and must needs be taken: thou say very well. But I pray
thee by the way, here note two things, First that this word, Is, has no
such strength or signification in the Lords words, to make or to signify
any transubstanciation. Secondly, that the Lords words whereby he instituted
the Sacrament of his blood: he uses a figurative speech. How vain then is it,
that some so earnestly do say, as it were an infallible rule, that in doctrine
and in the institution of the Sacraments, Christ used no figurs, but all his
words are to be strained to their proper significations: when as here what
soever thou say was in the cup, another that nor the cup it self, taking
every word in his proper signification, was the new testament, but in
understanding that which was in the cup by the cup that is a figurative
speech: yea and also thou can not verify or truly say of that whether thou
say it was wine or Christ's blood, to be the new testament without a figure
also. Thus in one sentence spoken of Christ, in the institution of the
Sacrament of his blood, the figure must help us twice. So untrue it is, that
some do write, that Christ uses no figure in the doctrine of faith, nor in
the institution of his sacraments. But some say, if we shall thus admit figures
in doctrine: then shall all the articles of our faith, by figures and
allegories shortly be transformed and unloosed. I say it is like fault, and even
the same, to deny the figure, where the place so reguirethe to be
understanded, as bainly to Aug. de doc. Christiana. li. 3. ca. 16.
make it a figurative speech, which is to be understood in his proper
signification.

The rules whereby the speech is known, when it is figurative, and whereby it is
none. S. Augustine in his book. De doctrina Christiana, gives diverse learned
lessons, very necessary to be known of the students in Gods word. Of the
which, oue I will rehearse, which is this: If (says he) the scripture does
seem to command a thing, which is wicked or ungodly, or to forbid a thing
that charity does require: then know, says he, that the speech is figurative.
And for example, he bringethe the saying of Christ, in the vj. chapter of S.
John. Except ye eat of the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood:
Gardener in his answers to the 161. and 226. objection. Note.
ye can not have life in you. It seems to command a wicked or anvngodly
thing, wherefore it is a figurative speech, commanding to have Communion and
fellowship with Christ's passion, and devoutly and holsomly to lay up in memory,
that his flesh was crucified and wounded for us.

And here I can not but maruail at some men, surely of much excellent finenesse
of wit, and of great eloquence, that are not ashamed to write and say, that
this aforesaid saying of Christ is after S. Augustine a figurative speech
indeed: howbeit not unto the learned, but to the unlearned. Here let any man
that but indifferently understands the Latin tongue, read the place in S.
Austine: and if ye perceive not clearly S. Augustins words, and mine to be
contrary, let me abide thereof the rebuke.

This lesson of S. Augustine I have therefore the rather set forth, because it
teaches us to understand that place in John figuratively. Even so surely the
same lesson with the example of S. Augustins expositions thereof, teaches us
nor only by the same, to understand Christ's words in the Institution of the
Sacrament both of his body and of his blood figuratively, but also the very
true meaning and understanding of the same. For if to command to eat the
flesh of the son of man, and to drink his blood, seems to command an
inconvenience and an ungodliness, and is even so indeed, if it be understood
as the words do stand in their proper signification: and therefore must be
understood figuratiuelye and spiritually, as S. Augustine does godly and
learnedly interpret them: then surely Christ commanding in his last Supper
to eat his body and drink his blood, seemed to command in sound of words
as grate and even the same inconvenience and ungodliness, as did his words
in the vj. of S. John: and therefore must even by the same reason, be likewise
understood and expounded figuratively and spiritually, as S. Augustine did
the other: Whereunto that exposition of S. Augustine may seem to be the more
meet, for that Christ in his supper, to the commandment of eating and
drinkinge of his body and blood, adds: Do this in remembrance of me. Which
words surely were the keye that opened and revealed the spiritual and godly
exposition unto Saint Augustine.

But I have tarried longer in settinge forth the form of The Lords Cup as the
Preests say.
Christ's words upon the Lords cup, written by Paul and Luke then I did
intend to do. And yet in speaking of the form of Christ's words, spoken upon
his cup, comes now to my remembrance the form of words used in the Latin
Mass, upon the Lords cup. Whereof I do not a little marvel, what should be
the cause, seeing the Latin Mass agreeeth with the Evangelists and Paul, in
the form of words said upon the bread why in the words said upon the
Lords cup, it differs from them all, yea and adds to the words of
Christ spoken upon the cup these words, Misterium fidei, that is, the
mystery of faith, which are not red to be attributed unto the Sacrament of
Christ's blood, another in the Evangelists, nor in Paul, nor so far as I know
in any other place of holy Scripture, yea and if it may have some good
expositione, yet why it should not be as well added unto the words of Christ
upon his Bread, as upon his Cup, surely I do not see the mystery. And
because I see in the use of the Latin Mass, the Sacrament of the blood
abused, when it is denied unto the lay people, clean contrary unto Gods
most certain word: for why, I do beseech thee, should the Sacrament of
Christ's blood he denied unto the lay Christian more then to the Preeste? Did
not Christ shed his blood as well for the lay godly man, as for the godly
Preeste? If thou will say, yes that he did so. But the Sacrament of the blood
is not to be received without the offeringe up and sacrificinge thereof unto God
the Father, both for the quick and for the dead: and no man may make oblation
of Christ's blood unto God but a Priest, and therefore the Priest alone, and that
but in his Mass only, may receive the Sacrament of the blood. And call you
this, Masters, Mysterium fidei?

Alas, alas, I fear me, this is before God, Misterium iniquitatis, the
misterye of iniquity, such as S. Paul speaks of, in his Epistle to the
Thessalonians. The Lord be merciful unto us, and 2 These 2. Prayer Psalm. 67.
bless us, lighten his countenance upon us, and be merciful unto us. That we
may know thy way upon earth, and among all people thy salvation.

This kind of oblation stands upon Transubstantiation his The Mass
sacrifice injurious to Christ's passion.
(...) german, and they do grow both upon one ground. The Lord weed it out
of his Vin^arde shortly, if it be his blessed will and pleasure, that bitter
root. To speak of this oblatione, how much is it injurious unto Christ's
passion?

How? it can not, but with high blasphemy and heinous arrogance, and
intolerable pride, be claimed of any man, other then of Christ himself: how
much and how plainly it repugneth unto the manifest words, the true sense and
meaning of holy Scripture in many places, especially in the Epistle to the
Hebrews: the matter it is so long, and other have written in it at large, that
my mind is now, not to entreat thereof any further.

For only in this my scribbling, I intend to search out and set forth by the
Scriptures (according to Gods gracious gift of my poor knowledge) whether
the true sense and meaning of Christ's words in the institution of his holy
supper, do require any Transubstantiation, as they call it: or that the very
substance of bread and wine do remain still in the Lords Supper and be the
material substance of the holy Sacrament of Christ our Saviors blessed
body and blood. Yet there remains one vain Quidditi of Duns in this
matter, the which because some Gardener in the answer to the 15. objection.
that write now do seem to like it so well that they have stripped him out of
Dunces dusty and dark terms, and pricked him and painted him in fresh
colors of an eloquent style: and may therefore deceive the more, except the
error be warelye eschewed.

Duns says in these words of Christ, This is my body, this pronowne
demonstratiue, meaning the word (This) if ye will know what it does show
or demonstrate, whether the bread that Christ took or no: he answers no, but
only one thing in substance (...) paintethe, whereof the nature or name it
doothe not tell, but leaves that to be determined and told by that which
follows the word Is, that is by Praedicatum, as the Logician does speak:
and therefore he calls this pronowne demonstratiue. (This) Indiuiduum vagum,
that is, a wandering proper name, whereby we may point out and show any one
thing in substance, what thing soever it be. That this imagination is vain
and untruly applied unto these words of Christ, This is my body: it may
appear plainly in the words of Luke and Paul said upon the cup, conferred
with the form of words spoken upon the cup in Mathewe and Mark. For as upon
the bread it is said of all. This is my body: so of Matthew and Mark, it is
said upon the cup: This is my blood. Then if in the words, This is my body,
the word (This) be as Duns calls it, a wandringe name to appoynte and show
forth any one thing, whereof the name and nature it doothe not tell: so must
it be likewise in those words of Mathewe and Mark upon the Lords cup This is
my blood. But in the words of Mathewe and Mark, it signifies and poynteth
out the same that it does in the Lords words upon the cup in Luke and Paul,
where it is said: This cup is the new testament in my blood, etc. Therefore in
Mathewe and Mark the pronown demonstratiue (this) doothe not wander to point
only one thing in substance, not shewinge what it is, but tellethe it
plainelye what it is, no less in Mathewe and Mark unto the eye then is done
in Luke and Paul, by putting too this word (cup) booth unto the eye, and unto
the ear. For taking the cup and demonstrating or showing it unto his
disciples, by this pronowne demonstratiue, (this) and saying unto them, Drink
ye all of this: it was then all one to say. This is my blood; as to say: This
cup is my blood, meaning by the cup as the nature of the speech does require:
the thing contained in the cup. So likewise without al doubt, when Christ had
taken bread, given thanks, and broken it, and giving it to his disciples,
said, Take: and so demonstrating and showing that bread which he had in his
bands, to say then, This is my body: and to have said, This bread is my body.

As it were all one, if a man lackinge a Knife, and going to his Oisters, would
say unto an other, whom he saw to have two knives. Sir I pray you lend me the
one of your-kniues. Were it not now all one to answer him, Sir, hold I will
lend you this to eat your meat, but not to open Oisters withal: and hold, I
will lend you this Knife to eat your meat but not to open Oysters. This
similitude serves but for this purpose, to declare the nature of speech
withal, where as the thing that is demonstrated and showed, is evidently
perceived, and openly known to the eye.

But O good Lord, what a wonderful thing is it to see, how some men do labor
to teach, what is demonstrated and showed by the pronowne demonstratiue (this)
in Christ's words when he says: This is my body: This is my blood: how they
labor (I say) to teach, what that (This) was then indeed, when Christ
spoke in Guard. to the 130. Objection.
the beginning of the sentence the word (This) before he had pronounced the
rest of the words, that followed in the same sentence: so that their doctrine
may agree with their Transubstantiation: God makers agree not among them
selves.
which indeed is the very foundation, wherein al their erroneous doctrine
does stand. And here the Transubstantiatours do not agree among them
selves, no more then they do in the words which wrought the
Transubstantiation, when Christ did first institute his Sacrament: wherein
Innocentius a Bishop of Rome of the latter days, and Duns (as was noted
before) do attribute the work unto the word (Benedixit) Blessed: but the
rest for the most part, to Hoc est corpus meum. This is my body, etc. Duns
therefore with his sect, because he puttech the change before must needs say,
that this, when Christ spoke it in the beginning of the sentence, was in deed
Christ's body. For in the change, the substance of bread did depart, and the
change was now done in Benedixit (says he) that went before: and therefore
after him and his that (this) was then indeed Christ's body, though the word
did not import so much but only one thing in substance: which substance
after Duns (the bread being gone) must needs be the substance of Christ's
body. But they that put their Transubstantiation to be wrought by these words
of Christ. This is my body: and do say, that when the whole sentence was
finished then this change was perfected and not before: they can not say, but
yet Christ's (this) in the beginning of the sentence before the other words
were fully pronounced, was bread in deed. But as yet the change was not done,
and so long the bread must needs remain, and so long with the uniuersall
consent of al transubstantiatours, the natural substance of Christ's body can
not come: and therefore must their (this) of necessitye demonstrate and show
the substance, which was as yet in the pronouncing of the first word this by
Christ, but bread. But how can they make and verify Christ's words to be
true, demonstrating the substance which in the demonstration is but bread, and
say thereof, This is my body, that is, as they say the natural substance of
Christ's body: except they would say, that the verb, Is, signifies, is made,
or, is changed into. And so then if the same verb, Is, be of the same effect
in Christ's words spoken upon the cup, and rehearsed by Luke and Paul: the cup
or the wine in the Cup must be made or turned into the new Testamente, as
was declared before.

There be some among the Transubstantiatours, which walk so wil^lye and so
warely between these two aforesaid opinions, Gardener a neutrall or lack of
both sides.
allowing them both, and bolding plainelye another of them both, that me thinks
they may be called Neutrals, Ambodexters, or rather such as can shift on both
sides. They play on both parts. For with the later, they do allow the
doctrine of the last syllable, which is that Transubstantiatione is done by
miracle in an instant, at the sound of the last syllable (um) in this sentence,
Hoc est corpus meum. And they do allow also Duns his fantastical imagination
of Individium vagum, that demonstrateth as he teaches in Christ's words, one
thing in substance, then being (after his mind) the substance of the body of
Christ.

A merhailous thing, how one man can agree with both these two, they being so
contrary the one to the other. For the one says, the word this,
demonstrateth the substance of bread: and the other says no not so, the bread
is gone, and it demonstrateth a substance which is Christ's body. Guard. to the
4. obiectiou.


Tushe says this third man, ye understand nothing at all. They agree well
enough in the cheef point, which is the ground God makers agree against the
truth. Note.
of all: that is, both does agree and bear witness, that there is
Transubstantiation. They do agree indeed in that conclusion: I grant. But
their process and doctrine thereof do even as well agree together: as did the
false witness before Annas and Caiphas against Christ: or the two wicked Judges
against Susanna. For against Christ the false witnesses did agree no doubt to
speak all against him. And the wicked judges were both agreeed to condemn
poor Susanna: but in examination of their witnesses, they dissented so far
that al was found false that they went about, both that wherein they agreeed,
and also those things, which they brought for their proofs.

Thus much have I spoken, in searchinge out a solucione for The consent of the
old authors.
this principal question, which was, what is the material substance of the
holy Sacrament in the Lords supper? Now least I should seem to set by mine
own conceit, more then is meet: or less to regard the doctrine of the old
ecclestasticall writers, then is convenient for a man of my poor learning and
simple wit for to do. And because, also I am indeed persuaded, that the old
ecclesiastical writers understood the true meaning of Christ in this matter:
and have both so truly and so plainly set it forth in certain places of their
writings, that no man which will vouchsafe to read them, and without
prejudice of a corrupt judgment will indifferently weigh them, and cons^er
their minds none otherwise then they declare themselves to have mente: I am
persuaded (I say) that in reading of them thus no man can be ignorant in this
matter, but he that will shut up his own eyes, and blindfeeld himself. When I
speak of Ecclesiastical writers, I mean of such as were before the wicked
usurpation of the sea of Rome was grown so unmeasurably great, that not only
with tirannical power, but also with corrupt doctrine, it began to subvert
Christ's gospel, and to turn the state, that Christ and his Apostles set in
the Church, vpside down. For the causes aforesaid, I will rehearse certain of
their sayings: and yet because I take them but for witnesses and expounders of
this doctrine and not as the authors of the same, and also for that now I will
not be tedious I will rehearse but few, that is three old writers of the
Greek Church, and other three of the Latin Church, which do seem unto me to be
in this matter most plain.

The Greek Authors are Origin, Chrysostom and Theodoret. The Latin, are
Tertulliane, S. Augustine and Gelasius. I know there call be nothing spoken so
plainly, but the crafty wit furnished with eloquence can darken it, and weest
it quite from the true meaning to a contrary sense. And I know also that
eloquence, craft, and finenes of wit has gone about to bleare men's eyes, and
to stop their ears in the aforenamed writers, that men should another hear
nor see, what those Authors both write and teach so plainly, that except
men should be made both stark blind and or ase: they can not but of
necessity, if they will read and way them indifferently, both he are and see
what they do mean when eloquence, craft, and finenesse, of wit have (...)
all that they can. Now let us he are the old writers of the Greek Church.

Origene, which lived about 1250. years ago: a man for the excellency of his
learning so highlye esteemed in Christ's Church, Origin.
that he was counted and judged the singular teacher in his time of Eccle Hist.
Li. 6. Ca. 3.
Christ's religion, the confounder of heresies, the schoolmaister of many godly
matters, and an opener of high mysteries in scripture. He writing upon the iv
chapter of Saint Mathewes gospel, says* bus: But if any thing enter into the
mouth it goes away in to the belly, and is avoided into the draught: Yea and
that meat which is sanctified by the word of God and prayer, concerning the
matter thereof, it goes away into the belly, and is avoided into the draughte.
But for the prayer which is added unto it, for the proportion of the faith, it
is made profitable, making the mind able to perceive and see that which is
profitable. For it is not the immateriall substance of bread, but the word
which is spoken upon it, that is profitable to the man that eats it not
unworthily. And his I mean of the Typical and Simbolical, that is,
Sacramental body. Thus far go the words of Origene, where it is plain,
first that Origene speaking here of the sacrament of the Lords supper as the
last words do plainly signify, does mean and teach, that the material
substance thereof is received, digested, and avoided, as the material substance
of other bread and meats is, which could not be, if there were no material
substance of bread at all, as the fantastical opinion of Transubstantiation
does put. It is a world too see the answer of the Papists to this place of
Origin, in the disputations which were in this The Papists objection against
Origene.
matter in the Parliamente house, and in both the universities of Cambridge and
Oxforde, they that defended Transubstantiation said, that this part of Origin
was but set forth of late by Erasmus, and therefore is to be suspected. But how
vain this their answer is, it appears plainly. For so may all the good
old authors, which lay in old libraries, and are set forth of late, be by
this reason re^^cted, as Clement Alexandrinus, Theodoretus, Justinius,
Ecclesiastica An other objection.
historia, Nicephori, and other such. An other answer they had, saying that
Origin is noted to have erred in some points, and therefore faith is not to be
given in this matter unto him. But this answer well waighed does minister good
matter to the clear confutation of it self. For indeed we grant, that in
some points Origin did err. But those errors are gathered out and noted both
of S. Jerome and Epiphanius, so that his works (those errors excepted) are
now so much the more of authority, that such great learned men took pains to
take out of him, whatsoever they thought in him to be written amiss. But as
concerning this matter of the Lords Supper, another they nor yet ever any other
anciente Author did ever say, that Origin did err.

Now because these two answers have been of late so confuted Gardener to the
166.
and confounded, that it is well perceived, that they will take no place:
therefore some which have written since that time, have forged two other
answers, even of the same moulde. The former whereof is, that Origin in this
place spoke not of the Sacrament of bread or wine of the Lords table, but of
an other mystical meat: of the which S. Augustine makes mention to be given
unto them, that were taught the faith, before they were baptized. But Origens
own words in two sentences before rehearsed being put together, prove this
answer untrue. For he says, that he means of that figurative and mystical
body, which profits them, that do receive it woorthilye, alludinge so
plainelye unto S. Paul's words spoken of the Lords Supper: that it is a shame
for any learned man once to open his mouth to the contrary. And that bread
which S. Augustine speaks of, he can not prove that any such thing was used
in Origens time. Yea and though that could be proved, yet was there never
bread in any time called a sacramental body, saving the sacramental bread of
the Lords table, which is called of Origin the typical and symboticall body of
Christ.

The second of the two new found answers, is yet most monstrous Gardener in
the same place.
of al other, which is this. But let us grant (say they) that Origin spoke of
the Lords Supper, and by the matter thereof was understood the material
substance of bread and wine: what then say they? For though the material
substance was once gone and departed by reason of Transubstantiation, whils the
forms of the bread and the wine did remain, yet now it is no inconvenience to
say, that as the material substance did depart at the entering in of Christ's
body under the aforesaid forms, so when the said forms be destroyed and do
not remain, then comes again the substance of bread and wine.

And this, say they, is very meet in this misterye, that that which began with
the miracle, shall end in a miracle.

If I had not red this fantasy I would scarcelye have believed, that any
learned man ever would have set forth such a foolish fantasy: which not
only lacks al ground, either of Gods word, reason, or of any ancient
writer, but also is clean contrary to the common rules of school divinity:
which is, that no miracle is to be affirmed and put without necessity. And
although for their former miracle, which is their Transubstantiation, they have
some color, though it be but vain, saying it is done by the power and virtue
of these words of Christ, This is my body: yet to make this second miracle
of returninge the material substance again they have no color at al. Or else
I pray them show me, by what words of Christ is the second miracle wrought.

Thus ye may see, that the sleights and shifts which craft and wit can
inuente to wreste the true sense of Origin cannot take place. But now let us
hear an other place of Origin, and so we will let him go.

Origin in the eleven Homile Super Leuiticum says: that there is also even in
the four Gospells, and not only in the old Testament, a letter (meaning a
litterall sense) which killethe. For if thou follow (says he) the letter in
that saying: Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his
blood, etc.

This letter does kill. If in that place the letter does kill, wherein is
commanded the eating of Christ's flesh? then surely in those words of
Christ, wherein Christ commands us to eat his body, the literal sense
thereof likewise does kill. For it is no less crime but even the same and all
one in the literal sense, to eat Christ's body, and to eat Christ's flesh.
Wherefore if the one do kill, except it be understood figuratiuelye and
spirituallye: then the other surely doothe kill likewise. But that to eat
Christ's flesh does kill so understood, Origin affirms plainly in his
words above rebearsed: Wherefore it cannot be justly denied, but to eat
Christ's body literally understood, must needs after him kill likewise.

The answer that is made to this place of Origin of the Papists, is so
foolish, that it be wraieth it self, without any further confutation. It is the
same, that they make to a piace of S. Augustine in Lib. 3. ca. 16.
his book De doctrinae Christiana: Whereas S. Augustine speaks in effect the
same thing that Origin does here. The Papists answer is this: To the carnal
man the literal sense is hurtful, but not so to the spiritual. As though to
understand that in his proper sense, which ought to be taken figuratively,
were to the carnal man a dangerous peril: but to the spiritual man none at
all.

Now to Chrysostom, whom I bring for the second writer in the Chrysostom.
Greek Church, He speaking against the unholy vsinge of man's body, which after
S. Paul ought to be kept pure and holy, as the very temple of the Holy Ghost,
says thus: If it be a fault (says he) In opere imperfect. ho. 9. in Matthe.
to translate the holy vessels, in the which is contained not the true body
of Christ, but the mystery of the body, to private uses, how much more offense
is it to a buse and defile the vessels of our body?

These be the words of Chrysostom, But I trow that here many foul shifts
are devised, to defeat this place. The Author says: one is suspected. I
answer: but in this place never fault was found with him, unto these our
days. And whether this author was John Chrysostom him self the Archbishop of
Constantinople or no, that is not the matter. For of all it is granted, that
he was a writer of that age, and a man of great learning: so that it is
manifest, that this which he writes was the received opinion of learned men in
his days.

Or else undoubtedly in such a matter his saying should have Gardener to the
198. objection:
bin impugned of some that wrote in his time, or near unto the same. Nay
(says an other) if this solucion will not serve: we may say that Chrysostom
did not speak of the vessels of the Lords cup, or such as were then used at
the Lords table, but of the vessels used in the Temple in the old law.

This answer will serve no more then the other. For here Chrisostom speaks of
such vessels, wherein was that which was called the body of Christ, although
it was not the true body (says he) of Christ, but the misterye of Christ's
body. Now of the vessels of the old law the writers do use no such manner
of phrase: for their sacrifices were not called Christ's body. For then Christ
was not but in shadows and figures, and not by the Sacrament of his body
revealed. Erasmus, which was a man that could understand the words and
sense of the writers, although he would not be seen to speak against this
error of Transubstantiatione, because he durst not: yet in this time
declares plainly that this saying of the writer is none otherwise to be
understanded.

Yet can I (says the third Papist) find out a fine and subtle solucion
Gardener in the same place.
for this place, and grant all that yet is said, both allowinge here the
writer, and also that he meant of the vessels of the Lords Table. For (says
he) the body of Christ is not contained in them, at the Lords Table, as in a
place, but as in a misterye. Is not this a pretty shifte, and a mystical
solution? But by the same solution then Christ's body is not in the Lords
Table, nor in the Priests hands, nor in the pixe, and so is he here no
where. For they will not say, that he is either here or there, as in a place.

This answer pleases so well the maker, that he him self (after he had played
with it a little while and showed the finenesse of his wit and eloquence
therein) is content to give it over and say: but it is not to be thought that
Chrysostom would speak after this finenesse or subtlety: and therefore he
returns again unto the second answer for his shoot anchor, which is
sufficiently confuted before. An other short place of Chrysostom I will
rehearse, which (if any indifferency may be heard) in-plaine terms sets
forth the truth of this matter.

Before the bread (says Chrysostom ad Cesarium monachum) be hallowed, we call
it bread, but the grace of God sanctifying it by the means of the preeste it
is delivered now from the name of bread, and esteemed worthy to be called
Christ's body, although the nature of bread tarry in it still.

These be Chrisostoms words: wherein I pray you, what can be Gardener to the
202. Objection.
said or thought more plain against this error of Transubstantiation, then
to declare, that the bread abides so still: And yet to this so plain a
place, some are not ashamed thus shamefully to elude it, saying: we grant that
nature of bread remains still thus, for that it may be seen, felt, and
tasted, and yet the corporal substance of the bread therefore is gone, least
two bodies should be confused together, and Christ should be thought
impanate.

What contrariety and falsehood is in this answer, the simple man may easily
perceive. Is not this a plain contrarietye to grant that the nature of bread
remains so still, that it may be seen, felt, and tasted: and yet to say*
the corporal substance is gone, to avoid absurdity of Christ's impanation? And
what manifest falsehood is this, to say or mean, that if the bread should
remain still, then must follow the inconvenience of impanation?

As though the very bread could not be a Sacrament of Christ's body (as water
is of baptism) except Christ should unite the nature of bread to his
nature in unity of person, and make of the bread, God.

Now let us hear Theodoretus, which is the last of the three Greek Theodoret:
Authors. He writes in his dialogue Contra Eutichen, thus. He that calls his
natural body, corn and bread: and also named himself a Vine tree: even he the
same has honored the Symboles (that is the Dial. 1.
sacramental signs) with the names of his body and blood, not changing indeed
the nature it self, but adding grace unto the nature.

What can be more plainly said, then this, that this old writer says? That
although the Sacraments bear the name of the body and blood of Christ, yet is
not their nature changed, but abides still. And where is then the Papists
Transubstantiation?

The same writer to the second dialogue of the same work against the
aforesaid heretic Eutyches, writes yet more plainly against this error of
Transubstantiation, if any thing can be said to be more plain. For he makes
the heretic to speak thus against him that defends the true doctrine, whom
he calls Orthodoxus.

As the Sacraments of the body and blood of our Lord are one thing before
the invocation, and after the invocation they be changed, and are made an
other: so likewise the Lords body (says the heretic) is after the
assumption or assention into heaven, turned into the substance of God: the
heretic meaning thereby, that Christ after his ascension, remains no more
a man.

To this Orthodoxus answers thus and says in the heretic: Thou art taken
(says he) in thine own snare. For those mystical Symbols or Sacraments after
the sanctification do not go out of their own nature, but they tarrye and
abide still in their substance, figure, and shape, yea and are sensibly seen
and groped to be the same they were before, etc.

At these words the papists do startle: and to say the truth, these words
be so plain, so full, and so clear, that they can not tell what to say, but
yet they will not cease to go about to play the cuttles, and to cast their
colors over them, that the truth which is so plainly told, should not have
place.

This Author wrote (say they) before the determination of the Church. As who
would say, whatsoever that wicked man Innocentius the Pope of Rome determined
in his congregationes with his monks and friars, that must be (for so Duns
says) holden for an article, and of the substance of our faith. Some do
charge this D. Moreman in the Conu^cation house.
author that he was suspected to be a Nestorian, which thing in Calcedon
Counsel was tried and proved to be false. But the foulest shift of al, and
yet the best that they can find in this matter, when none other will serve: is
to say, that Theodoret understands by the word (substance) accidents, and
not substance indeed.

This gloss is like a gloss of a lawyer, upon a decree, the text whereof
beginning thus: Statuimus, that is, We decree. The gloss of the Lawyer there
(after many other pretty shifts there set forth) which he thinks will not
well serve to his purpose, and therefore at the last to clear the matter, he
says thus: after the mind of one Lawyer. Vel dic (says he) Statuimus id est,
abrogamus, that is: Distine. Ca. 4. Statuimus.
or expound we do decree, that is, we abrogate or disanul. Is not this a
goodlye, and woorthye gloss? who will not say, but he is woorthye in the law,
to be retained of counsel, that can gloss so well, and find in a matter of
difficulty, such fine shifts? And yet this is the law, or at least the gloss
of the law. And therefore who can tell, what peril a man may incur to speak
against it except he were a lawyer indeed, which can keep him self out of the
briers what wind soever blow.

Hethertoo ye have heard three writers of the Greek Church, not all what they
do say: for that were a labor too great for to gather, and too tedious for
the Reader: But one or two places of every one, the which how plain, how full,
and how clear they be against the error of Transubstantiation, I refer it to
the judgment of the indifferent Reader.

And now I will likewise rehearse the sayings of other three old ancient writers
of the Latin Church, and so make an end.

And first I will begin with Tertullian, whom Ciprian the holy martyr Tertullian.
so highly esteemed, that whenever he would have his book, he was wont to
say: Give us now the Master.

This old writer in his fourth book against Martian the heretic, says
thus: Jesus made the bread, which he took, and distributed to his disciples,
his body, saying: This is my body. That is to say (says Tertullian) a figure
of my body.

In this place it is plain, that after Tertullians exposition, Christ mente
not by calling the bread his body, and the wine his blood, that either the
bread was the natural body, or the wine his natural blood, but he called
them his body and blood, because he would institute them to be unto us
Sacraments: that is holy tokens and signs of his body and of his blood:
that by them remembering and firmly believing the benefits procured to us by
his body, which was torn and crucified for us, and of his blood, which was
shed for us upon the cross: and so with thanks receiving these holy
Sacraments, according to Christ's institution, might by the same be
spiritually nourished and fed to the increase of all godliness in us here in
our pilgrimage and journey wherein we walk unto everlasting life.

This was undoubtedly Christ our Saviors mind, and this is Tertullians
exposition.

The wrangling that the Papists do make to elude this saying Gardener to the
16. Objection.
of Tertullian, is so far out of frame, that it even werieth me to think on it.

Tertullian writes here (say they) as none has deon hithertoo before him.

This saying is too too manifest false: for Origene, Hilarye, Ambrose, Basil,
Grigorie, Nazianzene, Saint Augustine, and other old authors, likewise do call
the sacrament, a figure of Christ's body. And where they say, that Tertullian
wrote this, when he was in a heat of disputatione with an heretic, coveting
by all means to overthrow his aduersarye. As who say, he would not take heed,
what he did say, and specially what he would write in so high a matter so that
he might have the better hand of his aduersarye.

Is this credible to be true in any godly wise man? How much less then is it
woorthye to be thought or credited in a man of so great a wit, learning, and
excellency as Tertullian is worthily esteemed ever to have been?

Likewise this author in his first book against the same heretic Martion,
writes thus: God did not reject bread, which is his creature: for by it he
has made a representation of his body.

Now I pray you, what is this to say that Christ has made a representation
(by bread) of his body, but that Christ had instituted and ordained bread to be
a Sacrament, for to represent unto us his body? Now whether the representatione
of one thing by an other, requires the corporal presence of the thing which
is so represented or no: every man that has understanding, is able in this
point (the matter is so clear of it self) to be a sufficient judge.

The second doctor and writer of the Latin Church, whose Augustine.
sayings I promised to set forth, is S. Augustine. of whose learning and
estimation, I need not to speak. For all the Church of Christ both has and
ever has had him for a man of most singular learning, wit, and diligence,
both in setting forth the true doctrine of Christ's religion, and also in the
defense of the same against heretics.

This author as he has written most plenteously in other matters of our
faith: so like wise in this argument he has written at large in many of his
works, so plainly against this error of Transubstantiation, that the Papists
love least to hear of him of all other writers, partly for his authority,
and partly because he opens the matter more fully, then any other does.

Therefore I will rehearse more places of him then heertofore I have done of the
other. And first, what can be more plain then that which he writes upon the
89. Psalm, speaking of the Sacrament of the Lords body and blood: and
rehearsinge (as it were) Christ's words to his Disciples after this manner.

It is not this body, which ye do see, that ye shall eat, another shall ye
drink this blood, which the Soldiers that crucify me, shall spill or shed.

I do commend unto you a misterye or a Sacrament, which spiritually
understood, shall give you life.

Now if Christ had no more natural and corporal bodies, but that one which
they then presently both heard and saw, nor other natural blood, but that
which was in the same body, and the which the soldiers did afterward cruelly
shed upon the cross: and another this body nor this blood was (by this
declaration of S. Augustine) either to be eaten or drunken, but the mystery
thereof spiritually to be understood: then I conclude (if this saying and
exposition of S. Augustine be true, that the mystery which the disciples should
eat, was not the natural body of Christ, but a mystery of the same
spiritually to be understanded.

For as S. Augustine says in his 20. book Contra Faustum. Ca. 21: Christ's
flesh and blood was in the old Testament promised by similitudes and signs of
their sacrifices, and was exhibited indeed and in truth upon the cross, but
the same is celebrated by a Sacrament of remembrance upon the altar.

And in his book, De fide ad Petrum. Ca. 19. he says, that in these
sacrifices, meaning of the old law, it is siguratiuely signified* what was
then to be given: but in this sacrifice it is euidentlye signified what is
already given (understanding in the sacrifice upon the altar) the remembrance
and thanks giving for the flesh, which he offered for us, and for the blood
which he shed for us upon the cross: as in the same place and evidently there
it may appear.

An other evident and clear place where in it appears, that by the Sacramental
bread, which Christ called his body, he meant a figure of his body. As upon
the 3 Psalm, where S. Augustine speaks this in plain terms.

Christ did admit Judas unto the feast, in the which he commended unto his
disciples the figure of his body.

This was Christ's last Supper before his passion, wherein he did ordeine the
sacrament of his body, as all learned men do agree.

S. Augustine also in his 23. Epistle to Bonifacius teaches, how Sacraments
do bear the names of the things whereof they be Sacraments, both in
Baptism, and in the Lords table, even as we call every good friday, the day of
Christ's passion: and every Easter day, the day of Christ's resurrection:
when in very deed there was but one day wherein he suffered, and but one day
wherein he rose. And why do we then call them so, which are not so indeed, but
because they are in like time and course of the year, as those days were,
wherein those things were done?

Was Christ, says saint Augustine, offered any more but once? And he
offered himself. And yet in a Sacrament or representation not only every
solemn feast of Easter, but also every day to the People he is offered: so
that he does not lie that says: he is every day offered.

For if Sacraments had not some similitude or likeness of those things, whereof
they be Sacraments, they could in no wise be Sacraments: and for their
similitudes or likeness: commonly they have the names of the things, whereof
they be Sacraments. Therefore as after a certain manner of speech, the
Sacrament of Christ's body, is Christ's body; the Sacrament of Christ's blood,
is Christ's blood, so likewise the Sacrament of faith is faith.

After this manner of speech, as S. Augustine teaches in his questiones
Question 57.
Super Leuiticum and Contra Adimantum, it is said in scripture, that vij. ears
of corn be vij. years, seven Kine be seven years, and the rock was Christ:
and blood is the soul, the which last saying (says Saint Augustine) in his
book Contra Adimantum is understood Cap 13.
to be spoken by a sign or figure.

For the Lord himself did not stick to say. This is my body, when Contra
Maximinum. Li. Ca. 22.
he gave the sign of his body. For we must not consider in Sacraments,
says S. Augustine in an other (...), what they be; but what they do
signify, or they be signs of things, being one thing in themselves, and yet
signifying an another thing.

For the heavenly bread (says he) speakinge of the Sacramental bread by some
manner of speech is called Christ's body, when in very deed it is the sacrament
of his body, etc.

What can be more plain, or more clearly spoken, then are these places of S.
Augustine before rehearsed, if men were not obstinately bent to maintain an
untruth, and to receive nothing whatsoever does set it forth. Yet one
place more of S. Augustine will I allege, which is very clear to this purpose,
that Christ's natural body is in heaven, and not here corporally in the
Sacrament, and so let him depart.

In his 50. treatice, which he writes upon John. he teaches plainly and
clearly how Christ being both God and man, is both here, after a certain
manner, and yet in heaven, and not here in his natural body and substance,
which he took of the blessed hirgin Mary: speaking thus of Christ and saying:
By his divine Majesty, by his providence and by his unspeakable and
invincible grace that is fulfilled which he spoke: Behold, I am with you unto
the end of the World. But as concerning his flesh which he took in his
incarnatione, as touching that which was borne of the Virgin as concerning
that which was apprehended by the Jews and crucified upon a tree, and taken
down from the cross, lapped in linen clothes, and buried, and rose again,
and appeared after his resurrection, as concerning the flesh, he said; ye
shall not ever have me with you. Why so? For as concerning his flesh, he was
conversant with his Disciples xl. days, and they accompanying, seeing and not
following him, he wentvp into heaven, and is not here. By the presence of his
divine majesty he did not depart; as concerning the presence of his divine
majesty, we have Christ ever with us; but as concerning the presence of his
flesh, he said truly to his disciples; ye shall not ever have me with you. For
as concerning the presence of his flesh, the Church had him but a few days;
now it holds him by Faith, though it se him not.

Thus much S. Augustine speaks repeating one thing so often: and all to
declare and teach, how we should understand the manner of Christ's being here
with us: which is by his grace, by his providence, and by his divine nature,
and how he is absent by his natural body which was born of the virgin Mary,
died, and rose for us, and is assended into heaven, and there sits, as in
the articles of our faith on the right hand of God, and thence (and from none
other place says S. Augustine) he shall come on the latter day, to judge the
quick and the dead. At the which day the righteous shall then lift up their
heads, and the light of Gods truth shall so shine: that falsehood and errors
shall be put into perpetual confusion: righteousness shall have the upper hand,
and truth that day shall bear away the victory, all the enemies thereof
quite overthrown, to be trodden under foot for evermore.

O Lord, Lord, I beseech thee hasten this day, then shall thou be glorified
with the glory due unto thy holy name, and unto thy divine majesty: and we shall
sing unto thee, in all joy, and felicity, laud and praise for ever mere. Amen.

Here now would I make an end. For me thinks, S. Augustine is in this matter so
full and plain, and of that authority, that it should not need after this his
declaration, being so firmelye grounded upon Gods word, and so well agreeinge
with the other ancient Authors, to bring in for the confirmation of this matter
any more: and yet I said, I would allege three of the Latin Church, to
testify the truethe in this cause. Now therefore the last of all shall be
Gelasius, which was a Bishop of Rome, but one that was Bishop of that See
before the wicked usurpation and tyranny thereof spread and burst out abroad
into all the world. For this man was before Bonifacius, yea and Grigorye the
first: in whose days both corruption of doctrine and tirannicall usurpation
did chee fly grow, and had the upper hand.

Gelasius in an Epistle of the two natures of Christ, Contra Eutichen,
Gelasius.
writes thus: The Sacraments of the body and blood of Christ, which we
receive, are godly things whereby and by the same we are made partakers of the
divine nature, and yet nevertheless the substance or nature of the bread and
wine does not depart nor go away.

Note these words I beseech you, and consider, whether any thing can be more
plainly spoken, then these words be against the error of
Transubstantiatione, which is the ground and bitter root, whereupon spring all
the horrible errors before rehearsed.

Wherefore seeing that the falsehood does appear so manifestlye, and by so many
ways so plainly, so clearly and so fullye, that no man needs to be deceived,
but he that will not see, or will not understand: let us all that do love the
truth, embrace it, and forsake the falsehood. For he that loves the truth, is
of God: and the lack of the love thereof is the cause why God suffers men to
fall into errors, and to perish therein: yea and as S. Paul says, why he
sends unto them illusions, that they believe lies, unto their own
condemnation: because (says he) they loved not the truth. This truth no
doubt is Gods word. For Christ him self says unto his father: Thy word is
truth. The love and Ioh. 17.
light whereof almighty God our heavenly father give us, and lighten it in our
hearts by his holy spirit through Jesus Christ out Lord, Amen.

Vincit Veritas.
Mr. FOX 2 d Volume of Acts and Monuments, Edit. London, 1684.
Lib. 9. page 106. The Disputation held at Cambridge before the Kings
Commissioners, June 20. 1549. wherein Bishop Ridley moderated. GLin. Well, yet
once again to you, thus. The very true Body P. 106.
of Christ is to be honored, but the same very true Body is in the Sacrament:
Ergo, the Body of Christ in the Sacrament, is to be honored.


Rochest. Wellbeloved Friends and Brethren in our Savior Christ, you must
understand that this Disputation, with other that shall be after this, are
appointed to search for the plain truth of the Holy Scriptures in these matters
of Religion, which of a long Season have been hidden from us by the false
Glosses of the Church of Rome, and now in our days must be revealed to us
Englishmen through the great Mercy of God principally; and secondarily, through
the most gentle Clemency of our natural Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, whom
the living Lord long preserve to reign over us in Health, Wealth and Godliness,
to the maintenance of Gods holy Word, and to the extirpation of all blind
Glosses of Men, that go about to subvert the Truth. Because therefore, that I
am one that does love the Truth, and have professed the same amongst you;
therefore I say, because of conferring my mind with yours, I will here gladly
declare what I think in this point now in Controversy. Not because this
worshipful Doctor has any need of my help in dissolving of Arguments proposed
against him; for as me seems, he has answered hitherto very well, and
Clerkly, according to the Truth of Gods Word. But now to the purpose, I do
grant unto you (Mr. Opponent) that the old Ancient Fathers do record and
witness a certain Honor and Adoration to be due unto Christ's Body, but they
speak not of it in the Sacrament, but of it in Heaven, at the right hand of the
Father, as holy Chrysostom says, Honor thou it, and then eat it; but that
Honor may not be given to the outward sign, but to the Body of Christ it self
in Heaven. For that Body is there only in a sign virtually, by Grace, in the
exhibition of it in Spirit, Effect and Faith, to the worthy receiver of it. For
we receive virtually only Christ's Body in the Sacrament.


Glin. How then (if it please your good Lordship) does Baptism differ from this
Sacrament? For in that we receive Christ also by Grace, and virtually.


Rochest. Christ is present after another sort in Baptism, than in this
Sacrament; for in that he purges and washes the Infant from all kind of Sin,
but here he does feed spiritually the receiver in Faith with all the merits of
his blessed Death and Passion; and yet he is in Heaven still really and
substantially. As for Example, The Kings Majesty, our Lord and Master, is but
in one place, wheresoever that this Royal Person is abiding for the time, and
yet his mighty Power and Authority is every where in his Realms and Dominions:
So Christ's real Person is only in Heaven substantially placed, but his might is
in all things created effectually. For Christ's Flesh may be understood for the
Power, or inward Might of his Flesh.


Glin. If it please your Fatherhood, St. Ambrose, and St. Augustine do say,
That before the Consecration, it is but very Bread, and after the Consecration,
it is called the very Body of Christ.


Madew. Indeed it is the very Body of Christ Sacramentally after the
Consecration, whereas before it is nothing but common Bread; and yet, after
that, it is the Lords Bread; and thus must St. Ambrose, and St. Augustine be
understood.


Glin. The Bread after Consecration does feed the Soul, Ergo, The substance of
common Bread does not remain. The Argument is good, for St. Ambrose, De
Sacramentis, says thus, After the Consecration there is not the thing that
Nature did form, but that which the blessing does consecrate. And if the
Benediction of the Prophet Elias did turn the nature of Water; how much more
then does the Benediction of Christ here, both God and Man?


Madew. That Book of St. Ambrose is suspected to be none of his Works.


Rochest. So all the Fathers say.


Glin. I do marvel at that, for St. Augustine in his Book of Retractations
makes plain, that that was his own very Work.


Rochest. He speaks indeed of such a Book so entitled, to St. Ambrose, but
yet we do lack the same Book indeed.


Glin. Well, let it then pass to other men's Judgments. What then say you, to
holy St. Cyprian, 1200 years past? Who says, That the Bread which our Lord
gave to his Disciples, was not changed in form or quality, but in very nature,
and by the Almighty word was made Flesh.


Madew. I do answer thus, That this word Flesh may be taken two ways, either
for the substance it self, or else for a natural property of a fleshly thing.
So that Cyprian there did mean of a natural Property, and not of fleshly
Substance. And contrariwise in the Rod of Aaron, where both the Substance, and
also the Property was changed.


Glin. Holy St. Ambrose says, The Body there made by the mighty Power of Gods
word, is the Body of the Virgin Mary.


Rochest. That is to say, That by the Word of God, the thing has a Being, that
it had not before, and we do consecrate the Body, that we may receive the Grace
and Power of the Body of Christ in Heaven, by this Sacramental Body.


Glin. By your Patience (my Lord) if it be a Body of the Virgin (as St. Ambrose
says) which we do consecrate as Ministers by Gods holy Word, then must it
needs be more than a Sacramental, or Spiritual Body; yea, a very Body of Christ
indeed; yea, the same that is still in Heaven, without all moving from place to
place, unspeakably, and far passing our natural Reason, which is in this
Mystery so captivate, that it cannot conceive how it is there, without a lively
Faith to Gods word. But let this pass. You do grant that this Bread does
quicken or give Life, which if it do, then it is not a natural Bread, but a
super-substantial Bread.


Rochest. So does the effectual and lively Word of God, which for that it
nourishes the Soul, it does give Life; for the Divine Essence infuseth it self
unspeakably into the faithful Receiver of the Sacrament.


Glin. How then say you to holy Damascene, a Greek Author, who as one Tritenius
says, flourished one thousand years past; he says thus, The Body that is of
the holy Virgin Mary is joined to the Divinity after the Consecration in
verity; and indeed, not so as the Body once assumpted into Heaven, and sitting
on the Fathers right Hand, does remove from thence and comes down at the
Consecration time; but that the same Bread and Wine are substantially
transumpted into the very Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. If (says
he) thou do not know the manner how it is brought to pass, let it be enough
to thee to believe that it is done by the Operation of the Holy Ghost; and we
do know no more, but that the living Word of God is working, and Almighty; but
the very manner how, is inscrutable to us; and no great marvel, says he, for
we cannot well express how the material Bread, Wine or Water are transumpted
naturally into the same Body and Blood of the Receiver, and be become another
Body than they were before. So says this great Ancient Clerk; also this
Shewbread with Wine and Water, are changed by the coming of the Holy Ghost,
into Christ's Body and Blood, and they be not two Bodies there, but very one (of
Christ) and the same.


Rochest First, I deny (Master Doctor) that Damascene was one thousand years
past: Secondarily, I say, That he is not to be holden as an Ancient Father, for
that he maintains in his Works, evil and damnable Doctrine, as the
worshipping of Images and such like. Thirdly, I say, That indeed God by his
holy Spirit, is the worker of that which is done in the Sacrament. Also I
grant, that there is a Mutation of the common Bread and Wine spiritually into
the Lords Bread and Wine, by the sanctifying of them in the Lords Word. But I
deny that there is any Mutation of the Substances; for there is no other change
there indeed, than there is in us, which when we do receive the Sacrament
worthily, then are we changed into Christ's Body, Bones and Blood, not in
nature, but spiritually, and by Grace; much like as Isaiah saw the burning
Coal, even so we see not there the very simple Bread, as it was before the
Consecration; for an Union cannot be but of two very things. Wherefore, if we
be joined to Christ receiving the Sacrament, then there is no Adnihilation of
Bread, which is when it is reduced to nothing, as it is in your feigned
Transubstantiation.


Glin. So I perceive you would have me to grant that the Sacrament is but a
Figure, which Theophylactus does deny.


Rochest. You say Truth, he denies it indeed to be a Figure; but he means,
that it is not only a Figure.


Glin. Whereas St. Paul says, That we being many, are one Bread, he speaks
not, nor means one material Bread, as you do here, Ergo, he speaks of
heavenly Bread. And holy Chrysostom upon Matthew says, That the Paschal Lamb
was a Figure, but the Mystery is the verity. For the Disciples would not have
been offended to have drunk a figure of Christ's Blood, being well accustomed
to figures. For Christ did not institute a figure for a figure, but the clear
verity instead of the figure, as St. John says, Grace and Verity was given by
Christ. Do thou see Bread? (says Chrysostom) does it avoid or pass as other
meats do which we receive? God forbid. Ergo, etc.


Madew. That ancient Clerk Origin, upon the 15th of St. Matthew. says thus, As
touching that which is material in the Sacrament, it descends and issues out
as other nutriments do; but as concerning that which is celestial, it does not
so.


Glin. Chrysostom. Homily 83. upon Matthew says, That we cannot be deceived of
Christ's Word, but our natural Senses may be deceived in this point, very soon
and easily; his said words cannot be false, but our senses be many times
beguiled of their judgments. Because therefore that Christ said, This is my
body; let us not at any hand doubt (says he) but let us believe it, and well
perceive it with the eyes of our understanding. And within a little after in
that place he says thus, It was not enough that he was become man, and
afterward was scourged for us, but also he did reduce and bring us to be as
one body with him, not through Faith only, but in very deed also he makes us
his Body. And after that he says, that these works are not of man's power. But
the same things that he wrought in his last Supper, he now works also by his
Precept to his right Ministers, and we do occupy the place of the same
Ministers, but he it is that does sanctify and transumpt the creatures, he
performs still the same.


Rochest. Mr. Doctor, you must understand, that in that place St. Chrysostom
shows us that Christ delivered to us no sensible thing at his last Supper.


Glin. Honorable Sir, by your patience I grant that he gave to his Disciples
no sensible thing in substance, but a thing insensible, his own precious Body
and Blood, under the only kinds of Creatures. And truly, as it seems,
Theophylactus best knew the meaning of Chrysostom, because all Authors accept
him as a faithful Interpreter of him. And he has these same plain words
Transelemented and Transformed. Also Theophylactus Alexandrinus super Marcum,
Cyrillus, and St. Augustine says, That before the consecration it is bread,
but afterward it is Christ's very Body. In like manner St. Augustine upon the
33d Psalm says, That in the last Supper Christ did bear himself in his own
hands. Now every man may bear the figure of his body in his own hands, but St.
Augustine says it there for a Miracle. Irenaeus in his fifth Book is of the
same mind. And St. Austin says, I do remember my words, etc. The Law and
Figures were by Moses, but the verity and Body came by Christ.


Rochest. Well, say what you list, it is but a figurative speech, like to this,
If you will receive and understand, he is Elias, for a property, but indeed he
was not Elias, but John the Baptist. And so in this place Christ calls it his
Body, when it was very Bread. But better than the common Bread, because it was
sanctified by the Word of Christ.


Langdale. I will prove it by another means. Christ did suffer P. 109.
his most glorious passion for us really and substantially; Ergo, He is also in
the Sacrament substantially. The Argument is good, because that it is the same
here that was there crucified for us; howbeit here invisibly, indeed
spiritually and sacramentally, but there visibly, and after a mortal and most
bloody manner.


Rochest. Mr. Langdale, your Argument does well conclude, in case that his Body
were here in the Sacrament after such a sort as it was when it was betrayed:
But that is not so; for he was betrayed and crucified in his natural body
substantially and really in very deed; but in the Sacrament he is not so, but
spiritually and figuratively only.


Langd. By your good Lordships favor that is not so, for he is there not
figuratively, but verily and indeed by the power of his mighty Word, yea even
his very own natural body under the Sacrament duly performed by the lawful
Minister.


Madew, O say not so, for you speak blasphemy.


Langd. No, no Mr. Doctor, God forbid that either I or any man else, should be
noted of blasphemy, saying nothing but the very plain truth, as in my
Conscience and Learning, I do no less.


Rochest. O Mr. Langdale, I wis it becomes you not here to have such words.


Langd. If it like your good Lordship, I gave not the first occasion of them,
but only did refute that which I was unjustly burdened withal, as reason does
require, and it grieved me to hear it. He says, if it please your Lordship,
that there is a mutation or change of the Bread after it is Consecrated; which
if it be so, as I grant no less, then I would require of him, whether it be
changed in the Substance or in the Accidents, or else in both, or in nothing?
No man can justly say, that there is a change into nothing. And all ancient
Fathers do agree, that the same accidents are there still after, that were
before; nor does any Doctor say, That there is any mutation both of the
Substance and Accidents also; Ergo, The Substance of Bread is changed into some
other thing that is there really present under the forms of Bread and Wine,
which by Christ's words must needs be his own Blessed Body.


Rochest. Sir, you are deceived greatly, for there is no change either of the
Substances, or of the Accidents; but in very deed there do come unto the Bread
other Accidents, insomuch that whereas the Bread and Wine were not sanctified
before, nor holy, yet afterward they be sanctified, and so do receive then
another sort or kind of virtue which they had not before.


Rochest. Christ dwells in us by Faith, and by Faith we receive Page 118.
Christ both God and Man, both in Spirit and flesh; that is, this Sacramental
eating is the mean and way whereby we attain to the Spiritual eating, and
indeed for the strengthening of us to the eating of this Spiritual food was
this Sacrament Ordained. And these words, This is my Body, are meant thus, By
Grace it is my true Body, but not my fleshly Body, as some of you suppose.


Rochest. I acknowledge not his real Substance to be there, but Page 119.
the property of his Substance.


The Determination of Dr. Nicholas Ridley Bishop of Rochester upon Page 120.
the Conclusions above prefixed.
There has been an ancient custom amongst you, that after Disputations had in
your common Schools, there should be some determination made of the matters so
disputed and debated, especially touching Christian Religion. Because therefore
it has seemed good unto these worshipful Assistants joined with me in
Commission from the Kings Majesty, that I should perform the same at this time;
I will by your favorable patience declare both what I do think and believe my
self, and what also other ought to think of the same. Which thing I would that
afterward ye did with diligence weigh and ponder every man at home severally by
himself.

The principal Grounds, or rather Head-springs of this matter are specially
five.

The first is the Authority, Majesty and Verity of Holy Scripture.

The second is the most certain Testimonies of the Ancient Catholic Fathers,
who after my judgment do sufficiently declare this matter.

The third is the definition of a Sacrament.

The fourth is the abominable Heresy of Eutiches that may ensue of
Transubstantiation.

The fifth is the most sure belief of the Article of our Faith, He ascended
into Heaven.

The First Ground.
This Transubstantiation is clean against the words of the Scripture, and
consent of the ancient Catholic Fathers. The Scripture says, I will not drink
hereafter of this fruit of the Vine, etc. Now the fruit of this Vine is Wine.
And it is manifest that Christ spoke these words after the Supper was finished,
as it appears both in Matthew, Mark, and also in Luke, if they be well
understood. There be not many places of Scripture that do confirm this thing,
neither is it greatly material: for it is enough if there be any one plain
testimony for the same. Neither ought it to be measured by the number of
Scriptures, but by the Authority, and by the verity of the same. And the
Majesty of this verity is as ample in one short sentence of the Scripture, as
in a thousand.

Moreover, Christ took Bread, he gave Bread. In the Acts, Luke calls it
Bread. So Paul calls it Bread after the Sanctification. Both of them speak of
breaking, which belongs to the Substance of Bread, and in no wise to Christ's
Body, for the Scripture says, Ye shall not break a bone of him. Christ says,
Do ye this in my remembrance. And again, As often as ye shall drink of this
Cup, do it in rememberance of me. And our Savior Christ in the sixth of John,
speaking against the Capernaites, says, Labor for the meat that perishes
not. And when they asked, What shall we do that we may work the works of God?
He answered them thus, This is the work of God, that ye believe in him whom he
has sent. You see how he exhorts them to faith, For Faith is that work of
God. Again, This is that Bread which came down from Heaven. But Christ's Body
came not down from Heaven. Moreover, He that eats my flesh and drinks my
blood, dwells in me, and I in him. My flesh (says he) is meat indeed, and my
blood is drink indeed. When they heard this, they were offended. And whilst
they were offended, he said unto them, What if ye shall see the Son of Man
ascend up where he was before? Whereby he went about to draw them from the
gross and carnal eating. This Body, says he, shall ascend up into Heaven,
meaning altogether, as St. Augustine says. It is the Spirit that quickneth,
the Flesh profits nothing. The words that I speak unto you, are Spirit and
Life, and must be spiritually understood. These be the Reasons which persuade
me to incline to this Sentence and Judgment.

The Second Ground.
Now my Second Ground against this Transubstantiation, are the Ancient Fathers
a Thousand Years past. And so far off is it, that they do confirm this Opinion
of Transubstantiation, that plain they seem to me, both to think and to speak
the contrary.

Dionysius, in many places, calls it Bread. The places are so manifest and
plain, that it needs not to recite them.

Ignatius to the Philadelphians says, I beseech you, Brethren, cleave fast
unto one Faith, and to one kind of Preaching, using together one manner of
Thanksgiving; For the Flesh of the Lord Jesus is one, and his Blood is one
which was shed for us: There is also one Bread broken for us, and one Cup of
the whole Church.

Irenaeus writes thus: Even as the Bread that comes of the Earth, receiving
God's Vocation, is now no more common Bread, but Sacramental Bread, consisting
of two Natures, Earthly and Heavenly; even so our Bodies receiving the
Eucharist, are now no more corruptible, having hope of the Resurrection.

Tertullian is very plain, for he calls it a Figure of his Body, etc.

Chrysostom writes to Caesarius the Monk, albeit he be not received of
diverse, yet will I read the place, to fasten it more deeply in your minds; for
it seems to show plainly the substance of Bread to remain. The words are
these:

Before the Bread is sanctified, we name it Bread: but by the grace of God
sanctifying the same, through the Ministry of the Priest, it is delivered from
the Name of Bread, and is counted worthy to bear the Name of the Lord's Body,
although the very substance of Bread notwithstanding do still remain therein,
and now is taken not to be two Bodies, but one Body of the Son, etc.

Cyprian says, Bread is made of many Grains. And is that natural Bread, and
made of Wheat? Yea, it is so indeed.

The Book of Theodoret in Greek was lately printed at Rome, which if it had not
been his, it should not have been set forth there, especially seeing it is
directly against Transubstantiation: For he says plainly, That Bread still
remains after the Sanctification.

Gelasius also is very plain in this manner: The Sacrament (says he) which we
receive of the Body and Blood of Christ, is a Divine Matter: By reason whereof,
we are made partakers by the same of the Divine Nature, and yet it cease not
still to be the substance of Bread and Wine. And certes, the representation and
similitude of the Body and Blood of Christ be celebrated in the action of the
Mysteries, etc. After this, he recited certain places out of Augustine and
Cyril, which were not noted.

Isichius also, confesses that it is Bread.

Also the Judgment of Bertram in this matter is very plain and manifest: And
thus much for the Second Ground.

The Third Ground.
The Third Ground is the Nature of the Sacrament, which consists of Three
Things; that is, Unity, Nutrition, and Conversion.

As touching Unity, Cyprian thus writes: Even as of many Grains is made one
Bread, so are we one mystical Body of Christ. Wherefore Bread must still needs
remain, or else we destroy the Nature of a Sacrament.

Also they that take away Nutrition, which comes by Bread, do take away
likewise the Nature of a Sacrament: For as the Body of Christ nourishes the
Soul, even so does Bread likewise nourish the Body of Man. Therefore they that
take away the Grains, or the Union of the Grains in the Bread, and deny the
Nutrition, or Substance thereof, in my judgment are Sacramentaries: For they
take away the Similitude between the Bread, and the Body of Christ; for they
which affirm Transubstantiation, are indeed right Sacramentaries and
Capernaites.

As touching Conversion, (that like as the Bread which we receive is turned
into our Substance, so are we turned into Christ's Body) Rabanus and
Chrysostom are Witnesses sufficient.

The Fourth Ground.
They who say, That Christ is carnally present in the Eucharist, do take from
him the Verity of Man's Nature. Eutiches granted the Divine Nature in Christ,
but his Humane Nature he denied. So they that defend Transubstantiation,
ascribe that to the Humane Nature, which only belongs to the Divine Nature.

The Fifth Ground.
The Fifth Ground is the certain persuasion of this Article of Faith, He
ascended into Heaven, and sits at the Right Hand, etc.

Augustine says, The Lord is above, even to the end of the World; but yet the
verity of the Lord is here also. For his Body wherein he rose again must needs
be in one place, but his verity is spread abroad every where. Also in another
place he says, Let the godly also receive that Sacrament, but let them not be
careful (speaking there of the presence of his Body.) For as touching his
Majesty, his Providence, his invisible and unspeakable Grace, these words are
fulfilled which he spoke, I am with you to the end of the World. But according
to the flesh which he took upon him, according to that which was born of the
Virgin, was apprehended of the Jews, was fastened to a Tree, taken down again
from the Cross, lapped in Linen Cloths, was buried and rose again, and
appeared after his Resurrection, so ye shall not have me always with you; and
why? because, that as concerning his Flesh, he was conversant with his
Disciples forty days, and they accompanying him, seeing him, but not following
him, he went up into Heaven, and is not here, for he sits at the right hand
of his Father; and yet he is here, because he is not departed hence, as
concerning the presence of his Divine Majesty.

Mark and consider well what St. Augustine says, he is ascended into Heaven,
and is not here, says he. Believe not them therefore which say that he is here
still in the Earth.

Moreover, Doubt not (says the same Augustine, but that Jesus Christ, as
concerning the nature of his Manhood, is there from whence he shall come. And
remember well and believe the Profession of a Christian man, that he arose from
death, ascended into Heaven, and sits at the Right hand of his Father, and
from that Place and none other (not from the Altars) shall he come to judge the
quick and the dead, and he shall come, as the Angel said, as he was seen to go
into Heaven; that is to say, in the same form and substance, unto the which he
gave immortality, but changed not Nature. After this form (meaning his Humane
Nature) we may not think that it is everywhere. And in the same Epistle he
says, Take away from the Bodies limitation of places, and they shall be
nowhere; and because they are nowhere, they shall not be at all.

Vigilius says, If the Word and the Flesh be both of one nature, seeing that
the Word is everywhere, why then is not the Flesh also everywhere? For when
it was in Earth, then verily it was not in Heaven; and now when it is in
Heaven, it is not surely in Earth. And it is so certain that it is not in
Earth, that as concerning the same, we look for him from Heaven; whom as
concerning the Word, we believe to be with us in Earth.

Also the same Vigilius says, Which things, seeing they be so, the course of
the Scripture must be searched of us, and many Testimonies must be gathered, to
show plainly what a wickedness and sacriledg it is to refer those things to the
property of the Divine Nature, which do only belong to the nature of the Flesh;
and contrariwise, to apply those things to the nature of the Flesh, which do
properly belong to the Divine Nature. Which thing the Transubstantiators do,
whilst they affirm Christ's Body not to be contained in any one place, and
ascribe that to his Humanity, which properly belongs to his Divinity, as they
do who will have Christ's Body to be in no one certain place limited.

Now in the latter Conclusion concerning the Sacrifice, because it depends
upon the first, I will in few words declare what I think. For if we did once
agree in that, the whole Controversy in the other would soon be at an end. Two
things there be which do persuade me that this Conclusion is true; that is,
certain places of the Scripture, and also certain Testimonies of the Fathers.
Saint Paul says Hebrews the 9th, Christ being become an High Priest of good
things to come, by a greater and more perfect Tabernacle not made with hands,
that is, not of this building, neither by the Blood of Goats and Calves, but by
his own Blood, entered once into the Holy Place, and obtained for us eternal
Redemption, etc. And now in the end of the World he has appeared once to put
away sin by the sacrifice of himself. And again, Christ was once offered to
take away the sins of many. Moreover he says, With one offering has he made
perfect for ever those that are sanctified. These Scriptures do persuade me to
believe that there is no other oblation of Christ (albeit I am not ignorant
there are many Sacrifices) but that which was once made upon the Cross.

The Testimonies of the Ancient Fathers, which confirm the same, are out of
Augustine ad Bonif. Epist. 23. Again, in his Book of 43 Questions, in the 41st
Question. Also in his 20th Book against Faustus the Manichee, Chap. 21. And in
the same Book against the said Faustus, Chap. 28. thus he writes; Now the
Christians keep a memorial of the Sacrifice past, with a holy Oblation and
participation of the Body and Blood of Christ.

Fulgentius, in his Book De fide, calls the same Oblation a Commemoration.
And these things are sufficient for this time for a Scholastical Determination
of these matters.

VOL. III.
Bishop Ridley 's Answer to the Three Propositions proposed to him in the
Disputation at Oxford, April 12. 1554.
I Received of you the other day, Right Worshipful Mr. Prolocutor, and ye my
Reverend Masters, Commissioners from the Queens Majesty and her Honorable
Council, Three Propositions; whereunto ye commanded me to prepare against this
day, what I thought good to answer concerning the same.

Now whilst I weighed with my self, how great a charge of the Lord's Flock was
of late committed unto me, for the which I must once render an account to my
Lord God, (and that how soon, he knows) and that moreover, by the Commandment
of the Apostle Peter, I ought to be ready always to give a Reason of the Hope
that is in me, with Meekness and Reverence unto every one that shall demand the
same. Besides this, considering my Duty to the Church of Christ, and to your
Worships, being Commissioners by Public Authority, I determined with my self
to obey your Commandment, and so openly to declare unto you my mind touching
the foresaid Propositions; and albeit plainly to confess unto you the Truth in
these things which ye now demand of me. I have thought otherwise in times past,
than now I do, yet (God I call to record unto my Soul, I lie not) I have not
altered my Judgment, as now it is, either by constraint of any Man or Laws;
either for the dread of any dangers of this World; either for any hope of
Commodity; but only for the love of the Truth revealed unto me by the Grace of
God (as I am undoubtedly persuaded) in his holy Word, and in the reading of the
Ancient Fathers.

These things I do rather recite at this present, because it may happen to some
of you hereafter, as in times past it has done to me: I mean, if ye think
otherwise of the matters propounded in these Propositions than I now do, God
may open them unto you in time to come.

But howsoever it shall be, I will in few words do that which I think ye all
look I should do; that is, as plainly as I can, I will declare my Judgment
herein. Howbeit of this I would ye were not ignorant, that I will not indeed
wittingly and willingly speak in any Point against Gods Word, or dissent in any
one jot from the same, or from the Rules of Faith, or Christian Religion; which
Rules that same most Sacred word of God prescribes to the Church of Christ,
whereunto I now, and for ever submit my self and all my doings. And because the
matter I have now taken in hand is weighty, and ye all well know how unready I
am to handle it accordingly, as well for lack of time, as also lack of Books;
therefore here I protest, that I will publicly this day require of you, that
it may be lawful for me concerning all mine Answers, Explications, and
Confirmations, to add or diminish whatsoever shall seem hereafter more
convenient and meet for the purpose, through more sound Judgment, better
Deliberation, and more exact Trial of every particular Thing. Having now by the
way of Preface and Protestation spoken these few words, I will come to the
Answer of the Propositions propounded unto me, and so to the most brief
Explication and Confirmation of mine Answers.

Weston. Reverend Mr. Doctor, concerning the lack of Books, there is no cause
why you should complain: What Books soever you will name, you shall have them;
and as concerning the Judgment of your Answers to be had of your self with
further deliberation, it shall, I say, be lawful for you until Sunday next to
add unto them what you shall think good your self. My mind is, that we should
use short Arguments, lest we should make an infinite process of the thing.


Ridley. There is another thing besides, which I would gladly obtain at your
hands; I perceive that you have Writers and Notaries here present. By all
likelihood our Disputations shall be published; I beseech you for Gods sake let
me have liberty to speak my mind freely, and without interruption, not because
I have determined to protract the time with a solemn Preface, but lest it may
appear that some be not satisfied. God wot I am no Orator, nor have I learned
Rhetoric to set Colors on the matter.


Weston. Among this whole Company, it shall be permitted you to take two for
your part.


Rid. I will choose two, if there were any here with whom I were acquainted.


Weston. Here are two which Mr. Cranmer had yesterday; take them if it please
you.


Rid. I am content with them, I trust they are honest men.


The First Proposition.
In the Sacrament of the Altar, by the virtue of God's Word spoken of the
Priest, the Natural Body of Christ, born of the Virgin Mary, and his Natural
Blood is Really Present under the Forms of Bread and Wine.

The Answer of N. Ridley.
In matters appertaining to God we may not speak according to the sense of Man,
nor of the World. Therefore this Proposition or Conclusion is framed after
another manner of Phrase or kind of Speech than the Scripture uses. Again it
is very obscure and dark by means of sundry words of doubtful signification.
And being taken in the sense which the Schoolmen teach, and at this time the
Church of Rome does defend, it is false and erroneous, and plain contrary to
the Doctrine which is according to Godliness.

The Explication.
How far the diversity and newness of the Phrase in all this first Proposition,
is from the Phrase of the Holy Scripture, and that in every part almost, it is
so plain and evident to any that is but meanly exercised in Holy Writ, that I
need not now (especially in this Company of Learned Men) to spend any time
therein, except the same shall be required of me hereafter.

First, There is a double sense in these words (by virtue of God's Word) for it
is doubtful what word of God this is; whether it be that which is read in the
Evangelists, or in St. Paul, or any other. And if it be that which is in the
Evangelists, or in St. Paul, what that is. If it be in none of them, then how
it may be known to be God's Word, and of such virtue that it should be able to
work so great a matter.

Again, There is a doubt of these words (of the Priest) whether no man may be
called a Priest, but he who has Authority to make a Propitiatory Sacrifice for
the quick and the dead; and how it may be proved that this Authority was
committed of God to any man, but to Christ alone.

It is likewise doubted after what Order the Sacrificing Priest shall be,
whether after the Order of Aaron, or else after the Order of Melchisedech; for
as far as I know, the Holy Scripture does allow no more.

Weston. Let this be sufficient.


Rid. If we lack time at this present, there is time enough hereafter.


Weston. These are but evasions or starting holes; you consume the time in vain.


Rid. I cannot start from you, I am captive and bound.


Weston. Fall to it, my Masters.


Smith. That which you have spoken may suffice at this present.


Rid. Let me alone, I pray you, for I have not much to say behind.


West. Go forward.


Rid. Moreover, there is ambiguity in this word Really, whether it be taken as
the Logicians term it transcendenter, that is, most generally, and so it may
signify any manner of thing, which belongs to the Body of Christ by any
means; after which sort we also grant Christ's Body to be really in the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, (as in Disputation, if occasion be given, shall
be declared) or whether it be taken to signify the very same thing, having
Body, Life, and Soul, which was assumed and taken of the Word of God, into the
Unity of Person. In which sense, fith the Body of Christ is really in Heaven,
because of the true manner of his Body, it may not be said to be here in the
earth. There is yet a further doubtfulness in these words under the forms of
Bread and Wine, whether the forms be there taken to signify the only
accidental and outward shows of Bread and Wine; or there withal the substantial
Natures thereof, which are to be seen by their qualities, and perceived by
exterior senses.

Now the Error and Falseness of the Proposition after the sense of the Roman
Church and Schoolmen, may hereby appear, in that they affirm the Bread to be
Transubstantiated, and changed to the Flesh assumed of the Word of God; and
that, as they say, by virtue of the Word, which they have devised by a certain
number of words, and cannot be found in any of the Evangelists, or in S Paul;
and so they gather that Christ's Body is really contained in the Sacrament of
the Altar: Which Position is grounded upon the Foundation of the
Transubstantiation; which Foundation is monstrous, against Reason, and
destroys the Analogy or Proportion of the Sacraments; and therefore this
Proposition also, which is built upon this rotten Foundation, is false,
erroneous, and to be counted as a detestable Heresy of the Sacramentaries.


Weston. We lose time. Ridley. You shall have time enough.


West. Fall to reasoning. You shall have some other day for this matter. Rid. I
have no more to say concerning my Explication. If you will give me leave, and
let me alone, I will but speak a word or two for my confirmation.


Weston. Go to, say on.


The Confirmation of the aforesaid Answer.
There ought no Doctrine to be established in the Church of Tes-
God, which dissenteth from the Word of God, from the Rule of Faith, and
draws with it many absurdities that cannot be avoided.

But this Doctrine of the first Proposition is such. ti-no.


Ergo, It ought not to be established and maintained in the Church of God.

The Major or first part of my Argument is plain, and the Minor or second part
is proved thus.

The Doctrine maintains a real, corporal, and carnal presence of Christ's
Flesh, assumed and taken of the Word, to be in the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper, and that not by virtue and Grace only, but also by the whole Essence
and Substance of the Body and Flesh of Christ.

But such a presence disagreeth from God's Word, from the Rule of Faith, and
cannot but draw with it many absurdities.

Ergo, The second part is true.

The first part of this Argument is manifest, and the second may yet futher be
confirmed thus. --

Weston. Thus you consume time, which might be better bestowed on other
matters. Mr. Opponent, I pray you, to your Arguments.


Smith. I will here reason with you upon Transubstantiation, which you say is
contrary to the Rule and Analogy of Faith. The contrary whereof I prove by the
Scriptures and the Doctors. But before I enter Argumentation with you, I demand
first, whether in the sixth Chapter of John there be any mention made of the
Sacrament, or of the Real Presence of Christ in the Sacrament?


Rid. It is against reason that I should be impeached to prosecute that which I
have to speak in this Assembly, being not so long, but that it may be
comprehended in few words.


West. Let him read on.


Rid. First of all, this Presence is contrary to many places of the holy
Scripture. Secondly, It varieth from the Articles of the Faith. Thirdly, It
destroys and takes away the Institution of the Lord's Supper. Fourthly, It
makes precious things common to profane and ungodly persons; for it casts
that which is holy unto Dogs, and pearls unto Swine. Fifthly, It forces men to
maintain many Monstrous Miracles without necessity and Authority of God's Word.
Sixthly, It gives occasion to the Heretics which erred concerning the two
Natures in Christ, to defend their Heresies thereby. Seventhly, It falsifieth
the sayings of the Godly Fathers; it falsifieth also the Catholic Faith of the
Church which the Apostles taught, the Martyrs confirmed, and the Faithful (as
one of the Fathers says) do retain and keep until this day. Wherefore the 2 d
part of mine Argument is true. The Probation of the Antecedent or former part
of this Argument, by the Parts thereof.

1. This carnal Presence is contrary to the Word of God, as appears, Joh. 16.
I tell you the truth. It is profitable to you that I go away, for if I go not
away, the Comforter shall not come unto you. Act. 3. Whom the Heavens must
receive until the time of restoring of all things which God has spoken. Mat.
9. The Children of the Bridegroom cannot mourn so long as the Bridegroom is
with them. But now is the time of mourning. Joh. 16. But I will see you again,
and your hearts shall rejoice. Joh. 14. I will come again and take you to my
self. Mat. 24. If they shall say unto you, Behold here is Christ, or there is
Christ, believe them not, etc.

2. It varieth from the Articles of the Faith, He ascended into Heaven, and
sits on the right hand of God the Father, from whence (and not from any
other place, says St. Augustine) he shall come to judge both the quick and the
dead.

3. It destroys and takes away the Institution of the Lord's Supper, which
was commanded only to be used and continued until the Lord himself should come.
If therefore he be really present in the body of his flesh, then must the
Supper cease: For a remembrance is not of a thing present, but of a thing past
and absent. And there is a difference between Remembrance and Presence, and (as
one of the Fathers says) A Figure is in vain where the thing figured is
present.

It makes precious things common to profane and ungodly Persons, and
constrains men to confess many absurdities. For it affirms, that
Whoremongers and Murderers, yea, and (as some of them hold opinion) that Mice,
Rats and Dogs also may receive the very real and corporal Body of the Lord,
wherein the fullness of the Spirit of Light and Grace dwells; contrary to the
manifest words of Christ in six Places and Sentences of the 6th Chapter of St.
John.

4. It confirms also and maintains that beastly kind of Cruelty of the
Anthropophagi, that is, the Devourers of Man's Flesh: for it is a more cruel
thing to devour a quick Man, that to slay him.


Pie. He requires time to speak Blasphemies. Leave your Blasphemies.


Rid. I had little thought to have had such reproachful words at your hands.


West. All is quiet. Go to your Arguments Mr. Doctor.


Rid. I have not many things more to say.


West. You utter Blasphemies with a most impudent face; leave off (I say) and
get you to the Argument.


Rid. 5. It forces men to maintain many monstrous Miracles, without any
necessity and authority of God's Word. For at the coming of this presence of
the Body and Flesh of Christ, they thrust away the Substance of Bread, and
affirm that the Accidents remain without any Subject, and instead thereof they
place Christ's Body without his qualities, and the true manner of a Body. And
if the Sacrament be reserved so long until it mould, and Worms breed, some say
that the Substance of Bread miraculously returns again, and some deny it.
Other some affirm, that the real Body of Christ goes down into the Stomach of
the Receivers, and does there abide so long only as they shall continue to be
good; but another sort hold that the Body of Christ is carried into Heaven, so
soon as the forms of Bread be bruised with the Teeth. O Works of Miracles!
Truly, and most truly, I see that fulfilled in these Men, whereof St. Paul
prophesied, 2 Thessalonians. 2. Because they have not received the love of the truth,
that they might be saved, God shall send them strong Delusions, that they
should believe a Lie, and be all damned which have not believed the Truth. This
gross Presence has brought forth that fond fantasy of Concomitance, whereby
is broken at this day and abrogated the Commandment of the Lord for
distributing of the Lord's Cup to the Laity.

6. It gives occasion to Heretics to maintain and defend their Errors; as to
Marcion, who said that Christ had but a Fantastical Body; and to Eutiches, who
wickedly confounded the two Natures in Christ.

7. Finally, It falsifieth the Sayings of the Godly Fathers, and the Catholic
Faith of the Church, which Vigilius, a Martyr and grave Writer, says, was
taught of the Apostles, confirmed with the Blood of Martyrs, and was
continually maintained by the Faithful until his time. By the Sayings of the
Fathers, I mean of Justin, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Origin, Eusebius, Emisenus,
Athanasius, Cyril, Epiphanius, Hierome, Chrysostom, Augustine; Vigilius,
Fulgentius, Bertram, and others most ancient Fathers. All those places, as I am
sure I have read, making for my purpose; so am I well assured that I could show
the same, if I might have the use of mine own Books, which I will take to me to
do, even upon the peril of my life, and loss of all that I may lose in this
World.

But now (my Brethren) think not because I disallow that Presence which the
first Proposition maintains (as a Presence which I take to be forged,
Fantastical, and besides the Authority of God's Word, perniciously brought
into the Church by the Romanists) that I therefore go about to take away the
true Presence of Christ's Body in his Supper rightly and duly administered,
which is grounded upon the Word of God, and made more plain by the Commentaries
of the Faithful Fathers. They that think so of me, the Lord knows how far
they are deceived; and to make the same evident unto you, I will in few words
declare what true Presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper I hold and affirm, with the Word of God and the Ancient Fathers.

I say and confess with the Evangelist Luke, and Apostle Paul, that the Bread
on the which thanks are given, is the Body of Christ, in the remembrance of him
and his Death, to be set forth perpetually of the Faithful until his coming.

I say and confess the Bread which we break, to be the Communion and partaking
of Christ's Body, with the Ancient and the Faithful Fathers.

I say and believe that there is not only a signification of Christ's Body set
forth by the Sacrament, but also that therewith is given to the Godly and
Faithful the Grace of Christ's Body, that is, the food of Life and Immortality.
And this I hold with Cyprian.

I say also with St. Augustine, that we eat Life, and we drink Life; with
Emisene, that we feel the Lord to be present in Grace; with Athanasius, that we
receive Celestial Food that comes from above; the propriety of natural
Communion, with Hilary; the nature of Flesh, and Benediction which gives life
in Bread and Wine, with Cyril; and with the same Cyril, the virtue of the very
Flesh of Christ, Life and Grace of his Body, the property of the only begotten,
that is to say Life, as he himself in plain words expounded it.

I confess also with Basil, that we receive the mystical Advent and coming of
Christ, Grace and Virtue of his very Nature; the Sacrament of his very Flesh,
with Ambrose; the Body by Grace, with Epiphanius; Spiritual Flesh, but not that
which was crucified, with Hierom; Grace flowing into a Sacrifice, and the Grace
of the Spirit, with Chrysostom; Grace and invisible Verity, Grace and Society
of the Members of Christ's Body, with Augustine.

Finally, with Bertram, (who was the last of all these) I confess that Christ's
Body is in the Sacrament in this respect; namely, as he writes, Because there
is in it the Spirit of Christ, that is, the power of the Word of God, which not
only feeds the Soul, but also cleanses it. But of these I suppose it may
appear unto all men how far we are from that Opinion, whereof some go about
falsely to slander us to the world, saying, we teach that the Godly and Faithful
should receive nothing else at the Lord's Table, but a Figure of the Body of
Christ.


The Second Proposition.
After the Consecration, there remains no Substance of Bread and Wine,
neither any other Substance, than the Substance of God and Man.

The Answer.
The second Conclusion is manifestly false, directly against the Word of God,
the Nature of the Sacrament, and the most evident Testimonies of the godly
Fathers; and it is the rotten Foundation of the other two Conclusions
propounded by you, both of the first, and also of the third. I will not
therefore now tarry upon any further Explication of this Answer, being
contented with that which is already added before to the Answer of the first
Proposition.

The First Argument for the Confirmation of this Answer.
It is very plain by the Word of God, that Christ did give Bread unto his
Disciples, and called it his Body.

But the Substance of Bread is another manner of Substance, than is the
Substance of Christ's Body, God and Man.

Therefore the Conclusion is false.

The second part of mine Argument is plain, and the first is proved thus.

The Second Argument.
That which Christ did take, on the which he gave Thanks, Da-
and the which he brake, he gave to his Disciples, and called it his Body.

But he took Bread, gave Thanks on Bread, and brake Bread. ti-
Ergo, The first part is true.

And it is confirmed with the Authorities of the Fathers, Irenaeus, si-
Tertullian, Origin, Cyprian, Epiphanius, Hierom, Augustine, Theodoret, Cyril,
Rabanus and Bid; whose places I will take upon me to show most manifest in
this behalf, if I may be suffered to have my Books, as my request is.

Bread is the Body of Christ. Ergo. It is Bread.

The Third Argument.
As the Bread of the Lord's Table is Christ's natural Body, so Ba-
it is his mystical Body.

But it is not Christ's mystical Body by Transubstantiation.

Ergo, It is not his natural Body by Transubstantiation. to- eo.


The second part of my Argument is plain, and the first is proved thus: As
Christ, who is the Verity, spoke of the Bread, This is my Body which shall be
betrayed for you; speaking there of his natural Body: even so St. Paul, moved
with the same Spirit of Truth, said, We, though we be many, yet are we all one
Bread and one Body, which be partakers of one Bread.

The Fourth Argument.
We may no more believe Bread to be Transubstantiate into the Body of Christ,
than the Wine into his Blood.

But the Wine is not Transubstantiate into his Blood:

Ergo, Neither is that Bread therefore Transubstantiate into his Body.

The first part of this Argument is manifest, and the second part is proved out
of the Authority of God's Word in Matthew and Mark, I will not drink of the
fruit of the Vine, etc. Now the fruit of the Vine was Wine which Christ drank,
and gave to his Disciples to drink. With this Sentence agrees plainly the
place of Chrysostom on the 20th Chapter of Matthew, as Cyprian does also,
affirming, That there is no Blood, if Wine be not in the Cup.

The Fifth Argument.
The words of Christ spoken upon the Cup, and upon the Ba-
Bread, have like effect and working.

But the words spoken upon the Cup have not virtue to Transubstantiate. to-


Ergo, It follows that the words spoken upon the Bread have eo.
no such virtue.

The second part of the Argument is proved; because they would then
Transubstantiate the Cup, or that which is in the Cup, into the New Testament.
But neither of these things can be done, and very absurd it is to confess the
same.

The Sixth Argument.
The Circumstances of the Scripture, the Analogy and proportion of Da-
the Sacraments, and the Testimony of the faithful Fathers, ought to rule us in
taking the meaning of the Holy Scripture touching the Sacrament.

But the Words of the Lord's Supper, the Circumstances of the ti-
Scripture, the Analogy of the Sacraments, and the Sayings of the Fathers, do
most effectually and plainly prove a figurative speech in the words of the
Lord's Supper.

Ergo, A figurative sense and meaning is specially to be received in si.
these words, This is my Body.

The Circumstances of the Scripture, Do this in remembrance of me. As often as ye
shall eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup, ye shall show forth the Lord's
death. Let a man prove himself, and so eat of this bread, and drink of this
cup. They came together to break Bread: and they continued in breaking of
Bread. The Bread which we break, etc. For we being many, are all one Bread and
one Body, etc.

The Analogy of the Sacraments is necessary; for if the Sacraments had not some
similitude, or likeness of the things whereof they be Sacraments, they could in
no wise be Sacraments. And this similitude in the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper is taken three manner of ways.

1. The first consists in nourishing, as you shall read in Rabanus, Cyprian,
Austin, Irenaeus, and most plainly in Isidore out of Bertram. 2. The second in
the uniting and joining of many into one, as Cyprian teaches. 3. The third is
a similitude of unlike things: Where, like as the Bread is turned into one
Body; so we by the right use of this Sacrament, are turned through Faith into
the Body of Christ.
The sayings of the Fathers declare it to be a figurative speech, as it
appears in Origin, Tertullian, Chrysostom in opere imperfecto, Augustine,
Ambrose, Basil, Gregory Nazianzen, Hilary, and most plainly of all, in Bertram.
Moreover the sayings and places of all the Fathers, whose names I have before
recited against the assertion of the first Proposition, do quite overthrow
Transubstantiation. But of all most evidently and plainly, Irenaeus, Origin,
Cyprian, Chrysostom to Caesarius the Monk, Augustine against Adamantus,
Gelasius, Cyril, Epiphanius, Chrysostom again on the 20th of Matthew. Rabanus,
Damascene and Bertram.

Here, Right Worshipful Mr. Prolocutor, and ye the rest of the Commissioners,
it may please you to understand, that I do not lean to these things only, which
I have written in my former Answers and Confirmations, but that I have also for
the proof of that I have spoken, whatsoever Bertram, a man Learned, of sound
and upright Judgment, and ever counted a Catholic for these Seven hundred
years, until this our age, has written. His Treatise, whosoever shall read and
weigh, considering the time of the Writer, his Learning, Godliness of life, the
Allegations of the Ancient Fathers, and his manifold and most grounded
Arguments, I cannot (doubtless) but much marvel, if he have any fear of God at
all, how he can with good Conscience speak against him in this matter of the
Sacrament. This Bertram was the first that pulled me by the Ear, and that first
brought me from the common Error of the Romish Church, and caused me to search
more diligently and exactly both the Scriptures and the Writings of the old
Ecclesiastical Fathers in this matter. And this I protest before the face of
God, who knows that I lie not in the things I now speak.

The Third Proposition.
In the Mass is the lively Sacrifice of the Church, propitiable and available
for the sins as well of quick as of the dead.

The Answer to this Proposition.
I answer to this third Proposition as I did to the first. And moreover I say,
that being taken in such sense as the words seem to import, it is not only
erroneous, but withal so much to the derogation and defacing of the Death and
Passion of Christ, that I judge it may and ought most worthily to be counted
wicked and blasphemous against the most precious Blood of our Savior Christ.

The Explication.
Concerning the Romish Mass which is used at this day, or the lively Sacrifice
thereof propitiatory and available for the sins of the quick and the dead, the
Holy Scripture has not so much as one syllable.

There is ambiguity also in the name of Mass: what it signifies, and whether
at this day there be any such indeed as the Ancient Fathers used; seeing that
now there be neither Catecumeni nor Poenitentes to be sent away.

Again, touching these words (The lively Sacrifice of the Church) There is
doubt whether they are to be understood Figuratively and Sacramentally, for the
Sacrament of the lively Sacrifice (after which sort we deny it not to be in the
Lord's Supper) or properly and without any figure; of the which manner there
was but one only Sacrifice, and that once offered, namely upon the Altar of the
Cross.

Moreover, in these words (as well as) it may be doubted whether they be spoken
in mockage as men are wont to say in sport, of a foolish and ignorant person,
that he is apt as well in conditions as in knowledge, being apt indeed in
neither of them both.

There is also a doubt in the word Propitiable, whether it signify here that
which takes away sin, or that which may be made available for the taking away
of sin; That is to say, whether it is to be taken in the active or in the
passive signification.

Now the falsness of the Proposition, after the meaning of the Schoolmen and
the Romish Church, and Impiety in that sense which the words seem to import, is
this; that they leaning to the foundation of their fond Transubstantiation,
would make the quick and lively body of Christ's Flesh (united and knit to the
Divinity) to lie hid under the accidents, and outward shows of Bread and Wine.
Which is very false, as I have said before; and they building upon this
foundation, do hold that the same Body is offered unto God, by the Priest in
his daily Massings, to put away the sins of the quick and the dead; whereas by
the Apostle to the Hebrews it is evident that there is but one Oblation, and
one true and lively Sacrifice of the Church offered upon the Altar of the
Cross, which was, is, and shall be for ever the propitiation for the sins of
the whole World: and where there is Remission of the same, there is, says the
Apostle, no more offering for sin.

Arguments confirming his Answer.
No Sacrifice ought to be done, but where the Priest is meet to offer Ce-
the same.

All other Priests be unmeet to offer Sacrifice for sin, but Christ alone. la-
rent.


Ergo, No other Priests ought to Sacrifice for sin but Christ alone.

The second part of my Argument is thus proved.
No honor in God's Church ought to be taken where a man is not Fe-
called as Aaron.

It is a great honor in God's Church to Sacrifice for Sin: ri- son.


Ergo.

No man ought to Sacrifice for Sin, but only they who are called.

But only Christ is called to that honor.

Ergo, No other Priest but Christ ought to Sacrifice for Sin.

That no man is called to this degree of Honor but Christ alone, it is
evident; For there are but two only Orders of Priesthood allowed in the Word of
God: Namely, the Order of Aaron, and the Order of Melchisedech. But now the
Order of Aaron is come to an end, by reason that it was unprofitable, and weak;
and of the Order of Melchisedech there is but one Priest alone, even Christ the
Lord, who has a Priesthood that cannot pass to any other.

An Argument.
That thing is in vain, and to no effect, where no necessity is Ba-
wherefore it is done.

To offer up any more Sacrifice Propitiatory for the quick and the to-
dead, there is no necessity, for Christ our Savior did that fully and
perfectly once for all.

Ergo, To do the same in the Mass, it is in vain. co.


Another Argument.
After that Eternal Redemption is found and obtained, there needs Fe-
no more daily offering for the same.

But Christ coming an high Bishop, etc. found and obtained for us ri-
Eternal Redemption.

Ergo, There needs now no more daily Oblation for the Sins of o.
the quick and the dead.

Another Argument.
All remission of Sins comes only by shedding of Blood. Ca- mes- tres.


In the Mass there is no shedding of Blood.

Ergo, In the Mass there is no Remission of Sins, and so it follows also that
there is no Propitiatory Sacrifice.

Another Argument.
In the Mass the Passion of Christ is not in verity, but in a Mystery
representing the same; yea even there where the Lord's Supper is duly
ministered. But where Christ suffers not, there is he not offered in verity:
For the Apostle says, Not that he might offer up himself oftentimes, (for then
must he have suffered oftentimes since the beginning of the World.) Now where
Christ is not offered, there is no Propitiatory Sacrifice.

Ergo, In the Mass there is no Propitiatory Sacrifice. For Christ appeared once
in the latter end of the World to put sin to flight by the offering up of
himself. And as it is appointed to all men that they shall once dye, and then
comes the Judgment: even so Christ was once offered to take away the Sins of
many. And unto them that look for him, shall he appear again without sin unto
salvation.

Another Argument.
Where there is any Sacrifice that can make the comers thereunto Da-
perfect, there ought men to cease from offering any more Expiatory and
Propitiatory Sacrifices.

But in the New Testament there is one only Sacrifice now already ri-
long since offered, which is able to make the comers thereunto perfect for
ever.

Ergo, In the New Testament they ought to cease from offering i.
any more Propitiatory Sacrifice.

Sentences of the Scripture tending to the same end and purpose, out of which
also may be gathered other manifest Arguments for more confirmation thereof.

By the which will (says the Apostle) we are sanctified by the offering Heb.
10.
up of the Body of Jesus Christ once for all. And in the same place; But this
man, after that he had offered one Sacrifice for sin, sits for ever at the
Right hand of God, etc. For with one Offering has he made perfect for ever
them that are sanctified, and by himself has he purged our Sins. I beseech you
to mark these words (by himself:) the which well weighed, will without doubt
cease all controversy. The Apostle plainly denies any other Sacrifice to
remain for him that treads under his feet the Blood of the Testament, by the
which he was made holy. Christ will not be crucified again, he will not his
death to be had in derision.

He has reconciled us in the Body of his Flesh. Mark, I beseech you, he Col. 1.
says not in the Mystery of his Body; but in the Body of his Flesh.

If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the 1 John 2.
Righteous; and he is the Propitiation for our Sins; not for ours only, but for
the Sins of the whole World.

I know that all these places of the Scripture are avoided by two manner of
subtle shifts: The one is, by the distinction of the bloody and unbloody
Sacrifice; as tho our unbloody Sacrifice of the Church were any other than the
Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving, than a commemoration, a showing forth,
and a Sacramental Representation of that one only bloody Sacrifice, offered up
once for all.

The other is by depraving and wresting the Sayings of the Ancient Fathers unto
such a strange kind of sense, as the Fathers themselves indeed never meant. For
what the meaning of the Fathers was, is evident by that which St. Augustine
writes in his Epistle to Boniface, and in the 83d Chapter of his Ninth Book
against Faustus the Manichee, besides many other Places; likewise by Eusebius
Emissenus, Cyprian, Chrysostom, Fulgentius, Bertram, and others, who do wholly
concord and agree together in this unity in the Lord, that the Redemption, once
made in Verity for the Salvation of Man, continues in full effect for ever,
and works without ceasing unto the end of the World; That the Sacrifice once
offered cannot be consumed; That the Lord's Death and Passion is as effectual,
the virtue of that Blood once shed, as fresh at this day, for the washing away
of sins, as it was even the same day that it flowed out of the blessed Side of
our Savior: And finally, that the whole substance of our Sacrifice, which is
frequented of the Church in the Lord's Supper, consists in Prayers, Praise,
and giving of Thanks, and in remembering, and in showing forth of that Sacrifice
once offered upon the Altar of the Cross; that the same might continually be
had in reverence by Mystery, which once only, and no more, was offered for the
Price of our Redemption.

These are the things (right worshipful Mr. Prolocutor, and ye the rest of the
Commissioners) which I could presently prepare to the answering of your three
foresaid Prophesies, being destitute of all help in this shortness of time,
sudden warning, and want of Books.

Wherefore I appeal to my first Protestation, most humbly desiring the help of
the same (as much as may be) to be granted unto me. And because ye have lately
given most unjust and cruel Sentence against me, I do here appeal (so far forth
as I may) to a more indifferent and just censure and judgment of some other
Superior, Competent and Lawful Judge, and that according to the approved state
of the Church of England. Howbeit, I confess, I am ignorant what that is at
this present, through the trouble and alteration of the state of the Realm. But
if this Appeal may not be granted to me upon Earth, then do I fly (even as to
my only Refuge and alone Haven of Health) to the Sentence of the Eternal Judge,
that is, of the Almighty God, to whose most merciful Justice toward us, and
most just Mercifulness, I do wholly commit my self, and all my Cause, nothing
at all despairing of the Defense of my Advocate and alone Savior Jesus Christ,
to whom with the Everlasting Father, and the Holy Spirit, the Sanctifier of us
all, be now and for ever all Honor and Glory. Amen.

Ridley. Of Christ's Real Presence there may be a double understanding: P. 56.
If you take the Real Presence of Christ according to the Real and Corporal
Substance which he took of the Virgin, that Presence being in Heaven, cannot be
on the Earth also. But if you mean a Real Presence, secundum rem aliquam quae
ad Corpus Christi pertinet: i. e. according to something that appertains to
Christ's Body, certes the Ascension and abiding in Heaven are no let at all to
that Presence. Wherefore Christ's Body after that sort is here present to us in
the Lord's Supper, by Grace, I say, as Epiphanius speaks it.

I grant the Bread to be converted and turned into the Flesh of P. 60.
Christ, but not by Transubstantiation, but by a Sacramental Conversion or
turning. It is Transformed, says Theophylact in the same place, by a Mystical
Benediction, and by the accession or coming of the Holy Ghost unto the Flesh of
Christ. He says not, by expulsion, or driving away the Substance of Bread, and
by substituting or putting in its place the Corporal Substance of Christ's
Flesh. And where he says, It is not a Figure of the Body, we should understand
that saying, as he himself does elsewhere add one, that is, it is no naked or
bare Figure only. For Christ is present in his Mysteries; neither at any time,
as Cyprian says, does the Divine Majesty absent himself from the Divine
Mysteries.

And I also worship Christ in the Sacrament, but not because P. 61.
he is included in the Sacrament: Like as I worship Christ also in the
Scriptures, not because he is really included in them. Notwithstanding, I say,
that the Body of Christ is present in the Sacrament, but yet Sacramentally and
Spiritually, according to his Grace giving Life, and in that respect really,
that is according to his Benediction, giving Life.

Furthermore, I acknowledge gladly the true Body of Christ to be in the Lord's
Supper in such sort as the Church of Christ (which is the Spouse of Christ, and
is taught of the Holy Ghost, and guided by God's Word) does acknowledge the
same. But the true Church of Christ does acknowledge a Presence of Christ's Body
in the Lord's Supper, to be communicated to the Godly by Grace, and
spiritually, as I have often showed, and by a Sacramental Signification, but
not by the Corporal Presence of the Body of his Flesh.

We worship, I confess, the same true Lord and Savior of P. 65.
the world, which the Wise men worshipped in the Manger; howbeit we do it in a
Mystery, and in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, and that in Spiritual
Liberty, as says S. Aug. lib. 3. de Doct. Christiana, Not in carnal servitude;
that is, we do not worship servilely the signs for the things; for that should
be, as he also says, a part of a servile Infirmity; but we behold with the
eyes of Faith him present after Grace, and spiritually set upon the Table; and
we worship him who sits above, and is worshipped of the Angels; for Christ
is always assistant to his Mysteries, as the said Augustine says. And the
Divine Majesty, as says Cyprian, does never absent it self from the Divine
Mysteries; but this Assistance and Presence of Christ, as in Baptism, it is
wholly Spiritual, and by Grace, and not by any Corporal Substance of the Flesh:
Even so it is here in the Lord's Supper, being rightly, and according to the
Word of God duly ministered.


Ridley. My Protestation always saved, that by this mine P. 420.
Answer I do not condescend to your Authority, in that you are Legate to the
Pope; I answer thus,

In a sense, the first Article is true, and in a sense it is false; for if you
take really for vere, for spiritually by Grace and Efficacy, then it is true
that the Natural Body and Blood of Christ is in the Sacrament vere and
realiter, indeed and really; but if you take these terms so grossly, that you
would conclude thereby a Natural Body, having Motion, to be contained under the
Forms of Bread and Wine, vere and realiter, then really is not Christ's Body
and Blood in the Sacrament, no more than the Holy Ghost is in the Element of
Water in our Baptism.

Because this Answer was not understood, the Notaries wist not how to note it;
wherefore the Bishop of Lincoln willed him to answer either Affirmatively or
Negatively, either to grant the Article, or to deny it.


Rid. My Lord, you know that where any Equivocation (which is a word having two
significations) is, except distinction be given, no direct Answer can be made;
for it is one of Aristotle's Fallacies, containing two Questions under one, the
which cannot be satisfied with one Answer. For both you and I agree herein,
that in the Sacrament is the very true and Natural Body and Blood of Christ,
even that which was born of the Virgin Mary, which ascended into Heaven, which
sits on the Right Hand of God the Father, which shall come from thence to
judge the quick and the dead; only we differ in modo, in the way and manner of
being; we confess all one thing to be in the Sacrament, and dissent in the
manner of being there. I being fully by God's Word thereunto persuaded, confess
Christ's Natural Body to be in the Sacrament indeed by Spirit and Grace,
because that whosoever receives worthily that Bread and Wine, receives
effectually Christ's Body, and drinks his Blood; that is, he is made
effectually Partaker of his Passion; and you make a grosser kind of being,
enclosing a Natural, a Lively, and a Moving Body, under the shape or form of
Bread and Wine. Now this difference considered, to the Question thus I answer,
That in the Sacrament of the Altar is the Natural Body and Blood of Christ,
vere and realiter, indeed and really for spiritually by Grace and Efficacy; for
so every worthy Receiver receives the very true Body of Christ; but if you
mean really and indeed, so that thereby you would include a lively and a
moveable Body under the forms of Bread and Wine, then in that sense is not
Christ's Body in the Sacrament really and indeed.

This Answer taken and penned of the Notaries, the Bishop of Lincoln proposed
the second Question or Article. To whom he answered.


Rid. Always my Protestation reserved, I answer thus, That in the Sacrament is
a certain Change, in that that Bread, which was before common Bread, is now
made a lively presentation of Christ's Body, and not only a Figure, but
effectually represents his Body; that even as the Mortal Body was nourished
by that visible Bread, so is the Internal Soul fed with the Heavenly food of
Christ's Body, which the eye of Faith sees as the bodily eye sees only Bread.
Such a Sacramental mutation I grant to be in the Bread and Wine, which truly is
no small change, but such a change as no mortal man can make, but only that
Omnipotency of Christ's Word.

Then the Bishop of Lincoln willed him to answer directly either Affirmatively
or Negatively, without further Declaration of the Matter.

Then he Answered:


Ridley. That notwithstanding the Sacramental Mutation of the which he spoke,
and all the Doctors confessed, the true Substance and Nature of Bread and Wine
remains; with the which the Body is in like sort nourished, as the Soul is by
Grace and Spirit with the Body of Christ. Even so in Baptism the Body is washed
with the visible Water, and the Soul is cleansed from all filth by the
Invisible Holy Ghost, and yet the Water cease not to be Water, but keeps
the nature of Water still. In like sort in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper
the Bread cease not to be Bread.


Extracts from Bishop Poynets Diallaction.
I Will so divide the question, that it may be briefly reduced to three heads.
First, I will show that the true Body of Christ is given to the Faithful in the
Sacrament; and that the words Nature and Substance, are not to be rejected, but
that the Ancients treating of this Sacrament did use them. In the next place, I
will show that there is a difference between the proper Body of Christ, and
that which is present in the Sacrament, and that the Ancient Fathers thought
so. Lastly, I will show, what manner of Body this is, which is received in this
Mystery, and why it is called by that Name, according to the Doctrine of the
sante Fathers.

The Body of Christ is so called properly and improperly; properly, that Body
which was taken of the Virgin. Improperly, as the Sacrament and the Church.
That the Church is not properly the Body of Christ, cannot be doubted by any.
It remains, that we now prove the same of the Sacrament.

It may easily be observed from what Chrysostom writes in this place, that
that which Christ called his Body when he said, Take, eat, this is my Body; and
which be received together with his Apostles, is in another manner his Body,
than is his very proper Body, which was fed with that other. This did eat, that
was eaten, and each is called his Body, but in a different manner.

He gave the Sacrament of his Body, and not the Body it self visibly conceived,
that is, his visible Body; which is referred to his proper Body. But this Body,
wherever it is, is visible.

It is to be observed, That the truth of the Lords Body may be spoken two ways,
and ought to be understood two ways. For one verity of his Body is required in
the Sacrament, another simply and out of the Sacrament.

As for what concerns our purpose, the very words of Cyprian sufficiently
demonstrate, how the Letter is not to be followed in those things, which relate
to this Mystery; how far all carnal Sense is to be removed, and all things to
be referred to a spiritual Sense; that with this Bread is present, the Divine
Virtue, the effect of Eternal Life; that the Divine Essence is infused; that
the Words are Spirit and Life; that a spiritual Precept is delivered; that this
Body, this Flesh and Blood, this Substance of the Body ought not to be
understood after a common manner, nor according to the Dictates of human
Reason; but is so named, thought and believed, because of certain eminent
Effects, Virtues and Properties, which are joined to it, which are naturally
found in the Body and Blood of Christ, to wit, that it feed and quicken our
Souls, and prepare our Bodies to Resurrection and Immortality.

Here it is to be remembered, that the words are spiritual, and spiritually to
be understood; that it is indeed named Flesh and Blood, but that this ought to
be understood of the Spirit and Life, that is, of the lively Virtue of the
Flesh of our Lord, so that the Efficacy of Life is conferred on the external
Signs.

When Theophylact said, That the Bread is not the Figure of our Lords Body, he
means that it is not only (or a bare) Figure of it.

See how Chrysostom says, That we are really, as I may so say, turned into the
Flesh of Christ. Yet who does not see that this is a spiritual, not a carnal
Conversion: So the Bread is really turned and transelementated into the Flesh
of Christ, but by a spiritual, not a carnal Conversion, inasmuch as as the
Bread obtains the Virtue of the Flesh.

How much better did Cyprian, Ambrose, Epiphanius, Emysenus, and others speak,
who teach a like change to be performed in the Eucharist, as is performed in
Baptism, by which the external Signs remain the same, and by Grace acquire a
new substance in the same manner.

The Exposition and Doctrine of Bertram, concerning the Sacrament, ought in my
Opinion to be diligently examined and embraced for two Reasons.

That this may appear more manifestly, and be remembered the better, I thought
it not unfit to subjoyn from what I have already taught, a certain Comparison
between the two Bodies of Christ.

The proper Body of Christ has Head, Breast, and distinct Members; the
mystical Body has not. The proper Body has Bones, Veins and Nerves; the
mystical Body has not.

That is organical; this is not.

That is not a Figure; this is a Figure of the proper Body. That is human and
corporeal by its Nature; this is Heavenly, Divine, and Spiritual.

The matter of that is not subject to Corruption; the material part of this is
Bread, and is corrupted.

That is contained in one place; this is present, wheresoever the Sacrament is
celebrated, but not, as in a place.

That is not the Sacrament of another Body; this the Sacrament of another.

That was taken of the Body of the Virgin Mary, and was once created; this is
not taken of the Virgin, but is created daily by the mystical Benediction
potentially.

That is a natural Body, this supernatural. Lastly, That is simply, properly
and absolutely his Body; this in a certain respect only and improperly.

Nor is it enough here, if we flee one way of carnally understanding it, and
fall upon another. For he who literally understands the eating of the Flesh of
Christ, and as although it were a proper Speech, he is a carnal Capernaite;
whether he imagine it to be properly done this way, or that way. For it is
probable that all the Capernaites understood Christ carnally, but not all the
same way.

For it is not therefore to be accounted a Spiritual sense, because they say
the Flesh of Christ is there invisibly present. For if they mean his proper
Flesh, we do not therefore not eat it carnally, because we do not see it.

Now in this Sacrament the ancient Fathers observed two things, for each of
which it might deservedly be called and esteemed the Body of Christ; but more
especially when it comprehends both. For the Bread is justly called his Body,
as well because it is the figure of his true Body, as because it has the
lively virtue of it conjoined to it, much more; but most especially, because it
comprehends both.

It is therefore to be admired, what they mean, who will not suffer it to be
called a figure, nor acknowledge any figure in the words of Institution, but
contumeliously call those who own it, Figurative men, whereas it is manifest
that all the Ancients did so call it. And indeed if there be no figure in it,
it will be neither a sign nor Sacrament. So that those who traduce the
maintainers of the other opinion as Sacramentaries, do indeed take away all
Sacrament from it.

There is yet another thing, which the Ancient Fathers acknowledging to be in
this Sacrament, taught it to be truly the Body of our Lord; And that is the
efficacious and lively virtue of the Body it self, which is joined with the
Bread and Wine by Grace and Mystical Benediction, and is called by diverse
names, although it be the same thing: by Augustine, the Intelligible, Invisible
and Spiritual Body: by Jerome the Divine and Spiritual Flesh: by Irenaeus an
Heavenly Thing: by Ambrose the Spiritual Food and Body of the Divine Spirit: by
others some other like thing. And this does chiefly cause this Sacrament to be
worthy of the appellation of his true Body and Blood, since it does not only
externally bear the Image and Figure of it, but also carries along with it the
inward and hidden natural propriety of the same Body; so that it cannot be
esteemed an empty Figure, or the sign of a thing wholly absent, but the very
Body of our Lord: Divine indeed and Spiritual, but present by Grace, full of
virtue, powerful in efficacy. For this is very frequent, that the names of
things themselves be ascribed to their virtue and efficacy.

The Fathers therefore in Treating of the Sacraments, use the words Nature and
Substance not Philosophically but Theologically: that is, they speak not as
natural Philosophers, but as men disputing of Divine matters; they give the
name of Nature and Substance to Grace, Virtue and Efficacy: the nature of the
Sacrament so requiring.

But this (that the Spiritual virtue is inseparable from the Elements) is to be
understood to be true, as long as the Sign serves for that use, and is
directed to that end, for which it was destined by the Word of God. For if we
apply it to other uses, and abuse it against the institution of Christ, it
either is altogether not a Sacrament, or cease to be a Sacrament.

The dignity and due honor of the Sacraments is not injured, but remains
whole and inviolate, while we confess both the truth of the Body, and the
nature and substance of it, to be received by the Faithful, together with the
Symbols: which also the ancient Fathers testify to be done. And then this
distinction which also those Fathers diligently observed, being received
between that proper or assumed Body of the Lord, and this Symbolical Body, or
Sacrament of the Body, the analogy of our Faith is not violated, which no ways
ought to be shaken: since we attribute to each Body his peculiar properties.
For we say that the proper and assumed Body is in a place, and circumscribed
with a space, by reason of the modus of a true Body, as Augustine says, etc.

All men see, that we also here affirm the Substance to be present, and assert
our Communion with Christ naturally, and as I may say, substantially. But then
these words ought to be understood after the manner not of Philosophers but of
Divines. Neither should we quarrel about the term of Transubstantiation,
although barbarous and not in the least necessary: Provided they meant thereby
such a Transmutation of Substances, as the Ancients taught: that is, a
Sacramental one: such as is also performed in a man regenerated by Baptism, who
is made a new man, and a new creature. Such as is also performed when we are
converted into the Flesh of Christ, which examples the ancient Fathers used.

If any here require a Miracle (for some Fathers call the Eucharist a great
Miracle) it is in truth no less wonderful, that Bread and Wine, which are
earthly Creatures, and apt only to nourish the Body, should by virtue of the
Mystical Benediction obtain that inward force, and such powerful efficacy, as
to cleanse, nourish, sanctify, and prepare to immortality both our (...), and
to make us the (...) and one Body with (...)

Diallacticon Viri boni and literati de veritate, natura atque substantia
corporis and sanguinis Christi in Eucharistia. Ad calcem Becae Opusculorum,
Vol. II. Par. 2. p. 31. Genevae, 1573. f.
CAusam ita partiri placuit, ut summatim ad tria capita revocetur. Primo
ostendam veritatem corporis Christi in Eucharistia dari fidelibus; nec has
voces Naturam at que Substantiam fugiendas esse, sed Veteres de hoc Sacramento
disserentes ita locutos fuisse Deinde discrimen esse monstrabo inter corpus
Domini proprium, and illud quod inest in Sacramento; veteresque Patres ita
censuisse. Postremo cujusmodi sit hoc Corpus, quod accipitur in Mysterio, and
cur eo nomine censeatur, indicabo, secundum eorundem Patrum sententiam, p. 33,
34.

Corpus Christi dicitur proprie and improprie; proprie, Corpus illud sumptum ex
Virgin; improprie, ut Sacramentum and Ecclesia. Quod Ecclesia proprie Corpus
Christi non sit, nemini dubium est; de Sacramento restat, ut nunc idem
Probemus, p. 38.

Non difficile est animadvertere ex his quae scribit hoc loco Chrysostomus,
aliter esse Corpus, quod Christus ipse Corpus suum appellavit, cum diceret,
Accipite, edite; hoc meum est Corpus, quod ipse quoque simul sumebat cum
discipulis; aliter ipsum Corpus proprium, quod illo altero vescebatur. Hoc
comedebat, illud comesum est; and utrumque Corpus, sed diversa ratione,
dicitur, p. 39.

Sacramentum videlicet Corporis (dedit) and non ipsum visibiliter, sive
visibile Corpus, quod ad proprium Corpus refertur. Hoc autem Corpus ubicunque
est, visibile est, p. 40.

Observandum est veritatem Dominici Corporis, dup citer dici ac debere
dupliciter acc^^i. Alia namque veritas Corporis requiritur in Mysterio, alia
simpliciter and absque Mysterio, p. 41.

Quod ad nostrum institutum attinet, ipsa Cypriani verba satis indicant, quam
non sequenda sit litera in his quae de hoc Mysterio dicuntur, quam procul
arcendus est carnis Sensus, and ad Sensum spiritualem omnia referenda; huic
Pani Divinae Virtutis praesentiam adesse, Vitae Aeternae effectum, Divinam
insundi essentiam verba Spiritum and vitam esse, spirituale documentum tradi,
hoc Corpus, hunc sanguinem, and carnem hanc substantiam Corporis, non communi
more, nec ut humana ratio dictat accipi oportere, sed ita nominari, existimari,
credi, propter eximios quosdam Effectus, Virtutes, and Proprietates conjunctas,
quae Corpori and sanguini Christi natura insunt; nempe quod pascat animas
nostras, and vivificet simul, and Corpora ad Resurrectionem and Immortalitatem
praeparet, p. 46.

Hic cogitandum est verba spiritualia esse, and spiritualiter intelligenda;
carnem quidem and sanguinem nominari, sed de Spiritu and Vita, id est, vivifica
Dominicae carnis Virtute debere intelligi, and proinde vim Vitae signis
externis inditam esse, Ibid.

Theophylactus quum dicit (panem) non esse Figuram (Corporis Dominici) sensit
non tantum Figuram esse, p. 47.

Ecce Chrysostomus dicit, realiter ut ita loquar, nos converti in carnem
Christi, sed spiritualem illam non carnalem Conversionem esse quis non videt?
Ita reipsa convertitur and transelementatur Panis in carnem Christi, sed
spirituali non carnali Conversione, quia Panis virtutem carnis assequitur, p.
48.

Quanto melius locuti sunt Cyprianus, Ambrosius, Epiphanius, Emysenus, and
alii, qui similem Commutationem in Eucharistia cum ea quae fit in Baptismo
confirmant qua fit ut signa maneant eadem, and per gratiam novam acquirant
substantiam similiter, p. 49.

Cujus ego viri (Bertrami) Expositionem and de Sacramento viam disputandi duas
ob causas diligenter expendendam and amplectendam arbitror, p. 52.

Quod ut magis appareat, and memoria reponatur, non inutile fore putavi, ex his
quae supra memoravimus, (...) quandam per collationem subjungere.

Corpus Christi proprium habet caput, pectus, membra dinstincta, Corpus
mysticum non habet. Corpus proprium habet Ossa, Venas, Nervos, mysticum non
habet.

Illud organicum est; hoc non est.

Illud Figura non est; hoc est Figura proprii Corporis. Illud natura sua
humanum and corporeum est; hec Coeleste, Divinum, Spirituale.

Illius materia Corruptioni non est obnoxia; hujus pars materialis Panis est,
and corrumpitur.

Illud uno loco continetur; hoc, ubicunque Sacramentum celebratur, adest, at
non ut in loco.

Illud non est Sacramentum alterius Corporis; hoc Sacramentum est alterius.

Illud de Virginis Mariae corpore sumptum, semel creatum est; hoc de Virgin
non sumitur sed quotidie per Benedictionem mysticam potentialiter creatur.

Illud natural Corpus est; hoc supernaturale. Denique illud simpliciter, hoc
secundum quid; illud proprie and absolute, hoc improprie Corpus est, p. 52, 53.

Neque hic satis est, si modum unum carnaliter intelligendi fugiamus, and in
alium impingamus. Nam qui Christi carnem edere secundum literam accipit, and
quasi locutio propria sit; is Capernaita carnalis est; sive id hoc sive illo
modo proprie fieri putat. -- Nam verisimile est, Carpernaitas omnes quidem
carnaliter intellexisse, sed non omnes eodem modo, p. 53.

Non enim ideo spiritualis sensus existimandus est, quia dicunt carnem Christi
invisibiliter adesse; nam si de propria carne intelligant, non ideo carnaliter
non edimus, quia non videmus, p. 54.

Jam in hoc Sacramento veteres Patres duas res animadverterunt; propter quas
singulas merito corpus Christi diceretur and haberetur, maxim vero cum
utramque comprehendat, Nam and quia figura very corporis panis est, jure corpus
appellatur; and quia virtutem ejusdem vitalem conjunctam habet, multo magis;
tum vero maxim quod utrumque complectitur. Ibid.

Quo magis mirandum est, quid illis in mentem veniat, qui figuram non patiantur
appellari, nec figuram in Coenae verbis agnoscant; sed ^^s qui agnoscunt, per
contumeliam figuratores appelant cum tamen manifestum sit Veteres omnes sic
appellasse. Quod si figura non erit, nec Signum, nec Sacramentum erit. Itaque.
qui in illos tanquam Sacramentarios dicere parati sunt, ipsi omnino Sacramenta
tollunt. p. 55.

Alterum esse diximus, quod veteres Patres agnoscentes in hoc Sacramento vere
Dominicum corpus esse voluerunt. Est autem virtus ipsius corporis efficax and
vivifica, quae per gratiam and mysticam benedictionem cum pane and vino
conjungitur, and variis nominibus appellatur, cum res eadem sit; ab Augustino
corpus intelligibile, invisibile, spirituale; ab Hieronymo caro divina and
spiritualis; ab Irenaeo res coelestis; ab Ambrosio esca spiritualis, and corpus
divini spiritus; ab aliis aliud simile quippiam. Et hoc multo etiam magis
efficit, ut hoc Sacramentum dignissimum sit very corporis and sanguinis
nomenclatura: quum non solum extrinsecus imaginem and figuram ejus prae se
ferat verum; etiam intus abditam and latentem naturalem ejusdem corporis
proprietatem, hoc est, vivificam virtutem secum trahat; ut jam non inanis
figura, aut absentis omnino rei signum existimari possit, sed ipsum corpus
Domini, divinum quidem and spirituale, sed praesens gratia, plenum virtute,
potens efficacitate. Saepe autem fit, ut nomina rerum ipsarum tribuantur earum
virtuti and efficacitati. Ibid.

Cum agitur de Sacramentis, mentionem faciunt Patres Naturae and Substantiae,
non (...) sed (...), hoc est, non ut Philosophi naturales loquuntur, sed
homines de divinis rebus disserentes, gratiae, virtuti, and efficacitati
naturae substantiaeque nomen impertientes, nimirum Sacramenti natura id
postulante, p. 57.

Hoc autem (inseparabilitas virtutis spiritualis ab Elementis) ita
intelligendum est, quamdiu signum ei servit usui and fini accommodatur, cui
juxta verbum Dei destinatum fuerit. Nam si ad alios usus applicamus, and
abutimur contra Christi institutum: aut Sacramentum prorsus non est, aut
Sacramentum esse desinit, p. 64.

Sacramentorum dignitas and debitus honos non laeditur, sed integer and
inviolatus manet; dum and veritatem corporis and naturam ac substantiam illius
una cum symbolis accipi fateamur a fidelibus, quod and veteres Patres fieri
testantur. Deinde hac recepta, quam iidem Patres diligenter observarunt,
distinctione inter proprium sive assumptum illud corpus Domini, and hoc
symbolicum corpus sive Sacramentum corporis, non peccatur in analogiam fidei
nostrae, quae nullo pacto convellenda est: quandoquidem utrique corpori quae
sua sunt attribuimus. Proprium enim and assumptum corpus in loco esse and loci
spatio circumscribi dicimus, propter very corporis modum ut ait Augustinus,
etc. Ibid.

Vident substantiam quoque a nobis (in hoc libro) praesentem affirmari, and
communionem nostram cum Christo naturaliter, and ut ita dicam, substantialiter
praedicari: sed has voces, non ut Philosophi, sed ut Theologi loquuntur,
intelligi oportere. Nec de Transubstantiationis vocabulo, quamvis barbaro
minimeque necessario, litigaremus, si modo talem substantiarum transmutationem
interpretentur, qualem Veteres agnoscebant, Sacramentalem videlicet, qualis
etiam in homine fit per Baptismum regenerato, qui novus homo factus est, and
nova creatura: qualis etiam fit, quum nos in Christi carnem convertimur: quibus
Patres antiqui utebantur exemplis, p. 65.

Quod si nonnulli miraculum requirunt (nam Patres aliquot Eucharistiam ingens
miraculum nominant) non minus profecto mirandum est panem and vinum creaturas
terrenas, and corpori tantum pascendo natas, eam virtute benedictionis mysticae
vim insitam, adeoque potentem efficacitatem obtinere, ut and animos and corpora
mundent, alant, sanctificent, atque ad immortalitatem praeparent, ut nos membra
Christi and unum cum illo corpus conficiant. Ibid.

FINIS.

