THE Right of Electing SHERIFFS OF LONDON and MIDDLESEX, Briefly stated and
declared.
IT IS the present unhappy Fate of this great and ancient City, to be betrayed
by persons fostered within her Walls, and raised and enriched through the
benefit of her Franchises and Privileges. How many, whose Hereditary Fortunes
could not furnish them with Bread, are swelled to a bigness ready to burst, by
having sucked at her Breasts, and like Vipers, after they have been nourished in
her Womb, they state their interest in gnawing her entrails, and stabbing her
in her Vital parts?

The Antiquity of London is such, that no Records can determine her Beginning.
Her subsistence as a Corporation is immemorial; and no Registers of the affairs
of former times, can define or determine when her Greatness, Prerogatives, and
Privileges commenced and begun. Annal. 14.
Tacitus says of her above Fifteen Hundred years ago, That she was a City
famous for Trade and Commerce. And Cambden assures us, That above 360 years
since, she was ennobled with the Title of Augusta, which was a Name of the
highest Honor and Dignity that any City was capable of: and then he further
tells us, Britain, fol. 305.
the Bishop of this famous City was present at the Council of Arles, which was
held under Constantine the Great. Yea, Heylin and Howel, whom our Tories so
much Reverence and admire, have so far in this matter consulted Truth and their
own Reputation, that the first of these Authors acknowledges, she was a City
of great renown in the time of the Roman conquest; and the second confesses,
That she was anciently not only the Epitome and Abridgment of the Kingdom, but
Caput Regum and Legum, the Head both of Kings and Laws.

Nor is the Citizens Right of choosing Officers, particularly Sheriffs, founded
originally upon their Charters, but it belonged unto them by the Common Law of
England, as appears by the Statute of Ed. 1. cap. 8. and 13. and Cooks
Commentary upon it, 2 Instit. fol. 558. Lamb. fol. 146.
wherein all he has said relating hereunto, is justified by Lambert in his
Saxon Laws. And when in the 9th Ed. 2. it was ordained by Parliament, that the
Sheriffs of the several Counties of the Kingdom should be nominated by the
Chancellor, Treasurer, Barons of the Exchequer, and the Justices; London is
excepted, forasmuch as it is expressly declared, that that Act extends only to
such Counties and places, 28 Ed. 3. cap. 8.
where the Sherivalty is not in Fee. And as all Sherivalties are shut out from
being concluded by that Statute, which are any ways held in Fee; so by
undeniable and natural consequence, such Sherivalties stand ratified and
confirmed by these two Acts of Parliament to the respective Grantees.
Stephanid. and M.ss. in Biblioth Cotton.
And whereas London had anciently pro consulibus vicecomites, for its
Magistrates, Sheriffs; so William the Conqueror in acknowledgment of its
ancient Rights, granted and confirmed, civibus Londini, totam dictam Civitatem
and vicecomitatum, to the Citizens of London, the whole City and Sheriffwick
thereof. lib. K. in Archivis London, fol. 120.
And as to the Sheriffwick of Middlesex, Henry 1. Son to William the Conqueror,
granted it to the Citizens of London and their Heirs at the Farm of Three
Hundred pounds per annum, Carta H. 1. Inspex 2 Hen. 5.
so that they should choose, vicecomites quales voluerint de seipsis, what
Sheriffs they pleased from among themselves. And King John, Son to Henry the
II. did in the first year of his Reign, Demise and grant to the Citizens of
London and their Heirs, the Sheriffwick of London and Middlesex, with all the
customs thereunto belonging, to be enjoyed by them and their Heirs, at the
Fee-farm of Three Hundred pounds per annum. Nor it is not unworthy of our
remark, that by that Charter the said Citizens have liberty and power to remove
their Sheriffs when they please, Ex Original Carta 1 Joannis.
because as the Charter expresses it, the City is to answer for their
misdemeanors, if they should offend against the duty of their office and Place.
To these we may subjoin the Charter of Hen. 3. who in the eleventh year of his
Reign, devised and confirmed to the Citizens of London, the said Sheriffwicks
of London and Middlesex, with all the things and customs thereunto
appertaining. And all these Charters have by Inspeximus's been confirmed by Ed.
1. Ed. 2. Ed. 3. Rich. 2. Hen. 4. Hen. 5. Hen. 6. Ed. 4. Rich. 3. Hen. 7. Hen.
8. Q. Mary, Q. Eliz. K. James, K. Charles I. and his present Majesty. Nay,
these Rights, Liberties and Jurisdictions of choosing Sheriffs from among
themselves, and turning them out when they will, are not only ratified and
confirmed to the Barons or Freemen of London, cap. 8.
by Magna Charta, or the great Charter, and the Statutes of the 18 Ed. 1. 9 Ed.
2. but by the Statute 1 Ed. 3. wherein it is particularly Enacted, That they
shall both have all the Privileges which they have enjoyed from the time of
Edward the Confessor, and William the Conqueror, and other the Progenitors of
the said Ed. 3. tam per cartas quam sine cartis ex antiqua consuetudine,
whether they possessed them by Charters, or without them, namely by
prescription. And it is observable, that this Charter of Ed. 3. is not a mere
Patent, Grant or Charter of the said King, but is it self an Act of Parliament,
made in the first year of that Kings Reign, and confirmed by Inspeximus in the
2 Hen. 8. And consonant to this Charter and Statute of Ed. 3. is the Charter of
the 7 Rich. 2. which is also ratified into an Act of Parliament, Rot. Parl. 7.
Rich. 2. Inspex 8. Jacob.
and wherein he confirms unto the Citizens of London all their Franchises and
Privileges, sive usi non fuerint, sive abusi, whether they were either such as
they had not made use of, or such as they had abused.

Accordingly the Freemen, or Barons of London, chose their Sheriffs, without
the least interposure of their Mayors, during all the time of R. 1. K. John, H.
3. E. 2. till the 20 of Ed. 3. But then they granted unto their Mayors, the
nominating or proposing one Sheriff, but still with this reserve, That they
should have the ratifying, confirming and choosing of them. And this reservation
of a Right to themselves to choose Sheriffs, plainly appears by the Act. For the
only reason of allowing that favor unto the Mayor, was upon a supposal that he
had better knowledge than others, who of the Citizens were fit for so important
an office, which many at that time were willing to decline, by reason of an Act
of Parliament passed in the said 20th Ed. 3. Empowering the Justices of Assize
to enquire into the misdemeanors of Sheriffs, and to punish them as Law and
Reason did require.

And that this Ordinance does not infringe the Rights and Privileges of the
Citizens to choose their own Sheriffs, appears uncontrollaby both by a Clause of
Common Council, 49 Ed. 3. which says, That the Citizens were to be summoned to
Guild Hall, Vid. lib. civit. ab anno 15. Ed. 3.
as Electors des Majores and viscountes, for the Election of Mayors and
Sheriffs; as also by the Elections which were made of Sheriffs in the 42d and
43d of Ed. 3. which are expressly said to have been made by the Mayor, Aldermen,
and quamplurimi clariorum civitatis, and many other famous persons of the City.
And as if this were not enough to instruct, that the Rights of the Freemen in
the choosing their Sheriffs, were not violated by the Ordinance of the 20th Ed.
3. We have another Act of Common Council in the 4th Hen. 5. in which it was
enacted, That the Citizens should be summoned at such a day for the choosing
freely and indifferently, Ibid.
Majorem and Vicecomites, Mayor and Sheriffs.

But whereas they alledg an Act of Common Council in the 7th Car. 1. wherein it
is Ordained and Established, That the 24th of June, shall be for the
confirmation and allowance of such persons as hereafter shall be chosen by the
Lord Mayor of this City for the time being, to be Sheriffs of the said City and
County of Midd. and for the choice of such other persons as by the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen and Commons shall be chousen to be Sheriffs of the said City and
County of Midd. etc. I say, in the 1st place, That this Act of Common Council
by acknowledging a Right in the Common Hall, to confirm and allow such as the
Mayor shall Elect, does thereby declare that they have a power not to confirm
or allow the said Person. For a Right and a Power to allow, without a power to
disallow, were a thing nonsensical and ridiculous. Secondly, I affirm, That
this Act of Common Council in the sense wherein it is constructed by the Mayor
and his Partisans upon he suggestions of his little Imps, is ipso facto null
and void, being expressly contrary to Charter, Prescription, and Statute-laws.

And for my Lord Mayor to insist upon it, is not only to perjure himself, but
to become liable to Indictments for subverting the Laws of the Land, as well as
the privileges and jurisdictions of the City. I thirdly affirm, That the Lord
Mayors have upon the Commons contesting this Prerogative with them, often
disserted and abandoned it. And for particular instances, I refer them to what
fell out in the 29th of Eliz. when my Lord Mayor having drunk to Richard Platt,
the Common Hall chose Hugh Offler and Richard Saltonstall; and to what occured
in the 32 of Car. 2. When notwithstanding George Hocknal's being drunk to, the
Commons elected, Slingsby Bethel, and Henry Cornish. And besides, there are
many instances when the Commons chose the very persons that my Lord had named,
but not till they had first set aside his Right and claimed Prerogative of
prescribing unto them. For example, my Lord Mayor having in the 19. Car. 1.
Nominated and presented John Fowke, the Commons refused to confirm the
Election, till the said Mayor had declined his Prerogative and pretense, and
referred for that time the Nomination of both the Sheriffs to the Common Hall;
upon which having vindicated their Rights, they elected the said John Fowke and
James Bunce. Nay, when in cases wherein my Lord Mayor has pleaded his
Prerogative in this matter, the House of Lords being appealed unto, have upon
finding the Commons to withstand the confirmation of the person he had
Nominated and Presented, in effect decided it against him, and allowed the
Commons to proceed to the Nomination of both Sheriffs for that time, as appears
by an Order of the House of Lords, 1628.

And whereas it is said, That my Lord Mayor and Aldermen intend on
Midsummer-day to continue on the Hustings as a Court; I do affirm that such a
practice would be contrary both to the Charters of the City, and to ancient
custom. For albeit they have a Right of voting in the Election of Sheriffs, yet
it is only in the quality of Barons and Freemen of London, and not in the rank
and under the Character of Mayor and Aldermen. And therefore if they should
pretend to stay, they are to descend and come down from the Hustings among the
Commoners, and during that affair and transaction lay aside their Grandeur, and
list themselves among the Livery of the City. Nay, so far back as the 22. Hen.
6. We read that the Mayor having presented one Nicholas Wyford for Sheriff,
Lib. K. fol. 214. in Arch. 2. Land.
did thereupon, cum Aldermanis ascendere in cameras superiores, remove from the
Court, and go into an upper Chamber. And consonant hereunto, has the custom
and practice been for many ages. The Sheriffs for the time being are the only
judges of the Election that is then to be made. And as this has been the
Common usage, so it is agreeable to Law and Reason.

But whereas it is discoursed abroad, That unless my Lord Mayor can obtain his
will of imposing a Sheriff upon the City, he intends to dissolve the Court; I
shall only say, let him do it at his peril. For hereupon not only every
Freeman may have an Action against him, as wronging them in the violation of
their Rights and Privileges; but they may Indict him for Perjury both in
violating his Oath not only as Mayor, but as a Freeman, and also as a
subverter of the Laws of the Kingdom, and the Rights and Privileges of this
famous Corporation. Nay, upon the dissolving the Court without the Election of
Officers, he would at once offend against an Act of the Common Council, which
appoints the 24th of June for the Election of Sheriffs; and withal leave the
City without a Chamberlain and Bridg-masters. And as upon the non-election of a
Chamberlain, no Moneys can be issued out of the Chamber, seeing there is none
that has Authority to do it; so his Lordship must expect to be liable to all
the Actions that persons having money arising from thence, shall think fit to
commence. Nay, his Lordships standing upon the Prerogative of choosing one
Sheriff, is industriously to betray the Charter of the City, forasmuch as the
plea put in against the Quo Warranto proceeds directly upon this principle and
foundation, viz. That the Freemen have Right acording to Prescription and
Charter of choosing annually two Sheriffs.

Upon the whole, Gentlemen and Citizens, you now understand what your
Privileges and Rights are, and pray remember, That by your Oaths you are bound
to maintain the customs and Franchises of the City.

Nor can you be ignorant that the design of wresting from you the Privilege of
choosing the Sheriffs, is merely in order to hang as many of you as a few men
whom I forbear to mention shall think meet. Did ever any of our former
State-Ministers concern themselves in these matters? Alas! there were not
heretofore such machinations carried on against our Lives, Laws and Fortunes.

And therefore accordingly as you shall acquit your selves in this affair, you
may expect either to live safely, or to become sacrifices to a few men, who
having forfeited their own heads to the Law, would preserve them by an exchange
for yours.

I need not mention the form of my Lord Mayors late Precepts, you are all
acquainted with it, and cannot but be sensible that it differs from all you
have heretofore seen, and that it directly overthrows your Charter, and all the
Privileges of it. Farewell.

LONDON: Printed for R. Dew. 1682.


