A BRIEF RELATION OF Sr. Walter Ralegh's TROUBLES: WITH The taking away of the
Lands and Castle OF SHERBORNE in DORSET From Him and his Heirs, being his
indubitable Inheritance.



LONDON, Printed for W. T. MDCLXIX.

To the Right Honorable, The COMMONS of ENGLAND, assembled in Parliament. The
Humble Petition of CAREVV RALEGH Esquire, only Son of Sir WALTER RALEGH, late
deceased.
HVMBLY SHOWS:
THat whereas your Petitioner conceives, That his late Father Sir WALTER
RALEGH, was most unjustly and illegally Condemned and Executed; and his Lands
and Castle of Sherborne wrongfully taken from him and his, as may more at large
appear by this brief narrative hereunto annexed; The particulars whereof your
Petitioner is upon due proofs ready to make good: Your Petitioner therefore
humbly submitting to the great Justice and Integrity of this House (which is no
way more manifested then by relieving the Oppressed) humbly craveth that he
may receive such satisfaction, for these his great oppressions, and losses, as
to the wisdom and elemency of this honorable House shall seem fit.

And your Petitioner shall humbly Pray, etc.
A BRIEF RELATION OF SIR WALTER RALEGH's Troubles, with the taking away of the
Lands and Castle of Sherborne in Dorset, etc.
WHen King JAMES came into England, he found Sir Walter Ralegh (by the favor
of his late Mistress Queen ELIZABETH) Lord Warden of the Stannaries, Lord
Lieutenant of Devonshire and Cornwall, Captain of the Guard and Governor of
the Isle of Gersey; with a large Possession of lands both in England and
Ireland. The King for some weeks used him with great kindness, and was pleased
to acknowledge diverse Presents, which he had received from him being in
Scotland, for which he gave him thanks. But finding him (as he said himself)
a Martial man, addicted to Foreign affairs, and great actions, he feared
lest he should engage him in a war (a thing most hated and contrary to the
Kings nature) wherefore he began to look upon him with a jealous eye,
especially after he had presented him with a Book, wherein with great
animosity he opposed the Peace with Spain then in treaty, persuading the King
rather vigorously to prosecute the war with that Prince then in hand, promising
(and that with great probility) within few years to reduce the West Indies to
his obedience. But Sir Walter Ralegh's enemies soon discovering the Kings
humor, resolved at once to rid the King of this doubt and trouble, and to
enrich themselves with the lands and offices of Sr. Walter Ralegh. Wherefore
they plotted to accuse him, and the Lord Cobham (a simple passionate man but of
very Noble birth and great possessions) of high treason. The particulars of
their accusation I am utterly ignorant of (and I think all men borth then and
now living) only I find in general terms, they were accused for plotting with
the Spaniard to bring in a foreign Army, and Proclaim the Jnfanta of Spain
Queen of England; but without any Proofs, and the thing it self as ridiculous
as impossible. How ever Sir Walter Ralegh was condem^ed without any witness
brought in against him, and the Lord Cobham, who was pretended to have accused
him barely in a letter, in another letter to Sr. Walt. Ralegh upon his
salvation cleared him of all treason or treasonable actions either against King
or state to his knowledge, which original letter is now in the hands o^ Mr.
Carew Ralegh son of Sr. Walter to be produced at any time. Upon this
Condemnation, all his lands and offices were seized and himself committed close
prisoner to the Tower, but they found his Castle of Sherborne, and the lands
thereunto belonging to be long before entailed on his children, so that he
could not forfeit it but during his own life. And the King finding in himself
the iniquity of Sir Walters condemnation, gave him all what he had forfeited
again, but still kept him close Prisoner, seven years after his imprisonment,
he enjoyed Sherborn at which time it fell out, that one Mr. Robert Car, a young
Scotch Gent: grew in great favor with the King and having no fortune, they
contrived to lay the foundation of his future greatness upon the ruins of Sir
Walter Ralegh. Whereupon they called the conveyance of Sherborn in question in
the Exchecquer chamber, and for want of one single word (which word was found
not withstanding in the Paper-book and was only the oversight of a Clerk) they
pronounced the Conveyance invalide, and Sherborn forfeited to the crown, a
judgment easily to be foreseen without witchcraft, since his chiefest judge
was his greatest enemy, and the case argued between a poor friendlesse
Prisoner and a King of England.

Thus was Sherborne given to Sir She was the only Daughter of Sir Nicholas
lTHrockmorton, who was arraigned in Q. Maryes time and qun; see Fox his Acts
and Monuments.
Robert Car (after Earl of Somerset;) the Lady Ralegh with her Children, humbly
and earnestly Petitioning the King for compassion on her and hers, could
obtain no other answer from him, but that he mun have the land, he mun have
it for Car. She being a woman of a very high spirit, and Noble birth and
breeding, fell down upon her knees with her hands heaved up to heaven, and in
the bitterness of spirit beseeched God Almighty to look upon the justice of
her cause, and punish those who had so wrongfully exposed her and her poor
children to ruin and beggary. What has happened since to that royal Family
is too sad and disastrous for me to repeat, and yet too visible not to be
discerned. But to proceed: Prince HENRY hearing the King had given Sherborn to
Sir Robert Car, came with some anger to his Father, desiring he would be
pleased to bestow Sherborn upon him, alleging that it was a Place of great
strength and beauty, which he much liked, but indeed with an intention to give
it hack to Sir Walter Ralegh, whom he much esteemed.

The King who was unwilling to refuse any of that Princes desires, (for indeed
they were most commonly delivered in such language as sounded rather like a
demand then an entreaty) granted his request; and to satisfy his Favorite gave
him five and twenty Thousand pounds in ready money, so far was the King or
Crown from gaining by this Purchase. But that Excellent Prince within a few
Months was taken away, how and by what means is suspected by all, and I fear
was then too well known by many. After his death the King gave Sherborn again
to Sr. Robert Car, who not many years after by the name of Earl of Somerset
was arraigned and co^d^mned for poisoning Sir Thomas Overbury, and lost all his
lands. Then Sr. John Digbie nov Earl of Bristol begged Sherborn of the King and
had it. Sir Walter Ralegh being of a vigorons constitution, and perfect health,
had now worn out sixteen years Imprisonment, and had seen the disastrous end
of all his greatest enemies; so that new persons, and new interests now
springing up in Court he found means to obtain his liberty, but upon
condition to go a voyage to Guiana in discovery of a Gold mine; that unhappie
voyage is well known (almost) to all men, and how he was betrayed from the
very beginning, his lett^rs and designs being discovered to Gondomar the
Spanish Ambassador, whereby he found such strong opposition upon the place,
that though he took and fired the town of St. Thoma, yet he lost his eldest
Son in that service, and being desperately sick himself was made frustrate of
all his hopes.

Immediately upon his return home he was made Prisoner, and by the violent
pursuit of Gondomar and some others (who could not think their estates safe,
while his head was upon his shoulders) the King resolved to take advantage of
his former condemnation sixteen years past (being not able to take away his
life for any new action) and, though he had given him a Commssion under the
Broad seal to execute martial law upon his own Soldiers, which was conceived by
the best Lawyers a full pardon for any offense committed before that time,
without any further trouble of the law, cut off his head.

Here Justice was indeed blind, blindly executing one and the same person upon
one and the same Condemnation for things contradictorie; for Sir Walter Ralegh
was condemned for being a friend to the Spanyard, and lost his life for being
their utter enemy. Thus Kings, when they will do what they please, please not
him they should, God, and having made their power subservient to their will,
deprive themselves of that just power whereby others are subservient to them.
To proceed; Mr. Carew Ralegh only Son of Sr Walter being at this time a youth
of about 13. bred at Oxford, after 5-years came to Court, and by the favor of
the right Hon. Will: Earl of Pembroke his noble kinsman, hoped to obtain some
redress in his misfortunes; but the King not liking his countenance said, he
appeared to him like the ghost of his Father, whereupon the Earl advised him
to travail, which he did until the death of King James, which, happened about
a year after. Then coming over, and a Parliament sitting, he according to the
custom of this Land, addressed himself to them by Peti^ion to be restored in
blood, thereby to enable him to inherit such Lands as might come unto him
either as heyr to his Father or any other way, but his Petition having been
twice read in the Lords house, King Charles sent Sir James Fullerton, (then of
the Bedchamber) unto Mr. Ralegh to command him to come unto him, and being
brought into the Kings chamber by the said Sir James, the King, (after using
him with great civilitie) notwithstanding told him plainly, that, when he was
Prince, he had promised the Earl of Bristol to secure his title to Sherborn
against the heyrs of Sir Walter Ralegh; whereupon the Earl had given him then
Prince ten thousand pounds, that now he was bound to make good his promise
being King; that therefore unless he would quit all his right and title to
Sherborn, he neither could nor would pass his bill of restoration. Mr. Ralegh
urged the justice of his cause, that he desired only the liberty of a
Subject, and to be left to the Law, which was ^ever denied any freeman.
Notwithstanding all which allega^ions, the King was resolute in his denial,
and so left him, After which Sir James Fu^lerton used many arguments to
persuade submission to the Kings will, as the impossibility of contesting with
Kingly power, the not being restored in blood, which brought along with it so
many inconveniences, that it was not possible without i^ to possess or enjoy
any lands or estate in this Kingdom, The not being in condition, if his cloak
were taken from his back, or hat from his head, to sue for restitution. All
which things being considered, together with splendid promises of great
preferment in Court, and particular favors from the King not improbable,
wrought much in the mind of young Mr. Ralegh, who being a person not full
twenty years old, left friendlesse and fortune-lesse, prevailed so far that
he submitted to the Kings will.

Whereupon there was an Act passed for his restoration, and together with it a
settlement of Sherborn to the Earl of Bristol, and in show of some kind of
recompense, four hundred pounds a year pension during life granted to Mr.
Ralegh after the death of his Mother, who had that sum paid unto her during
life in lieu of jointure.

Thus have J with as much brevity, humility, and candor, (as the nature of the
case will permit) related the pressures, force, and injustice committed upon a
poor oppressed, though not undeserving Sir Walter Ralegh discovered Virginia
at h^s own Charge, which cost him 40000. Pounds. He was the first of the
English that discovered Guiana in the West Ind^. He took the Islands of
Fayall from the Sp^^yard, and did most signal and eminent Service at the tak^ng
of Cadiz. He took from the Spaniard the greatest, and richest Carick, that
ever came into England. And another ship laden with nothing but Gold, Pearls,
and Cochincel.
Family; and have forborne to specify the Names of those, who were Instruments
of this evil; left I should be thought to have an inclination to scanda^ize
particular, and perchance Noble families.

Upon the consideration of all which, I humbly submit my self to the Commons
of England now represented in Parliament; desiring according to their great
Wisdom and Justice, that they will right me, and my Posterity according to
their own best liking; having in mine own Person (though bred at Court) never
opposed any of their just Rights, and Privileges, and for the future being
resolved to range my self under the banner of the Commons of England; and so
far forth as Education, and Fatherly instruction can prevail, promise the
same for two Sons whom God has sent me.


