BY JOHN BAPTIST RINVCCINI ARCHBISHOP AND PRINCE OF FIRMO, And by the
Ecclesiastical Congregation of both Clergies of the Kingd^me of IRELAND.
A Decree of Excommunication against such as adhere to the late Peace, and do
bear arms for the Heretics of Ireland, or do aid or assist them.
NOt without cause (says the Oracle of truth) does the Minister of God carry
the sword: Romans 13. 3.4.
for he is to punish him, that does evil, and remunerate him that does good.
Hence it is, that ^ve have by our former decrees declared to the world, our
sense and just indignation against the late Peace concluded and published at
Dublin, not only in its own nature bringing prejudice and destruction on
Religion and kingdom, but being also contrary to the Oath of Association; and
withal against the Contrivers of, and adherents to the said Peace. In
pursuance of which decrees being forced to unsheath the spiritual sword, we
(to whom God, Matthew. 16.19. ibid. 18.18.
has given power to bind and loose on Earth) assembled together in the Holy
Ghost, tracing herein the steps, and imitating the Examples of many venerable
and holy Prelates, who have gone before us, and taking for our authority, Io.
20.23.
the sacred Canons of holy Church, grounded on holy Writ, ut tollantur^ medio
nostrum, qui hoe opus faciunt, do, 1. Cor. 5.2.
cum virtute domini nostri Jesus, deliver over such persons to Satan; that is
to say, 1. Cor. 5.5.
we excommunirate, execrate and anathematice all such, as after publication of
this our decree and notice, either privately or publicly given them hereof,
shall, defend, adhere or approve the justice of the said peace; and chiefly
those, who shall hear arms, or make or join in war with, fot, or in the
behalf of the Puritans, or other heretics of Dublin, Cork, Yoghell, or of
other places within this kingdom; or shall, (either by themselves, or their
appointment) bring, send, or give any aid, succor, or relief of victuals,
ammunition or other provision unto them, or by advise or otherwise advance the
said Peace, or the war made against us. Those and every of them by this
present decree we do declare and pronounce excommunicated IPSO FACTO, ut non
circumveniamur a Satanaa; non enim ignoramus cogitationes eius. 2. Cor. 2.11.


Dated at Kilkenny in the Palace of our Residence, the 5. day of October,
1646. Ioannes Baptista Archiepiscopus Firmanus Nuncius Apostolicus. De mandato
Illustrissimi Domini Nuncij and Congregationis Ecclesiasticae utriusque Cleri
regni Hiberniae. Nicolaus Fernensis Episcopus Congregationis Cancellarius.


