Vera Effigies FRANCISCI ROBERTS in ^ Magistri, Pastoris Ecclesiae apud
Augustinian: LAND

Tho: Cross Sculp^
A COMMVNICANT INSTRVCTED. OR, Practical Directions FOR Worthy Receiving OF
THE LORD'S SUPPER.

By Francis Roberts, M. A. Pastor of the Church of Christ, at Wr^ngton, in the
County of Sommerset.

The third Edition, re^ised and corrected by the AVTHOR.

1 Cor. 11.28, 29. Let a man examine himse^f, and so let him ^at of that Bread,
and drink o^ that cup. For he that eats and drinks unworth^ly, eats and
drink^th damn^t^on to himself, not di^c^rning the L^rds Body.

London, Printed by I. Stre^ter, ^or G. Calve^t and are to be ^o^d at the S^gn
of the Half Moon in the new Buildings in Pau^s Church yard, near the little
North-Door. 1656.

To the Church of Christ in the Parish of Wrington, in the County of Somerset.
Grace, Mercy, and Peace, from the Father of Mercies, and the God of all
Consolation.
Men, Brethren and Fathers, entirely beloved in the Lord.
THe substance of these practical Directions for worthy receiving of 1 ^or.
11.20.
the Lords Supper, I have represented to your ears in preaching; That before I
administered unto you this heavenly 1 cor. 10.16.
Communion, I might (according to my duty) instruct you in right Communicating:
Now I offer them to your eyes in Printing; And, by both Preaching and Printing,
to your Hearts; that they may be unto you as a continual Sermon before every
Sacrament.

When first I treated of this Subject, I had no thoughts of printing it in any
other Book, than in your breasts. (O that your hearts and lives were living
Books, wherein the whole Heb. 6.1.
Doctrine of Christ were printed in Capital Letters, that he that runs might
read: Then should ^ou be 2 Cor. 3.2, ^^
The Epistle of Christ* written not with ^nk, but with the Spirit of the living
God) Yet since that, I have been induced to make these familiar Directions more
public, upon these Considerations;

1. That I might gratify your pious request in public to me, That these
Instructions might be printed, which you apprehend might be of such frequent
use and advantage to you and yours, before, in, and after every Lords Supper.

2. That I might help on your Edification and Consolation, and happily others
also, in reference to that sweet fellowship which Christ affords his Members
with Himself and his Death, in this Ordinance. For hereby your understandings
may be farther cleared, your memories confirmed, your Hearts and affections
raised upwards, your Graces acted unto higher perfections, and your Sacramental
Duties regulated so as to seek the Lord herein, in a right Order. And I
persuade my self that those things which were so acceptable to you in my
Sermons; will be the more profitable to you in my Book. If your souls prosper,
my heart shall rejoice. I shall count it my Crown and glory, to promote your
Grace and Glory. It will be my Heaven here, to help you forward toward Heaven
hereafter. And in order hereunto, I hope I shall willingly preach; print, and
bestow my pains in public or private amongst you, that I may more and more
endeare you and espouse you unto Jesus Christ; For I trust I may truly say with
the Apostle, Phi. 1.8. to 12.
God is my record, how greatly* I long after you all, in the bowels of Jesus
Christ. And this I pray that your love may abound yet more and more in
knowledge and in all sense.

That ye may approve things that are excellent, that ye may be sincere and
without offense till the day of Christ: Being filled with the fruits of
righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ unto the glory and praise of God.

3. That I may preach unto you, not only whilst I am with you, but even after
the Lord shall have taken me from you.

As Heb. 11.4
Abel by his faith (he being dead) yet speaks: So these lines may live, when
I shall be dead; and they may speak to you, when I shall be silent in the
Grave. I am here but Ps. 39.12.
a Pilgrim, and my abode with you can be but momentany at the longest, for Jam.
4.24
our life is but a vanishing vapor, Ps. 102. ii
our days a declining shadow, our Ps. 39.5.
years as nothing, Heb. 13.14.
we have here no continuing City, but seek one to come: Therefore by this
publication, 2 Pet. 1.15.
I will endeavor that you and yours may be able after my decease to have these
things always in remembrance. Thus Moses and the ProPhets, Christ and his
Apostles, preach unto us and the whole Church of Christ still (though they are
all in Heaven,) by their Doctrines and writings left behind them.

4. That I may testify this way my true love and affection to you in the Lord
Jesus: And to let you know, 2 Cor. 7.3
that ye are in mine heart to live and die with you. For you have not only
loved and deservedly honored my Reverent, learned, and pious Predecessor, now
sleeping in the Lord, thereby showing your selves very eminently exemplary to
all the Congregations round about you: but you have also declared your singular
respect and affection unto me, the unworthiest Labourer in the Lords Vineyard,
ever since my first entrance amongst you, both in your ready accepting of my
Ministry, diligent attending upon the Ordinances, willing compliance with such
pious proposals as I have laid before you, and in other demonstrations of your
kind dispositions toward me to this day. And therefore I have cause to be 1
These. 2.8.
the more affectionately desirous of you, and I am willing to impart unto you
not the Gospel of God only, but also mine own Soul, because ye are dear unto
me.

The Lord maintain and increase the Spirit of love still betwixt us, whilst we
have a day or an hour to live together.

Upon these Motives especially I have been inclined to commit the^e ensuing
Meditations to the Press: And I dedicate them unto you especially, most
earnestly beseeching the Lord, that they may be abundantly useful and
beneficial both to you and others. 2 These. 2.16, 17.
Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father, which has loved
us, and has given us everlasting consolation, and good hope through grace,
comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every good word and work. And fill you
with all grace, that may fit you for everlasting glory, So prays

Your truly loving Pastor, who longs for your salvatition. FRAN: ROBERTS.
From my Study in Wrington in Somersetshire June 12. 1651.
The INTRODVCTION, or PREFACE to the DIRECTIONS.
GOds Covenant of Grace, for salvation of lapsed sinners by Jesus Christ, is
the principal Subject of the Holy Scriptures: The New Covenant and Testament is
the Complement, or complete fullness of the Covenant of Grace* Baptism and the
Lords Supper, are the Lords n^w Covenant Tokens or Great Seals of his New
Testament: And Jesus Christ is the Kernel, Marrow and Soul of them all. In the
whole Scriptures Christ is re^e^led; In the Covenant of Grace Christ is
tendered v^z. As promised under the Old Testament: As performed under the New:
In the Sacraments of the New Testament, especially in the Lords Supper, Christ
is evidently, as it were, crucified before our eyes* represented, sealed, and
exhibited to the bel^eving soul. Thou therefore O Chr^st^an Joh. 5.19
Search the Scriptures, that thou may there find Christ: Accept the
Covenant, that thou may therein embrace Christ; And duly partake the
Sacraments, espec^ally the Lords Supper, that thou ma^st more fully and
undoubtedly assure thy self of Christ to thy salvation. To this end ser^ously
consider,

1. It is not bare partaking, but due partaking of Sacraments, that will
commend us to God, and interest us in Christ. It is possible that in a visible
Church multitudes may partake Sacraments, and yet be deeply displeasing to God.
The Israelites of old had not only the ordinary and standing Sacraments of
Circumcision and the Passover, but also the extraordinary and transient
Sacraments of the Cloud and Sea, answering to our Baptism; Of Manna and water
out of the Rock, answering to our Lords Supper. 1 Cor. 10.1. to 6.
All our Fathers were under the Cloud, and all passed through the Sea: And were
all baptized unto Moses in the cloud, and in the sea, and did all eat the same
spiritual meat, and did all drink the same spiritual drink (for they drank of
that spiritual Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ:) But with
many of them God was not well plea^ed, for they were overthrown in the
Wilderness. Ishmael was circumcised as well as Isaac; yet Ishmael is branded
for Gal. 4.29.
a Persecuter: Esau circumcised as well as Jacob; yet Romans 9.13.
Jacob loved, Esau hated of God* Simon Magus baptized, yet Act. 8.13.21, 23.
his heart was not right in the sight of God, and he still remained in the gall
of bitterness, and bond of iniquity. Judas did eat the ^oh. 13.2, 21, 16, 27.
Sacrament of the Passover with Christ and his Disciples; yet after the eating
of it, Satan more strongly entered into him then ever before: and he died an
hypocrite, a murderer, a devil. And the Corinthians not only were baptized,
but received also the Lords Supper: yet notwithstanding they were 1 Cor. 11 30,
31, 32.
judged of the Lord: many were weak and sickly among them and many slept, viz.
were dead (as is thought of the plague of Pestilence.) Thus we may possibly be
baptized, yea eat and dri^k the Lords Supper; and yet for all that, through
unworthy communicating incur the Lords displeasure.

2. They that partake Sacraments in a visible Church, may so far
notwithstanding be displeasing unto God: As 1. That all the Sacraments and
Services, they take in hand may be accounted by God as Nullities, as no
Sacraments, no Services at all. 1 Cor. 11.20.
This is not to eat the Lords Supper. 2. That all their Sacraments and
religious performances may be accounted their Isa. 1.13* 14.
sins and abominations, 3. That the Sacraments which were intended for
spiritual benefit, shall become a spiritual mischief to their souls through
their abuse. That the Lords, Supper instead of nourishing Grace 1 Cor. 11.27,
28, 29. John 13 2, 27.36.
should strengthen sin; instead of sealing of Remission of our sins in
Christ's blood, should render us guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, even
guilty of murdering the Lord of Life and Glory. 4. That by unworthy handling
them, they may incur many 2 Chronicles. 30, 18, etc. 1 Cor. 10.5, 7, 8, 9, 10. and
11.30.
temporal afflictions and chastisements in Gods displeasure. 5. Finally, they
may enjoy Sacraments; and yet so far displease God therein, as thereby to
hazard 1 Cor. 11.29.
their own Judgment, and eternal Damnation, and lose Heaven it self for ever.
As those Jews of old, notwithstanding their enjoyments of Sacraments 1 Cor.
10.1, to 6
were overthrown in the wilderness, lost Canaan the Type of Heaven, and, it is
to be feared, Heaven it self thereby typified.

3. Hence consequently these things are clear. I. That our bare enjoyment of
Sacraments, is no infallible sign, either of Gods special love tow, or of our
good spiritual state toward God. II. That it is altogether unsafe for
Christians to rest themselves satisfied and contented with the mere having, or
the mere using of Sacraments. It Is the Right having and Due using of
Sacraments, which will commend us, and our actions about them unto Go^. III.
That it singularly concerns all Gods people to endeavor so to enjoy and use
all Sacraments, and particularly the Lords Supper. Which is often to be
received, as therein they may be well-pleasing and acceptable to the Lord.

Now that we may acceptably and profitably manage the Lords Supper, these
things are peculiarly necessary. 1. A due Preparation for the Lords Supper
before we commmunicate. 2. A right use of the Lords Supper while we are
communicating. 3. A Christian conversation suitable to the Lords Supper, after
we have commmunicated. In reference to these three General Heads, seriously
consider, and practically improve these brief Directions following.

PRACTICAL DIRECTIONS FOR Worthy Receiving Of the LORDS SVPPER.
I. Directions touching our due Preparation for the Lords Supper* before we
Communicate.
Our due preparation for the Lords Supper before communicating, consists
chiefly in a judicious, impartial and sincere Self-examination. 1 Cor. 12.28.
Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of
that Cup. There Is A public Ecclesiastical Examination by Church Governors,
preparing for fit communicating in respect of the Church: And there is al^o a
^rivate Self-examination, preparing for worthy communicating in re^pec^ of
Christ. By That, ^rovision i^ made that the Lords Suppe^ be not abused by
gross Ignorance and Scandals: By This, farther care is taken that the Lords
Supper be not unworthily received, through Carnaln^sse, Unbelief, Impeniten^y,
Hyp^cris^^, V^^h^nk^ulness, Vncha^i^^ blenesse, etc. Both are necessary and
helpful to each other: but Self-Examination is more e^pecially needful. O, we
have great cause to use all possi^^e Preparations before ^ommunicating. For, 1.
The Lord and Author of this Sacrament, with whom we have to do here^n is 1 Cor.
11.23.
Jesus Christ, who is most Heb. 7.26.
Holy Harmless, Separate from sinners, Higher, then the Heavens, Rev. 2.23.
Searching the Heart and Reins; Rev. 1.14.
Whose eyes are as a flame of fire, who John 5.22. with Mat. 28.18.
(...), and all power in Heaven (...) and Rev. 22.12.
who will render to every man according to his works. 2. The Nature of this
Sacrament is sublime, mysterious, spiritual, heavenly. 1 Cor. 11.20.
A (...) of Chri^ts providing, whe^^in Chr^^t is both the Master of the (...),
and ^he M^^er of the (...) A (...) Christ's engra^ing* whose Sup^rscription is
Christ lo^ing us; who^e Image is Christ dying for us; whose (...) is Chri^^^
N^w Tes^^ment confirmed to his Members, etc. 3. The benefit of worthy
com^unica^ing (...) surp^^^sing ^vveet. H^reby (...) Soul-reviving 1 Cor.
11.24, 25, 26.
death of Christ is a fre^^ remembered* the inward man with all the graces and
abi^^ties thereof is 1 Cor. 11.20, 24, 25.
nourished; Mat. 26.28.
Remission of sins through Christ's blood is assured; 1 Cor. 10.16.
Communion with Christ crucified, and all the benefits of his death is sealed;
our interest in the Mat. 26.28.
New Testament, with all the Promises and Privileges thereof is confirmed; and
our spiritual 1 Cor. 10.17.
fellowship with Christ's holy Members is established and increased. 4. The
danger o^ unworthy communicating is exceeding great. For, hereby the 1 Cor.
11.27.
guilt of Christ's body and blood is ^ontra^ted; hereby the deep 1 Cor. 11.30,
31, 32. with 1 Cor. 10.5.
displeasure of God is procured; and hereby unworthy Communicants do as it were
set Seal to their 1 Cor. 11.29.
own judgment and damnation. All these considerations should mightily move us
to prepare and examine ourselves, with all industry and integrity before we
communicate.

But upon what particulars are we chiefly to examine our selves?

Answ. We are principally to examine our selves touching these three
particulars, viz. 1. What right we have to the Lords Supper. 2. What need we
have of it. 3. What actual fitness we have for it. If we have no Right we
shall but usurp it, if we feel no Need we shall but despi^e it; if we be not
Fit, we shall but abu^e it.

I. What Right we have to the Lords Supper. We should carefully examine our
Right; for without a due Right and claim to the Lords Supper, receiving it,
the Lord may justly count us intruders and usurpers upon the Childrens bread,
and say, Friends How came you in hither, etc. Now as the Matter of the Lords
Supper is two fold, viz. Outward, the Elements and Actions; and Inward, the
spiritual mysteries represented by them: So there is a twofold Right to the
Lords Supper, viz. Outward and Inward, 1. Outward and Visible, in respect of
the visible Church of Christ wherein this visible Ordinance is dispensed, when
we outwardly profess to be Federates of the New Covenant, whereof the Lords
Supper is a Seal. And this outward Right, is either More Remote and Mediate,
when by virtue of our Membership (being baptized though we be but Infants) we
have a Ius ad rem, a remote Right to the Lords Supper, though no present
capacity and fitness for it: More Near and Immediate, when by reason of our
Qualifications, of competent knowledge, and unblameablenesse of life we have
Ius in re, a Right in the Lords Supper, in respect of the Church, so that the
Church may not exclude us, but ought to admit us. Now of this outward Right the
Church takes Cognizance, examineth and judges. 2. Inward and Invisible Right,
in re^pect of God and the Lord Jesus Christ. And this Inward Right is, when we
not only outwardly profess to be, but inwardly and indeed are, Federates with
God in Christ in the New Covenant, sealed by the Lords Supper; for of the Cup
in the Lords Supper, it is said, Mat. 26.28.
This is my blood of the New Testament; Or Luke 22.20. 1 Cor. 25.
This is the New Testament in my blood; That is, This wine in the Cup is the
Sign and Seal of my blood and death, whereby the New Testament is ratified and
established. Now of this our Inward Right to the Lords Supper in respect of
God, we our selves are peculiarly to take knowledge, examine and judge.

But how may we try and know, whether we have this Inward Right to the Lords
Supper, in respect of God? Answ. Our true Inward Right to the Lords Supper, we
may discover by our inward Right to, and actual Interest in the New Covenant,
or New Testament: for the Lords Supper is the Token and Seal of the New
Covenant; Such therefore as is our Right to the New Covenant, such is our Right
to the Lords Supper. Clear thine inward Right to the New Covenant, and thine
Inward Right to the Lords Supper, is consequently evident. The New Covenant is
summarily described by Jeremy and Paul. Compare Ier. 31.31. to 3^. with Heb.
8.7. to 13. and Ier. 32.38.39.40. According to the tenor of this New Covenant,
examine thy Right to the Sacraments. Art thou a Party to this New Covenant?

1. All that are Parties to the New Covenan^ are clearly taught to know the
Lord. Art thou clearly taught of God savingly to know the Lord? Jer. 31.34.
Heb. ^.11.
And they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man his
brother, saying, Know the LORD: for they shall all know me, from the least of
them unto the greatest of them, says the Lord. This clause of the New Covenant
peculiarly concerns the Elect under the New Testament, they all shall be taught
as it were with open face to k^ow the Lord, far more clearly then the Jews
were under the Old Testament. The Jews knew the Lord darkly a^ under a veil:
and being as Gal. 4.1, 2.
Children in Minority they stuck in principles, stood in need of Tutors and
Governors, etc. But now the 2 Cor. 3.24.
veil is done away in Christ, and the Elect, as children come to riper age,
know not only Principles, but many abstruse mysteries of Religion, the Lord
opening Col. 2.3.
All treasures of wisdom and knowledge in Christ, and bestowing a John 7.38, 39.
greater measure of his Spirit. And yet this Text does not countenance
Enth^siasms, nor annul and lay aside the public Ministry, or private
brotherly instructions, etc. under the New Testament; but this phrase, (They
shall not teach every man his neighbor, etc.) is an Hyperbolical expression,
to show (as I^. Calv. Com. in Ier. 31.34. and ^n Heb. 8.11.
Calvin well notes) how far the knowledge of the Lord under the New Testament
shall surpass that under the Old. Private instru^tion and publik^ Ministry
are appointed under the New Testament, and are subordin^ (...) the Spirits
teaching. And (as Dav. Pareus in Heb. 8.11.
Parae^^ observes) We may as well ^rgue; The Lord feeds all; therefore there is
no more need of (...) or husbandry: as thus reason, The Long ^aches all his
people* therefore they need no more humane instruction, private or public. And
though under the New Covenant all shall more fully and clearly know the Lord
then the Jews, from the least to the greatest: yet shall not all under the New
Testament, have an equal knowledge of the Lord, but every one according to the
measure of the gift of Christ.

Have thou now this clear New-Covenant-knowledge of the Lord, beyond Jews of
old, beyond all carnal men now? Then, 1. Thou art translated from natural
darkness, to supernatural light, Ephesians. 5.8
Ye were sometimes darkness, but now ye are light in the Lord. Is thy night of
carnal ignorance past, and thy day of spiritual knowledge come? Has the day
dawned to thee, and is the day star risen in thine heart? 2. Thou art so
savingly taught of God, as by his teaching to be effectually brought to Christ
to believe in him, John 6.45.
It is written in the Prophets, and they shall be all taught of God. Every man
therefore that has heard, and has learned of the Father, (says Christ)
comes unto me. So that none are taught of God till they come to Christ by
faith. 3. Thou so 2 Co^. 3.18.
behold^st, as in a Glass, the Glory of the Lord* (his New Covenant Glory)
that thou art ch^^ged into the same image from Glory to Glory, even as by the
Spirit of the Lord. Is the Image of Christ's spiritual Glory, spiritual light in
thee? Do thou grow therein from glory to glory, from one glorious degree to
another?

2. They that are parties to the New Covenant, have the Law and Covenant of God
written in their hearts. Jer. 31.33. Heb. 8.10.
This shall be the Covenant that I will make with the House of Israel, after
those days, says the LORD, I will put my Law in their inward parts, (or, into
their mind, as Paul has it) and write it in their hearts. Have thou now the
Laws of God put into thy mind, into thine inward parts? are they written in
thine heart?

But how shall I know whether Gods laws be written in mine heart, etc? Answ.
Thou may know God has written his Law in thine heart and inward parts, by
these ensuing discoveries. 1. By the conformity of thine heart and inwards to
the Law of God. When Gods law is writ in thine heart, thou will have a Law
within thy breast, exactly answering to Gods Law written without, in the
Scriptures; even as Tally answers to Tally, Indenture to Indenture, the face in
the glass to the face of a man, or as the Counterpain exactly answers to the
principal Deed or Conveyance; there is Article for Article, Clause for Clause,
Covenant for Covenant, Word for Word, so will thine heart be to the Law of God.
Thine heart will forbid thee every thing Gods law forbids thee, thine heart
will command thee every thing Gods Law commands thee, thine heart will comply
to the whole Law. 2. By the newness of thy heart and spirit. The writing of
Gods Law in the heart brings in a spiritual newness into the heart; Ezekiel.
36.26.
A new heart also will I give you (says God) and a new spirit will I put
within you. New, not for substance, but for Qualities and Qualifications. A new
mind, illuminated: A new memory, strengthened and sanctified: A new
Conscience, quickened and purified: A new Will, subdued to the obedience of
Christ; New affections; new grief for sin; new desires of grace; new love of
God, Christ, and his Members; new joys in the Holy Ghost; and in a word, the
whole man is become 2 Cor. 5.17.
a new Creature. Old things are past away, and all things are become new. If
thou find this newness of heart, then the new Covenant, the Law of God is
in thine heart. 3. By the spiritual softness and tenderness of thine heart.
Naturally every man's heart is stony, a mere Stone, hard, inflexible and
impenetrable: when God writes his law in man's heart, and admits him into
Covenant with him* he takes this stony heart away and gives him a supple,
f^eshy, soft, tender heart. Ezekiel. 36.26.
And I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an
heart of flesh. An heart of flesh is of a tender temper, flexible and easily
wrought upon by God, quickly wounded for sin, facile to melt and dissolve
into penitential sorrows; is thine heart such? 4. By the Obedientialnesse of
thine heart. Where the Law is written in the heart, there the heart becomes
obedient to Gods Will, and delights in that obedience. So says David, Psalm,
40.5
I delight to do thy Will, O my God, yea thy Law is within mine heart: or,
(according to the Hebrew phrase,) thy law is in the midst of my bowels. Because
the Law was graven in his heart, therefore he so delighted to do the Will of
God. Do thou delight now to do thine own Will, the Will of the flesh? or the
Will of the Lord?

3. They that are Parties to the New Covenant, have a Covenant Relation to God,
and a Covenant Interest in God, and God in them. Jer. 31.33. and 24.7. and
30.27. etc. 32.38. with Heb. 8.10.
This shall be the Covenant, -- I will be their God, and they shall be my
people. What greater blessing can God covenant to bestow on us, then to give
himself to be our God? Had God covenanted to give Earth, Heaven, Grace, Glory,
the whole world, ten thousand worlds; that were nothing comparable to God
himself. This then is the greatest promise in the World. And on the other
hand, what greater duty can lie upon us, then to engage our selves to be Gods
Vovenant People? Consider now, has God given himself to thee as thy God in
Covenant? then thou art in Co^enant with God. But how shall I know whether God
is my God in Covenant? Answ. By this. Art thou one of Gods people by Co^enant?
Art thou thy whole self, not on^y some part of thy self given up to God? Thou
must be wholly not partially his. Is thy tongue his, to praise him: Thy hands
his, to work his Will: thy feet his, to walk in his paths: thy Mind his, to
know him: thy Conscience his, to accuse or excuse under him: thy Will his, to
obey him: thy memory his, to retain him: thy heart his, to desire and love him,
yea to embrace him with most ravished affections beyond all: and in a word, is
thy whole self, soul and body, with all that is within thee, wholly his
sincerely to serve him, and to be a spiritual sacrifice to him? Then thou art
in New Covenant with God indeed, and have inward Right to the Lords Supper.

4. They that are Parties to this New Covenant, have their iniquities forgiven
and forgotten of God. So the Lord covenanteth; Jer. 31.34 and 33.8.
I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more. Or, as
the Apostle alleged it, Heb. 8.12 and 10, 16.17.
I will be merciful to their unr^ghteousnesse, and their sins and their
iniquities will I remember no more. Has the Lord now forgiven thine
iniquities? then thou art in Covenant with him indeed.

Thou will say, O that mine iniquities were pardoned, then should I be an happy
soul. But how may I know that the Lord has pardoned my sins, and will remember
mine iniquities no more? Answer. Thou majest know that God has forgiven thy
sins, 1. If thou have sincerely confessed, bewailed, and forsaken thy sins, and
turned from all thine evil ways; for thus has God promised. Prove. 28.13.
He that covers his sins shall not prosper; but who so confesses and
forsakes them, shall have mercy. -- Isa. 1.16, 17, 18.
Wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine
eyes, cease to do evil. -- Come now, and let us reason together, says the
LORD; though your sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow; though
they be red like Crimson, they shall be as Wool. And elsewhere most sweetly;
Isa. 55.7.
Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts: and let
him return unto the LORD, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for
he will multiply to pardon. 2. If thine heart be calmed and quieted through
faith in Christ, so that thereby thou art at peace with God. When we through
faith have pardon and justification from God, we consequently have peace with
God: Romans 5.1.
Being justified by faith, we have peace with God. Is God pacified toward
thee? does he smile upon thee? does he still thy soul with true peace? this is
an Argument of thy sins pardon. 3. If thine heart be singularly inflamed with
the love of Christ, through whom thy sins are pardoned, it is a great evidence
thy sins are forgiven. The woman that Luke 7.38, 47.
had many sins forgiven her by Christ, she loved him much; upon that account,
She wept and washed his feet with tears, she wiped them with the hairs of her
head, she kissed his feet, and anointed them with ointment. Nothing was too
good, too dear for Christ, that had paid all her debts, forgiven all her sins.
4. If thou art earnest with God more and more for assurance of pardon, for
purity of heart, and stablishment in the ways of grace for time to come; it is
a good sign thy sins are pardoned. God told David by Nathan; 2 Samuel 12.13.
The Lord has put away thy sin, thou shall not die. Upon this David prays so
pathetically, Ps. 51.1.2, 7* 8, 12.
Purge me with Hysope, and I shall be clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter
then Snow. Make me to hear joy and gladness. -- Restore unto me the joy of thy
salvation, and uphold me with thy free Spirit. 5. Finally, it is a sign thy
sins are pardoned, if thy heart and soul, and all within thee be singularly
enlarged to bless and praise God for his pardons. So it was with David; Ps.
103.1 2, 3.
Bless the LORD, O my soul: and all that is within me, bless his holy name.
Bless the LORD, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits. Who forgiveth all
thine iniquities, who heals all thy diseases. If thine heart feel his
pardons, thy mouth will sing his praises.

5. Lastly, they are parties to the New Covenant, that have Gods fear so
implanted in the heart, as not to depart from him. Jer. 32.40.
And I will make an everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn away
from them to do them good: but I will put my fear in their hearts, and they
shall not depart from me. Apostates and Back-sliders were never truly in
Covenant with God. All in Covenant with God, persevere: for God will not
forsake them, and they shall not forsake him; his fear in them shall be their
Preservative. Now then, if the Lords fear in thee, keep thee from falling away,
thou art in Covenant with God.

Thus thou may from the substance and nature of the New Covenant, discover
w^ether thou be a Party to the New Covenant, having true inward interest
therein, and consequently having true inward Right to the New Covenant-Seale
the Lords Supper in respect of God himself. Now if this be thy case, thou have
a childs portion in the Lords Supper, and may lay claim to it, and all the
benefits of it, beyond any carnal man in the world. Thou shall be no usurper:
in that regard come and well-come. Thus examine, What right thou have to the
Lords Supper.

What need we have of the Lords Supper. As we should examine our Right to it,
that we be not usurpers; so we should search what need we have of it, that we
be not despisers of the Lords Supper; Pro. 27.7
The full soul loatheth an Honey-combe. Sense of want excites desire, and
enlivens the appetite after what we want. And Hunger (we say) will break
stone-walls.

Now Christians have need, urgent, pressing need of the Lords Supper in many
re^pects. Examine thou, whether thou have not great need of it in all these
respects.

1. Have thou not great need, often to nourish, strengthen and comfort thine
inward man with all the graces and spiritual abilities thereof? Consider, 1.
Thy whole new man, when at perfectest, is but imperfect. 1 Cor. 13.12.
We see now but through a glass darkly, we know but in part, and so we love
but in part, obey but in part, etc. Paul himself durst not challenge perfection
to himself in this life, saying, Phil. 3.12
Not as though I had already attained, or were already perfect; but I follow
after, that I may apprehend that for which I am apprehended of Christ Jesus. 2.
Consequently thy new man and all thy gracious endowments are but weak, when at
strongest; for every thing that is imperfect, is comparatively weak. 3. Thy
inward man is assaulted with many temptations, adversaries and difficulties
tending to enfeeble and discourage it: especially with the relics of the
flesh. Gal. 5.17.
The flesh lusts against the Spirit. Paul says in the Person of the
Regenerate; Romans 7.21, 22, 23.
I find a law, that when I would do good, evil is present with me. For I
delight in the Law of God after the inward man. But I see another law in my
members, warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into Captivity to
the law of sin. Have thou not need now to nourish thine imperfect graces, that
they may grow up to perfection: thy weak graces, that they may be strong:
thine assaulted graces that they may not fail?

Behold now what need thou have of the Lords Supper to these ends. For what
nourishing ordinance is this Sacrament for all these purposes? For it is styled
1 Cor. 11.20.
The Lords Supper. It Is A Supper, therefore, suitable to nourish the inward
man; The Lords Supper, therefore sufficient to nourish it effectually. As the
body and all its strength decays without due corporal food; so the soul and its
graces without due spiritual food. Here is meat indeed, Christ's body; and drink
indeed, Christ blood; and both tendered most familiarly in this Ordinance, and
most effectually. When the Lord Christ prepares a Supper for his members, he
provides like himself. They that truly eat with Christ, eat of Christ in this
Supper, shall never die, never totally hunger, or mortally thirst more.

2. Have thou not need to have the pardon of thy sins often testified to thee,
and to have thy faith, apprehension and assurance thereof, con^irmed to thee?
There are many things may daily make thee question and doubt whether thy sins
be pardoned: or at least may darken and dim thine evidence of pardon. As 1.
Multitudes of sinful infirmities, that still hang upon thee invincibly, makes
thee fear sin is not pardoned. Hence for clearing the assurance of pardon daily
we are taught daily to pray, Mat. 6.12.
Forgive us our debts. 2. Lapses into grosser sins obscure the evidence of our
pardon. David by his fall, lost in great measure Ps. 51.12.
the joy of Gods salvation, which he prays to have restored. 3 Sharp trials
and severe afflictions, are wont to revive sin unto the conscience, and to
bring in scruples about the pardon of them. Job himself in the great storms of
his afflictions, somewhat dazeled in his sense of pardon, complains, Job.
13.23, 24.
How many are mine iniquities and sins? make me to know my transgression and
my sin; wherefore hidest thou thy face, and hold me for thine enemy? Verse.
26.
Thou writest bitter things against me, and make me possess the iniquities of
my youth. -- Job 14.16, 17.
Thou numberest my steps, do thou not watch over my sin? my transgression is
sealed up in a bag, and thou sowest up mine iniquities.

Thus here is great need to have thy sen^e and apprehension of thy sins pardon
assured to thee. Consequently thou have great need of the Lords Supper, which
notably tends to relieve thee in this case. Mat. 26.28.
This is (says Christ in the In^^itution) my blood of the New Testament, which
is shed for many for Remission of sins. That is, this wine in this Ordinance,
is a Sign, Seal, and Conveyance of my blood, ratifying the New Testament,
which blood is shed for many, ( viz. for all the Elect, for all Christ's sheep)
for remission of sins; Christ's blood then was shed meritoriously to procure our
sins remission: and the Lords Supper is appointed, to signify and seal up to
us this remission of sins in Christ blood. Herein Christ seems as it were thus
to speak to every worthy Communicant; I poured out my blood to procure the
Remission of thy sins: and I give thee this Sacramental wine, this pledge of my
Blood, to assure thee in particular of the Remission of thy sins; that as
verily as thou drinkest this wine, so verily thou have pardon of thy sins
through my blood. Oh they are happy that have their sins pardoned! Oh they
are double happy that have their sinn's pardon, assured to them!

3. Have thou not need to have the fresh memory of Christ, and of his death for
sinners perpetuated to thee? Consider. 1. That to forget Christ, argues
disaffection to him; true Lovers cannot forget one another, nor can endure to
be forgotten one of another. Hence the Church desires Christ, to Cant. ^.^
set her as a Seal upon his heart, and as a Seal upon his arm; that we might
never be forgotten of him: proportionably we should se^ Christ as a Seal on
our heart, and as a Seal on our arm, that we might never forget him. 2. That
to forget Christ's death for sinners, argues great ingratitude; For, what
greater love could Christ ever have manifested unto us then to die for us? John
15.13.
Greater love then this has no man, than this, that a man lay down his life
for his friends: Yet Christ's love greater then man's love; for, Romans 5.6, 8.10.
When we were yet without strength while we were yet sinners, when we were even
enemies, Christ died for us. Now to bury in oblivion Christ's greatest
expression of love, cannot but be great ingratitude. As David quickens his soul
Ps. 103.1, 2.
not to forget all Gods benefits, lest he thereby should be unthankful. And
Pharohs Butler was unthankful to Joseph, in that Genesis 40.23.
He remembered him not, but forgat^ him 3. That the remembrance of Christ and
his death, is most sweet and profitable to every believing soul. For, Christ is
he whom the Christian Cant. 1* 7
soul loves, and loves to remember. Christ is the Christians sole Mediator,
King, Priest and Prophet; his 1 Cor. 1.30.
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption; His Head, Husband;
elder Brother, Life, and Hope of glory And Christ's death is that whereby Rev.
1.5.
our sins are washed away and purged, Col. 1.20.21* 22.
our reconcilement with God is obtained, Gal. 3.13.
Gods Curse is removed from us; Col. 2.14, 15. Heb. 2.14, 15.
all the enemies of our salvation are subdued; Heb. 9.12.
Our eternal Redemption is wrought; and Heb. 10.19, 20.
our liberty of entrance into the Holiest of all, Heaven it self, is procured.
Oh what variety of Cordials arise out of Christ's grave! what precious balm
distills from Christ's bleeding side! and what heavenly honey drops out of this
everlasting Rock! Thou can not live without Christ and his death; have thou
not need then that Christ and his death should still live in thine heart and
memory?

Consequently thou have great need of the Lords Supper. The Lords supper is as
a lasting Monument of Christ's death, a Marble Pillar on Christ's grave. Christ
living, erected this Monument and Memorial of Christ dying. In the Institution
he says of the bread Luke 22.19.
Do this in Remembrance of me. And of the Cup, 1 Cor. 11.25.
This do ye, as often as ye drink it in remembrance of me. And of them both,
says Paul, As often as ye eat this bread, and drink of this Cup, ye do show the
Lords death till he come. So then, in the Lords Supper, thou have Jesus Christ
as it were evidently crucified before thine eyes. Can thou see this bread
broken, and the wine distinctly severed from the bread, and not call to mind
(according to the Scripture) Christ's Agony in the Garden, his sufferings in the
Highpriests Palace, and his Cross upon Mount Calvary, in all which places he
freely shed his blood for thee? Can thou take and eat this bread; take and
drink this Cup; and in so doing not apprehend Christ stooping from heaven to
feed thy soul with bread of Life, his own body: and water of life, his own
blood? Christ bowing his head upon the Cross to kiss thee; Christ opening his
side to heal and wash thee; and Christ condescending to thy senses as once to
Thomas, saying; Joh. 20.27.
Reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands, and reach hither thy hand, and
thrust it into my side, and be not faithless, but believing.

4. Have thou not great need to maintain, increase and evidence to thy self
more and more, thy spiritual Communion with Jesus Christ and him Crucified?
Behold 1. This Fellowship and Communion with Christ, is the Saints spiritual
Paradise: their Heaven on Earth. Therein we enjoy his person, and all sweet
relations to his person; his Death, and all the saving fruits, privileges, and
influences of his death. Hereby we are Cant. 2.4.
brought into Christ's banqueting house; held in his Galler^es, his Banner over
us being love; and are carried up into the Mount with Christ, as it were to
behold Christ trasfigured, and may say with Peter, Mat. 17.1, 2, 3.4.
Master, it is good for us to be here, and let us build Tabernacles. Oh thrice
happy soul that may thus lodge in Christ's bosom, and Christ dwell in their
hearts! 2. This dear Communion with Christ may be much obscured and
interrupted; Sometimes by Cant. 5.2, 3, 4* 5.
carnal security creeping upon the Church, which causes Christ to withdraw
himself from her: Sometimes by a Churches Rev. 2.4, 5
decay in her first love to Christ and his ways; which provokes Christ to
remove her Candlestick, (that is, to un-Church her,) if she repent not; And
when the Candlestick removes, Christ removes, for he walks among the golden
Candlesticks: Sometimes by the gross falls and sins of Gods own people, which
causes the Lord to Ps. 51.^, 12.
break their bones, as it were, and to take away the joy of his salvation; as
in David's case. 3. When this sweet Communion with Christ is interrupted, how
grievous, painful, and intolerable is it to the Church and Members of Christ;
Then the soul of the Church Cant. 5.6 7, 8. etc.
failed even fainted away; then she sought Christ, but could not find him: she
called him, but he gave her no answer; then she became lovesick; then she was
restless till she found him whom her soul loved. These things considered,
there is great need of preserving, improving, and clearing to thy self more and
more thy Communion with Christ.

Now therefore to this purpose thou have great need of the Lords Supper; which
to thy Soul, to thy Faith, yea even to thy outward senses, signifies, seals,
and instrumentally exhibits this Communion with Christ and his Death. 1 Cor.
10.16.
The Cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of
Christ? the bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the body of
Christ? His Question whether it be so, puts it out of question that doubtless
it is so. That as verily as we partake that Bread and Cup: so verily we
partake, and are strengthened in this fellowship with Christ.

5. Finally, Have thou not great need to confirm and increase spiritual union
and communion with the Saints and members of Jesus Christ? Consider well, 1.
That the Spiritual Union and Communion of Saints is by all means to be
preserved and increased. For, This is most agreeable to that spiritual Relation
wherein they stand one to another in Christ, being Joh. 15.1
fellow-branches in the same Vine Christ, 1 Pet. 2.4, 5. Ephesians. 2.19.20, 21, 22.
Living stones in the same spiritual building upon Christ, and 1 Cor. 12.25,
26, 27.
fellow members in the same mystical body of Christ, that should have the same
care one of another. And whether one member suffer, all the members should
suffer with it: or one member be honored, all the members should rejoice with
it. For the^e should be no schism in the body. This is much urged, and that
with pathetical Arguments and importunity by the Apostle. Ephesians. 4.1. to 7.
I therefore the prisoner of the Lord beseech you, that ye walk worthy of the
vocation wherewith ye are called; with all lowliness and meekness, with
long-suffering, forbearing one another in love. Endeavoring to keep the unity
of the Spirit in the bond of Peace. There is one body, and one Spirit, even as
ye are called in one hope of your Calling; One Lord, One Faith, One Baptism,
One God and Father of all, who is above all, and through ^ll, and in you all.
All these Unities should persuade the Saints to unity. And elsewhere 1 Cor.
1.10.
Now I beseech you; brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all
speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you: but that you be
perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment. This is
much commended by the Spirit of God; Ps. 133.1, etc.
Behold, how good and how pleasant it is, for brethren to dwell even together
in unity, etc. There also it is compared to Aarons precious Ointment, and
Hermon's fruitful dew. This also was practiced by Believers in the purest
Primitive times. Act. 4.32.
And the multitude of them that believed were of one heart, and of one soul,
etc. 2. That Divisions, Schisms, Fractions* Dis-unions among Christ's members
is by all means to be avoided; For, 1 Cor. 1.11, 12, 13
Christ is not Divided. Gal. 5.19 20, 21, 22.
Divisions are a fruit of the flesh, not of the Spirit. 1 Cor. 3.1, 3.
Divisions evidence professors to be carnal, and to walk as men, not as
Christians. And at last divisions will prove their Destruction that nourish
them; Gal. 5.15
If ye bite, and devour one another, take heed that ye be not consumed one of
another. In these regard^ there is great need of maintaining and confirming
Union and Communion of Saints, and especially in such times as these are,
wherein professors of Christ have, by their unparalle^'d Divisions both in
Judgment, Affection and Practice, brought such reproach upon the Gospel and way
of truth, prejudice upon their own souls, hazard to the Kingdom of Christ, and
advantage to the Kingdom of Satan.

In this regard what need is there of the Lords Supper, which in the nature of
it tends so much to unite, cement, knit and sodder together the disjoynted
members of Christ's body? 1 Cor. 10.17.
For (as the Apostle says) We being many are one bread, and one body: for we
are all partakers of that one bread. As many grains of Wheat make up one loaf;
so many members make up one body of Christ. And as we all partake that one
bread; so we all thereby profess to be one, and walk as fellow members in
Christ, with all Christian love, union, and mutual tenderness one toward
another: and if we dissolve communion with our fellow members, how can we
mai^tain communion with Christ our head?

Thus you may examine what need you have of the Lord's Supper, which is the
second Gener^al branch of Preparation.

What present fitness we have for the Lords Supper, is the third and last, but
not the least Particular; whereupon by way of preparation, we are to examine
our selves, before we communicate.

Wherein does our present fitness for the Lords Supper consist, and how may we
examine our selves about it? Answ. Our present fitness for the Lords Supper
consists principally in having and exercising of, 1. A competent Knowledge. 2.
Faith. 3. Repentance, 4. New Obedience. 5. Love to Christ and his Members. 6.
Thankfulness. 7. A spiritual Appetite to this Feast. The^e are qualifications
peculiarly necessary to fit us for the Lords Supper. How necessary they are,
and how we are to examine our selves about them comes now to be declared.

I. KNOWLEDGE. This is an inlet and foundation to all the rest: therefore begin
we with it. Touching Knowledge Consider

1. The Necessity of it to worthy Communicating. 2. The Trial of it.

What necessity is there of Knowledge before we receive the Lords Supper? Answ.
A competent Knowledge in Spirituals is necessary before we communicate, 1. For
the di^cerning of the Lords Body in this Ordinance. How can the Lords body be
discerned here but by Knowledge and Faith? The^e are the spiritual eyes of the
soul. And 1 Cor. 11.29.
whosoever discerns not the Lords body, he eats and drinks unworthily, eats
and drinks damnation to himself. 2. For Directing Communicants in the due
managing of the Lords Supper. This Sacrament is a part of Divine Worship:
without due Knowledge thereabouts, we shall worship we know not what, and run
into the error of the Athenians, who er^cted an Act. 17.23.
Altar to the Unknown God, whom therefore they ignorantly worshipped. Gross
ignorance herein will make men guilty of the body and blood of the Lord: and to
stand in need of the like prayer that Christ put up for them that crucified
him; Luke 23.34.
Father forgive them; for they know not what they do. 3. For the leading on and
inciting of all the other Communion-Graces. Knowledge will stir up Faith,
Repentance, Obedience, Love, Thankfulness, and Spiritual Desire, to their
proper objects and actions: whereas gross ignorance will either withstand them,
or mislead them.

How is Knowledge to be tried? Answ. Knowledge may be tried whether it be ^ound
and competent. 1. By the Particular points of Knowledge which are more
peculiarly requisite to worthy communicating. 2. By the properties of true
sanctified knowledge.

I. The particular points of Knowledge, requisite to prepare Christians for
worthy communicating, are e^pecially these, viz. A competent knowledge.

1. Of God. For in the Lords Supper we come to renew Covenant with God, and to
have the New Testament with all the Promises, Privileges, and Benefits thereof
confirmed and assured to us. The Lords Supper being a Pledge and Seal of the
Mat. 26.28.
New Testament in Christ's blood. Now one clause of this New Covenant is, That,
Heb. 8.10
The Lord will be to us a God, and we shall be to him a People. If therefore we
have not a due knowledge of this God, how can we acceptably renew and
re-establish Covenant with him?

2. Of our selves. For we are to be the Communicants. And t^erefore it is
necessary we be well known to our selves, thoroughly acquainted with our own
state and condition, whether it be carnal or spiritual, and if spiritual,
whether we be weaker or stronger in a state of grace, etc. Otherwi^e, 1. How
can we discover our right to the Lords Supper? (...) How can we di^cern our
need of the Lords Supper? 3. How can we judge of our ^i^ness for the Lords
Supper? Ignorance of our selves will render us ignorant in all these things.

3. Of Jesus Christ. For, 1. Jesus Christ is the 1 Cor. 11.23.
Author of this Ordinance, that at first gave Being to it, and still gives
Benefit by it. 2. Jesus Christ is the Matter, the inward Matter and Marrow of
the Lords Supper to be fed upon. 1 Cor. 11.2^* ^5.
Take, eat this is my body, which is broken for you. -- This Cup is the New
Testament in my blood. 3. Jesus Christ and the solemn remembrance of his death,
is one eminent end of the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 21.26.
As often as ye eat this bread, and drink this Cup, ye show forth the Lords
death till he come. Consequently without a competent knowledge of Jesus Christ,
it is altogether impossible to communicate worthily.

4. Of the New Covenant, or New Testament. For this is one of Christ's great
Seals, and solemn tokens of his New Testament Mat. 26.28.
This Cup is the New Testament in my blood. So that when we renew the Lords
Supper, we renew the Lords Covenant. And how can we renew that Covenant,
whereof we are grossly ignorant?

5. Of the Lords Supper it self. For should we intrude upon this Ordinance, and
not competently understand what is the nature o^ Sacraments in general, and of
this in particular; we should but give God a blind and a lame service, and
offer the sacrifice of fools.

These are the principal points, more peculiarly necessary to be known in some
competent sort before communicating; and these are the reasons why they are so
necessary to be known. Next consider what ought to be known of them severally
in order.

I. Knowledge of God.
These things especi^lly ought to be known, touching God in some competent
manner, before a man come to the Table of the Lord, viz.

1. That God is, or, That there is a God Heb. 11.6.30.
He that comes to God, must believe that he is.

2. That God is one, or that there is only one true God and no more. Deu^. 6.4
The LORD our God, the LORD is One. 1 Cor. 8.4, 5, 6.
We know that there is none other God but one. -- But to us there is but one
God, He only These. 1.9 Jer. 10.10.
is the living and true God.

3. That this one God subsisterh in three distinct Persons; Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost. Joh. 5.7.
There are three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
Holy Ghost: and these three are one. Mat. 28.10. See also Mat. 3.16, 1^. 2 Cor.
13.13. Ps. 33.6.
Go teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost. The Father is ^f none, neither begotten, nor
proceeding. The Son is begotten of the Father eternally. Hence called, ^oh.
1.14, 18.
The only begotten of the Father. -- And, The only begotten Son, which is in
the bosom of the Father. The Ho^y Ghost eternally proceeds from the Father
and the Son. Joh. 15.26. and 14.6.
But when the Comforter is come whom I will send unto you from the Father, the
Spirit of truth, which proceeds from the Father. The^e three are
Co-essentia^, Coequal, and Coeternal. This deep mystery cannot be fully
comprehended by our understandings must be truly apprehended by our faith. It
may darkly be re^embled, by the light of Sun, Moon and Stars, united in the
Arre. O^, by the light of three di^tinct Torches, united in one flame. Or, by
one of your Bibleleases in three folds. The first fold is not the second, nor
the second the third, nor the third either of the other; and yet all those
three folds are that one leaf. Thus the Father is not the Son, the Son is not
the Holy Ghost, the Holy Ghost neither the Father nor the Son; and yet all
these three are that one most Holy God.

4. That this one God is a most pure invisible Spirit. Joh. 4.24 2 Cor. 3.17
God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and
Truth. -- 1 Timothy 1.
The King invisible. -- 1 Timothy 6.16.
Whom no man has seen, nor can see.

5. That this one God, Father* Son, and Holy Ghost, has made himself
gloriously known, Partly by his essential Attributes or Properties. Partly by
his Works.

I. Gods essential Attributes or Properties, are the high perfections of his
Essence, which are all one, both with his Essence and with one another; yet are
revealed to us, and apprehended by us as many and different, because our weak
understandings cannot comprehend this one infinite Act: in one Act God is,

1. Most absolutely simple; No way compounded in himself, or with any other
thing. Joh. 4.24.
God is a Spirit. The highest Spirit. The most spiritual Spirit. The Spirit of
spirits, therefore absolutely uncompounded, without body* parts, or passions.
-- Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16.
Ye saw no manner of similitude on the day that the Lord spoke to you out of
Horeb, etc. -- Luke 24.39.
A Spirit has not flesh and bones. And Paul proving to the Heathens that
himself and Barnabas were no gods, as they imagined said; Acts 14.^1. with 15.
Sirs, Why do ye these things? we also are men of like passions with you.

2. All-sufficient. ^en. 17.1 See also Genesis 35.11 and 28.3. and ^8.3. Ex. ^.3.
The LORD appeared to Abraham, and said unto him, I am God All-sufficient, or,
God Almighty. The Hebrew word, according to its several derivations may
signify either of these.

3. Immutable, or Unchangeable. Mal. 3.6.
I am the Lord, I change not. -- ^am. 1.17
Every good gift, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from
the Father of lights, with whom is no variableness neither shadow of turning.

4. Infinite, without and beyond all bounds and limits. Ps. 147.5.
His understanding is infinite. Now Gods understanding is God himself.

Gods essence is infinite and boundless, in all respects imaginable.
Whereupon, God is

Immense, or unmeasurab^e: Because he cannot be determined or described by any
Dimensions of Height, Depth, Length, or Breadth* and because he cannot be
limited, confined, or circumscribed with any place. ^er. 23.^3, 24.
Am I a God at hand, says the Lord, and not a God afar off? -- Do not I fill
Heaven and Earth? says the LORD. -- 1 Kings 8.^7.
But will God indeed dwell on the Earth? Behold^, the Heaven, and Heaven of
Heavens cannot contain the^; how much less this House that I have builded?

Omni-present, or present in all places Gods essence filling all places (yet
not comprehended in any place) is consequently in all places Ps. 139.7. to 13.
Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy presence?
If I asscend up into heaven, thou art there: if I make my bed in hell, behold,
thou art there. If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the utmost
parts of the Sea, even there* shall thine hand lead me, and thy right hand
shall hold me, etc.

Incomprehensible. Because God is boundless in respect of all created knowledge
and understanding. No man nor Angel can fully understand or comprehend him.
(...)
Great is the LORD. -- And of his greatness there is no search. -- (...)
Can thou by searchin^ find out God? Can thou find out the A^^mighty unto
Perfection? It is as high as Heav^^. what can thou do? Deeper then Hell,
(...) can thou know? The measure thereof is long then the earth, and broader
then the Sea.

Eternal* Ephesians. 1.11.
Because God is infinite an^ boundless in respect of time and duration. Verse 5.
Gods essence never had beginning, never succession or change, and never shall
have end. (...) and 16. (...) 6.10
The everlasting God, the LORD. -- Ps. 25, 26,
Of old ^hast thou laid the foundation of the Earth; and the Heavens are the
work of thy hands. They shall perish, but thou shall endure: yea all of them
shall wax old like a garment; as a vesture shall thou change them, and they
shall be changed. But thou art the same: and thy years shall have no end. --
Ps. 90.2.
Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever thou had formed the earth
and the world; even from everlasting to everlasting thou art God.

And these are commonly styled Gods Incommunicable Attributes, as being
peculiar only to God, and no way attributed or Communicable to any thing
besides God. The Communicable Attributes follow; so called, because ^ometimes
in some sense they are communicated to c^eatures.

5. The living God. (...)
-- That has heard the voice of the living God. -- (...)
My soul ^hirsteth for God, for the living God. (...)
Thou (...) Christ, the Son of the living God. -- (...)
It (...) a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the ^^ving God. God lives
most properly and per^^ctly; All imperfections of created life must (...)
removed from him. God li^es ete^nally. ^od faith of himself, (...)
I live for ever. God (...) eternal life it self; his own eternal life; -- (...)
And show unto you that eternal life, which was with the Father. Yea, he gives
life to all living. -- (...)
Seeing he gives to all Life, and Breath, and all things. -- (...)
For in him we live, and move, and have our Being.

6. Most wise. 1 Timothy 1.17.
-- The only wise God, -- Romans 11.33.
O the depth of the Riches both of the wisdom, and knowledge of God! To this
purpose are ascribed to God, Counsel, Jer. 32.19
-- Great in Counsel. Ephesians. 1.11
-- Who works all things according to the Counsel of his own Will. Knowledge
Act. 15.18.
Known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the world.
Understanding: Ps. 147.5.
His understanding is infinite. God in one individed Act most absolutely,
eternally, perfectly, infallibly, immutably Knows himself as the most adequate
object of his Understanding; Knows all things knowable besides himself, whether
possible, or actually existing; Knows all things existing, whether in time
past, present or future. God knows all man's ways, works, words, thoughts,
imaginations: all men's sins, with all the kinds, degrees, circumstances,
aggravations of them; All men's states in this and the world to come; all future
contingencies before they come to pass, though to us never so casual,
accidental, or uncertain. Yea he absolutely knows all things in the world.

7. Of most absolute, perfect, and righteous Will. Ephesians. 1.11.
Who works all things after the Counsel of his own Will: -- Verse 5.
Having predestined us, -- according to the good pleasure of his Will. We are
taught to pray to God; Mat. 6.10
Thy will be done. Gods Will is perfectly one, yet in respect of our diverse
notions in apprehending of it, is either Approving all that's good: Effecting
all that is wrought: Prescribing all that is duty: or Permitting all that comes
to pass; yea he even permits or suffers sin to be in the world, himself and
his Will being neither directly, indirectly, nor any way the Cause or Author of
sin.

8. Most true. God is most true in himself, his works, and words. Most true in
himself; Deuteronomy. 32.4.
A God of truth; or, (as the Hebrew phrase will well beat it) God is Truth;
Joh. 17.3
This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God. All other
gods and Idols are but false gods, lies, vanities, nothing in the world. Most
true in his works. They are not shadows and fictions, but realities. Ps. 33.4.
All his works are done in truth. -- Rev. 15.3.
Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy
ways, thou King of Saints. True in his words; Joh. 17.17.
Sanctify them through thy Truth thy word is Truth. -- Ps. 119.142, 151.
Thy Law is the Truth. -- All thy Commandments are Truth. -- 2 Cor. 1.20.
For all the Promises of God in him are yea and in him Amen. -- Tit. 1.2.
In hope of eternal life, which God that cannot lie, promised.

9. Most good, yea ^upreme goodness it self, without all evil or imperfection.
Good in himself, and Author of all good to his creatures. -- Ex. 33.19
I will make all my goodness pass before thee. Christ said; Mat. 19.17. Mark.
10.18. Luke 18.19.
Why call thou me good? There is none good save one, that is God. Not Man,
Saint, Angel, or Christ himself as man are good as God is good, essentially,
infinitely, immutably, etc. -- 2 These. 1.12.
That our God would fulfill all the good pleasure of his goodness. -- Romans 2.4
The riches of his goodness. Ps. 1 45.9.
-- The Lord^s good to all. Jam. 1.17
Every good gift, and every perfect gift is from abvoe, and comes down from
the Father of lights.

In this goodness of God are ^is Graciousnesse, Love, Mercy, Patience.

Graciousness. God is most gracious, incomparable in free grace. Ex. 3 4.6
The LORD the LORD God, merciful and gracious. Ps. 116.5
-- Gracious is the Lord, and righteous.

Love. God is most loving, yea all love. 1 John 4.8.16.
He that loves not, knows not God for God is love. -- And we have known and
believed the love that God has to us. God is love, and he that dwells in
love, dwells in God, and God in him.

Mercy. God is most merciful, yea all mercy it self, and loving kindness it
self. Ps. 116.5.
-- Our God is merciful. Ps. 103.8.
-- Plenteous in mercy, -- Ps. 145.8. Ex. 34.6, 7 Ps. ^ 13.8, 9
The Lord is good to all; and his tender mercies are over all his works. Psalm.
136. throughout.
-- His mercy, (or, loving kindness) endures for ever.

Patience. God is most patient, long-suffering, slow to anger. Ps. 145.9.
The Lord is gracious, and full of compassion: slow to anger, and of great
mercy. Rom: 2.4
-- Despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and
long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to
repentance? -- 2 Pet. 3.9
The Lord is not slack concerning his promise ( as some men count slackness)
but is long-suffering to usward, not willing that any should perish, but that
all should come to repentance.

10. Most Just and Righteous. Universally righteous, as God should be
righteous; and the Author of all Righteousness in the world, eternally and
immovably disposed to give to himself and to all creatures their due. Psalm. 11.7
The righteous LORD loves Righteousness. -- Ps. 92.25
The LORD is upright, -- and there is no unrighteousness in him. -- Ex. 34.7.
That will by no means clear the guilty, visiting the iniquity of the Fathers
upon the children, and upon the childrens children, unto the third and to the
fourth Generation. -- Rev. 19.5
Thou art righteous, O Lord, which a^^, and wast, and shall be. -- Ps. 145.17.
The LORD is righteous in all his ways.

11. Most Holy, God is not only infinitely holy and pure, but holiness it
self. Psalm. 22.8
But thou art holy, O thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel. -- Isa. 6.3.
Holy, Holy, Holy is the LORD of Hosts. -- Rev. 4.8.
The four Beasts rest not day and night, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God
Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come. -- Ps. 89.35.
Once have I sworn by mine Holiness. He is all holiness. Deuteronomy. 32.4.
Without iniquity, -- Ps. 92.15.
There Is no unrighteousness in him. -- Hab. 1.13
^hou art of purer eyes then to behold evil, and can not look on iniquity.
That is, not with the least approbation. -- 1 John 1.5.
God is light; and in him is no darkness at ^^l.

12. Most Powerful, Strong, Omnipotent. Ephesians. 3.20
He can do beyond all that we are able to ask or think. He can do everything
that argues or implies, power. -- Genesis 17.1
The LORD appeared to Abraham, and said unto him, I am the Almighty God. -- Job
42.1, 2.
Then Job answered the Lord, and said, I know that thou can do every thing.
-- Mat. 19.26.
With God all things are possible.

13. All-ruling. God has absolute Authority, Dominion, and Power to dispose of
all creatures as he pleases, for their present or perpetual estate without any
their check or control. Psalm. 103.19.
His Kingdom rulleth over all. -- Dan. 4.34, 35.
His Dominion is an everlasting Dominion, and his Kingdom is from genera^ion to
generation. And all the inhabitants of the earth are ^eputed as nothing; and he
does according to his Will in the army of Heaven, and among the inhabitants of
the earth; and none can stay his hand, or say unto him, What do t^ou? -- Jude
25.
To the only wise God our Savior, be Glory and Majesty, Dominion, and Po^er,
now and ever. Amen.

And in respect of all these former essential Perfections of God, whether
Incommunicable or Communicable, God is most Perfect, Excellent, Blessed, and
Glorious.

14. Most perfect. God is so perfect, that in him th^re is no want, defect, or
need of any thing. He is perfect in all his former essential Attribut^s. Mat.
5.48
Be ye therefore perfect, as your Father which is in heaven is perfect, -- Acts
17.24, 25.
God that made the world, and all things therein, seeing he is Lord of Heaven
and Earth, dwells not in Temples made with hands, neither is worshipp^d with
men's hands, as though he needed any thing, seeing he gi^eth to all life, and
breath, and all things.

15. Most Excellent. God absolutely surpasses all Beings in his Being, and all
their Perfections; and in that respect is the most excellent. Hence
High-excellency is ascribed to him: Am. 8.7.
The LORD has sworn by the High-excellency of Jacob: that is, by Himself, for
God swears by himself. Ps. 8.1, 9.
O LORD, our Lord, how exc^llent is thy name in all the earth? -- Exodus 15.7.
In the greatness of thine excellency thou have ov^rthrown them that rose up
against thee. -- Job 37.23.
Touching the Almighty we cannot find ^im out. He is excellent in Power, and
in judgment, and in plenty of Iust^ce.

16. Most blessed. God is the most blessed Being, has infinit^ happiness in
himself; is fully satisfied in hi^ own blessedness; yea he is his own
happiness, depending on ^one other. Hence those expressions; Ps. 119.12
Blessed art thou, O LORD, teach me thy sta^i^^es, -- Romans 1.25.
Worshipped and served the creature more then the Creator, who is blessed for
ever; Amen. -- 1 Timothy 1.11.
According to the glorious Gospel of the blessed God. Hence the Father is by
way of Excellency called, The Blessed; Mat. 14.61.
Art thou the Christ, the Son of the blessed? And Christ is styled in like
manner, 1 Timothy 6.15.
The blessed and only Potentate. -- Romans 9.5
Of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came, who is over all, God blessed for
ever, Amen. Yea God is so blessed, that all blessedness in the creatures is
originally from him; they being only so far happy indeed as they enjoy God to
be their God, their supreme happiness Ps. 144.15.
Happy is the people that are in such a case; yea happy is that people whose
God is the Lord. That Is the true happiness indeed.

17. Finally, God is most glorious. Infinite in his Highness, Majesty,
Greatness, Splendour, Beauty, and Renown; Herein none may compare with him. --
Mat. 6.13
Thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory for ever. Hereupon God is
styled, Ps. 24.7, 9, 10.
The King of Glory; Isa. 3 3.21
The glorious LORD; and Ps. 29.3. Act. 7.2.
the God of Glory. To this effect his Name and his essential Attributes are
declared to be glorious. -- Neh. 9.5
Blessed be thy glorious name, which is exalted above all blessing and praise
-- Ex. 15.11
Who is like unto thee, O LORD, amongst the gods? Who is like thee, glorious in
Holiness? -- Ephesians. 1.6.
To the Praise of the glory of his Grace. -- 2 These. 1.9.
From the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his Power.

These are Gods essential attributes revealed in Scripture, whereby he has
made himself known. And without a competent knowledge of these, we cannot
truly know God as we ought before we come to the Lords Supper. The next way
whereby God makes himself known to us, is by his works, or Acts.

II. Gods works, or Acts are either 1. Before all time, as his Decree. Or, 2.
In time, as the execution of his Decree.

1. The works of God before all time, are his Decrees. Gods Decrees may be
considered, 1. More generally, in reference to all creatures. 2. More
specially, in reference to the intellectual creatures only, viz. Angels and Men.

(1) Gods decrees more generally considered, are, Gods purposes in himself
according to the Counsel of his own Will, whereby he has foreordained
whatsoever comes to pass* for the praise of his glory. Gods Decrees are his
purpose in himself according to the Counsel of his own Will; -- Romans 9.11.
That the purpose of God according to Election might stand. -- Ephesians. 1.9.
According to his good pleasure which he has purposed in himself. -- Ephesians. 1.11
Being predestined according to the purpose of him, who works all things
after the Counsel of his own Will. According to this purpose God has fore
ordained, for the praise of his Glory, whatsoever comes to pass; -- Romans 8.29.
For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate. -- Ephesians. ^.12
That we should be to the praise of his glory. -- Romans 11.36.
For of him, and through him, and to him are all things.

(2.) Gods Decrees more specially considered are, Gods purpose according to the
Counsel of his own Will, whereby he has foreordained for the praise of his
glory whatsoever comes to pass touching Angels and Men. I call it Purpose:
because Scripture styles it, Romans 9.11.
The purpose of God according to Election. Ephesians. 1.11
Who works all things according to the Counsel of his own Will. According to
this purpose, God has foreordained for the praise of his glory whatsoever
comes to pass touching Angels and Men. And this especially in respect of their
eternal state. For some he has predestined to the Adoption of children,
electing and cho^sing them in Christ as vessels of mercy: Others he has in his
eternal Counsel passed by and rejected, as vessels of wrath. That, is styled in
Scripture sometimes Predestination, sometimes Election: This, is termed by
learned men, sometimes Preterition or passing-by, sometimes Reprobation. Of
both, the Scripture says Romans 9.22, 23, 24.
What if God willing to show his wrath, and to make his power known, endured
with much long-suffering the vessels of wrath, fitted to destruction; and that
he might make known the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy; which he
had a fore prepared unto glory? Though this be spoken only of men; yet
elsewhere the Scripture mentions the 1 Timothy ^.21.
Elect Angels, therefore there are rejected and reprobate Angels, even Jude 6.
The Angels that kept not their first estate: Mat. 25.
the Devil and his Angels, for whom everlast^ng fire is prepared. God intending
more especially to glorify himself in the intellectual cre^tures* Angels and
Men, has more especially decreed their final state, and all things concerning
them, tending thereunto. This the Apostle calls Ephesians. 1.5, 9.
Predestinating us to the Adoption of ch^ldren, by Jesus Christ to himself
according to the good pleasure of his Will, to the praise of the glory of his
grace. And in order to this end, Romans 8.30.
Whom he did predestinate, them he also called, and whom he called, them he
also justified: and whom he justified them he also glorified.

This Decree of God, whether more Generally or more Specially considered, has
the^e excellencies and perfections in it. It is Eternal, Unchangeable, Free,
Wise, Just, and the Cause of Causes. 1. Eternal; Ephesians. 1, 4.
According as he has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, etc.
2. Unchangeable, for it is said, Romans 9.11. with Jam. 1.17
That the purpose of God according to Election might stand -- with whom is no
variablnesse neither shadow of turning. And, -- 2 Timothy 2 19.
The foundation of God stands sure, having this Seal, The Lord knows them
that are his; and there is a determinate number of them, which cannot be
increased, nor di^inished. 3. Free, Gratuitous, and merely ^ndependent on the
creature, or any thing in the creature: ha^ing no inward impulsive cause moving
him thereunto, but the good pleasure of his Will; not foreseen Faith, Works,
Freedom of Will, Perseverance, etc. Ephesians. 1.5.
Having predestined us to the Adoption of children, by Jesus Christ to
himself, according to the good pleasure of his Will. -- 2 Timothy 1.9.
Who has saved us, and called us with an holy calling; not according to our
works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ
before the world began. -- Romans 9.15, 16.
I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy; and I will have compassion on
whom I will have compassion. 4. Wise For, Ephesians. 1.11.
We are predestined according to the purpose of him, who works all things
according to the Counsel of his own Will. -- Romans 11.33, 34.
O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! for who has
known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his Counselor? 5. Just and most
equal. Gods Decrees may be secret and mysterious, cannot be unjust or
injurious; God is so just, yea such infinite justice, that he can do or decree
nothing but what is just and equal. It is written, Romans 9.13, 14, 31, 22, 23.
Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated. What shall we say then? is there
unrighteousness with God? God forbid. -- Has not the Potter power over the
Clay, of the same lump to make one vessel unto honor, and another unto
dishonor? And has not God greater power to dispose by his decree, of his
creatures? yet God no way wrongs the cr^ature: nor the Potter the Clay. 6.
Finally, Gods Decree is the Cause of Causes. All inferior Causes and Means
conducing to the ends whereunto God decrees any thing, are subordinate to Gods
decree as the supreme cause of them all. Gods Decree not only foreappoints the
end, but also all the secondary causes and means tending and conducing to that
end. Hence that Concatenation of the causes of our salvation; -- Romans 8.30.
Whom he did predestinate, them he also called: and whom he called, them he
also justified: and whom he justified, them he also glorified.

Thus of Gods works before all time: His Decrees.

2. The works of God in time, are, His executions of his Decrees. God executes
his Decrees, 1. Partly in the beginning of Time, by Creation. 2. Partly in the
succession and continuance of time, by Providence. By both which God makes
himself most gloriously known to his creatures, Discovering Romans 1.19, 20.
his invisible perfections by his visible works.

1. Creation is Gods making the world and all things therein, of nothing, in
the space of the first six days, very good, by the word of his power, for
himself. Heb. 11.^
Through faith we understand, that the worlds were framed by the Word of God so
that things which are seen, were not made of things which do appear. -- Ex.
20.11 Genesis 1. throughout
In six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them is,
and rested the seventh day. Man was reserved to the last place, as Gods most
accurate and curious piece; being by reason of his heavenly soul, and earthly
body, as an Epitome or Abstract of Heaven and Earth, and thence justly styled
the Microcosme, or Little-worlds -- Genesis 1.31
And God saw everything that he had made, and behold, it was very good. -- Pro.
16 ^
The LORD has made all things for himself, yea even the wicked for the day of
evil.

In this work of Creation, Gods Freedom, Wisdom, Power, and Goodness shine
forth most gloriously. 1. Freedom; in that he Ps. 115.3
has done whatsoever he pleased. He made one world and no more: such creatures
and no other: in such sort and not otherwise; because he pleased. None may
control his work. Romans 9.20.
Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, Why have thou made me thus?
2. Wisdom; for he Ephesians. 1.11
works all things according to the Counsel of his own Will. How many ways
has God discovered his wisdom herein! As, in the Sea Gods excellent order in
creating. Genesis 1. and Psalm. 104.
Order of Creation. He made all things in six days. He could have made them in
one day, in one hour as easily; but he would show himself a God of Order; He
first made the Creatures containing, then the contained; and from the more
imperfect proceeds to the more perfect Creatures. In the variety of Creatures.
Ps. 104.24.
O LORD how manifold are thy works! in wisdom have thou made them all. In the
distinct Natures and Properties of all those varieties. 1 Cor. 15.41.
There Is one glory of the Sun, another glory of the Moon, another glory of the
Stars, and one Star differs from another Star in glory. Some of the Elements
are hot, some cold; some moist, some dry; some light, some heavy. The virtues
of plants, fruits, etc. are innumerable. In the sweet Harmony of the whole
Vnivere, though consisting of such different creatures, the wisdom of God also
wonderously appears. 3. Power, in that he could frame all things of nothing,
without any pre-existent matter: and all most easily, by his word; Genesis 1.3.
He said, Let there be light, and there was light, etc. He spoke works more
easily then we can speak words. Psalm. 33.9
He spoke, and it was done; he commanded, and it stood fast. -- Ps. 148.5
He commanded, and they were created. It was but A word, and A work. 4.
Goodness, in that God, (though infinitely happy and satisfied in himself,) was
pleased to create the world, especially Men and Angels, to communicate himself
and his goodness to them.

2. Providence is Gods sustaining, governing, and ordering all Creatures
together with all their actions to his own glory. So that in Gods Providence
generally considered, there are three grand acts, viz. 1. Sustaining, upholding
or preserving of the Creatures in being and well-being. He Heb. 1.2, 3. with
Ps. 3^7.8.9.
that made the world, -- is still upholding all things by the word of his
power. 2. Governing and disposing all Creatures and all their actions, even the
least and smallest of them all. Ps. 103.19.
The LORD has prepared his Throne in the Heavens, and his Kingdom rules over
all. -- Mat. 10.29, 30.
Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? and one of them shall not fall on
the ground without your Father: but the very hairs of your head are all
numbered. 3. O^dering and directing all creatures and al their actions to his
own glory, and his peoples good. Joseph said to his brethren; Genesis 45.7, 8. and
50.20.
God sent me before you, to preserve you a posterity on earth, and to save your
lives by a great deliverance. So now it was not you that sent me hither, but
God. -- Ye thought evil against me, but God meant it unto good, etc. -- Isa
63.14
So did thou lead thy people, to make thy self a glorious name, -- Romans 11.36.
For of him, and through him, and to him are all things.

As for Gods special Creation of man, and Providence over man in his fourefold
state, viz. of 1. Creation; 2. Corruption; 3. Restitution; and 4. Perfection;
They will come farther to be considered in the next branch, the knowledge of
our selves. Hitherto of the first branch of knowledge, requisite in some
competent sort before communicating, viz. The Knowledge of God.

2. Knowledge of our selves.
Knowledge of our selves, is the next point of Knowledge necessary to a worthy
Communicant. Christians eyes and apprehensions should be like the windows of
the Temple, widest inward, narrowest outward; far more dispo^ed to look home
then abroad better acquainted with themselves then with others: And not like
Plutarch's Lamiae, or Witches, that put on their eyes when they went abroad but
put up their eyes in boxes when they came home.

The necessity of this Self-Knowledge, has before been evidenced. The
particulars of Self-Knowledge follow. We are principally to know our selves. 1.
What we were in Adam before the fall. 2. What we are in Adam since the fall. 3.
What we should and may be in Jesus Christ the second Adam.

I. What were we in Adam before the fall? Answ. Before the fall, Adam was the
happiest creature under the Sun, enjoying many surpassing Privileges. And all
mankind being then in his loins, enjoyed in him the same happiness and
Privileges viz.

1. A reasonable and immortal soul personally joined with a suitable body,
both of them, Ps. 139.14, 15.
fearfully and wonderfully made, yea Genesis 1.26. and Ps. 139.15.
curiously wrought, according to divine Consultation of the blessed Trinity.
Adams soul was so rational, that he knew the nature of all the creatures which
God brought before him, and Genesis 2.20, 23.
named them accordingly. And so immortal, that it cannot die a natural death,
as many Ps. 49.15 Eccles. 12.9. 1 King. 17.21. Mat. 10 28. Phil. 1.22, 23. 1
Pet. 3.19. 2 Cor. 5.1
Scriptures intimate. But the souls of all other sublunary creatures, besides
man, are irrational: and die with their bodies.

2. A most pleasant Habitation. Genesis 2.8.9.
God planted a Garden Eastward in Eden, and there he put the man. A garden is
the glory of the fields: A garden of Gods planting, the glory of all gardens.
Herein grew every tree pleasant to the sight, and good for food: And a
Quadripartite, or four-streamed river to water the garden. Oh what a garden of
delights! what an earthly Paradise! Here man was placed, Genesis 2.15
to dress this Garden. Man must not be idle, no not in Paradise.

3. Liberal Provision. Man was allowed, Genesis 1.29. and 2.16 17
freely to eat of every herb, and of the fruit of every tree in the Garden,
except only the tree of Knowledge of good and evil. His food therefore was most
various and delicious.

4. Universal dominion over the creatures. Genesis 1.26
Let them have dominion over the fish of the Sea, and over the foul of the
air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping
thing that creeps upon the earth. This dominion was not supreme, but
subordinate to Gods dominion. Adam was Monarch of the earth, God the sole
Monarch of all the world. -- Ps. 8.4, 6 7, 8.
Lord what is man that thou art mindful of him? and the Son of man that thou
visitest him? -- Thou have made him to have dominion over the works of thy
hands; thou have put all things under his feet. So that all sublunary creatures
were to do homage unto Adam.

5 Conjugal society with his wife, Genesis 2.21 22, 23, 24,
created out of Adams side, while he was asleep. She was thus taken out of man,
that she might be a meet help for man, and become affectionately dear to man,
as bone of h^s bone, and flesh of his flesh. Man is naturally a sociable
creature, and loves society; And Marriage-society is the sweetest of all
natural societies.

6. Innocence. E^cles. 7.29.
God made man upright. As man came at first out of Gods hands, he was
spotless, undefiled, and wholly without sin. Hence that state is styled, The
state of innocence. Except Christ, never man on earth was perfectly without
sin, as Adam was in his first Creation. The holiest Saints in this life have
sin in them; though sin reign not over them. We were without sin in the
earthly Paradise, and shall be Ephesians. 5.27
without sin in the heavenly Paradise. How happy is a sin-less state!

7. The image of God. Genesis 1.27.
God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him. There
was not only an utter absence of all sinfulness, but also a presence of all
due righteousness in him: in which regard he was perfectly conformable to the
will of God. This image of God in man, seems principally to consist Compare
Col. 3.10. with Ephesians. 4.24. and weigh them well.
in, 1. Knowledge, 2. Rig^teousnesse. and 3. True holiness; or, as the Greek
phrase is, Holiness of truth. This image of God in Adam made him full of divine
beauty, whereby he was all glorious within, surpassing all sublunary creatures.

8. A Covenant-state with God. In all times and states of the Church, God has
pleased to deal with his people by way of Covenant. Adam before the fall being
perfect and without sin, had perfect ability given him to keep that Covenant
with God, in which he was naturally enstated. The Covenant into which Adam was
admitted with God, was the Covenant of Works, the substance whereof is the
Moral Law, or Ten Commandments. The Moral Law was perfectly written in Adams
heart for the substance of it, so that he was fully able to know and keep it:
for even since the fall, the Gentiles which have not the written Law, Romans
2.14.15,
do by nature the things contained in the Law, -- which show the work of the
Law written in their hearts. Much more was the Law written in Adams heart
before the fall. This Covenant of Works, the substance whereof is contained in
the Moral Law, required personal, perfect, and perpetual obedience under the
severest penalties Gal, 3.1^
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are written in the
Book of the Law to do them. Unto this Covenant of Works with Adam, seem to be
annexed two Sacraments, viz. Genesis 2.9.16.17.
The Tree of Life, assuring him of life upon his keeping Covenant and eating of
that tree: And the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, assuring him of death
upon breach of Covenant, and tasting of that Tree.

9. Finally, Adam enjoyed sweet Peace and Communion with God, all the while he
continued in this his pure primitive state. God Genesis chapter 1 and chapter 2.
familiarly conversed with him, and he with God in the Garden of Eden,
receiving from God no expressions but of love and favor. This Peace and
Communion with God was the Eden of Eden, the Paradise of Adams Paradise.

Object. These were Adams Privileges before the fall, and they were excellent.
But what is all this to us? Asw. All this is very much to us. For, all Adams
Privileges were our Privileges: Adam being a public person, the general
Parent, Root and Stock of Mankind; and we all at that time in his loins.
Therefore as Heb. 7.9, 10.
Levi is said to pay Tithes in Abram unto Melchizedech, because Levi was in his
father Abram's loins, when Melchizedech met him: So we may be truly said to
enjoy all the Privileges of the state of innocence in Adam, because at that
time we all were in Adams loins when he enjoyed them, Oh therefore, How happy
a man was Adam! and how happy were all we in Adam before the fall!

Thus we should know our selves and our primitive state, what once we were in
Adam before the fall. Next we should know what we now are by nature since the
fall.

II. What are we now in Adam by nature, since the fall? Answ. As the pillar of
cloud between the Israelites and Egyptians had a light side, and a dark side;
Ex. 14.19, ^^.
Giving light by night to Israel, but being darkness to the Egyptians: So our
state before and after the fall, had a bright side, and a dark side. I have
already showed you the bright side of the cloud; Now I shall represent unto you
the dark side. We were not once so happy before the fall; but we are now as
miserable since the fall. And this chiefly two ways, 1. Through the Privation
and Absence of all good which we had. 2. Through the Position or presence of
all evil which we had not.

1. By the fall of Adam, we have lost all the good we had, all the happiness
we enjoyed in our first estate. (1.) Our reasonable and immortal souls, are
become brutish in the things of God; and liable to die everlastingly. (2). We
are Genesis 3.24,
banished out of Paradise our pleasant Habitation. (3). We are deprived of
Edens liberal Provision. In the sweat of our brows we must now get our bread;
and though we toil never so much, Verse. 18.
Yet the earth yields not its strength, but brings forth thorns and thistles.
(4) We have lost much of our dominion over the creatures, many of them rebeling
against us. (5) The sweetness of Marriage-society is imbittered; Genesis 31.6
The wives subjection to her husband becoming grievous; Her sorrows in
Conception and bringing forth, being greatly multiplied, and both of them being
exercised with cares and 1 Cor. 7.28, 32, 33.
troubles in the flesh touching their children and one another. 6. Our
innocence and spotlesnesse is swallowed up with nocency and Genesis 6.5.
sinfulness. 7. We are disrobed of Gods beauteous image, Eccles. 7.29. Co^. 3
10. Ephesians. 4.24.
Having sought out many inventions, till Christ the second Adam repair Gods
image in us. 8. We have brok Covenant with God, by Genesis 3.6.22.24.
eating the forbidden fruit: and so have debarred our selves of all benefit of
the Tree of Life. 9. And finally, we lost our sweet Peace and Communion with
God; sin defiling our consciences with guilt, Genesis 3.7.8, 9, 10, etc
clothing us with shame, and filling our hearts with fear and horror at the
presence of God; our first Parents, and we in them, endeavoring to hide our
selves from Gods presence among the trees of the Garden. Thus by the fall we
are quite stripped of all our glory and happiness* wherein we were created.

2. By the fall of Adam we are also implunged into all manner of evil, which we
had not before, viz. 1. Evil of sin. 2. Evil of punishment.

(1). The evil of sin is most grievous upon us diverse ways. Principally in
regard, 1. Of Adams sin, whereof we are guilty. 1. Of Original sin, wherein we
are naturally drowned. 3. Of Actual sin, of all sorts and degrees, whereunto we
are naturally disposed.

1. We are all guilty of Adams sin, of Adams fall. For we all being in the
loins of Adam the public Root of mankind, we stood with him, and we fell with
him. Hence it is said, Romans 5.12.
By one man sin entered into the World, and death by sin; and so death passed
upon all men for that all have sinned. And again, -- Verse. 19
By one man's disobedience many were made sinners. So that Adams fall and first
sin, together with all the sinful ingredients, and aggravations thereof; As
Unbelief, Pride, Disobedience, Rebellion Unthankfulness, Intemperance, Murder,
Apostasy, Hypocrisy, etc. may all most justly be laid to our charge. And this
is sin enough, were we guilty of no more, to sink us into everlasting death.

2. We are all drowned in Original corruption. For even Infants from Adam to
Moses, that lived not so long as to sin Actually, as Adam in his Apostasy did,
even they were brought under death for their guilt of Adams sin, and of
Original corruption of their natures: Romans 5.14.
Death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had not sinned after the
similitude of Adams transgression. And David thus laments himself; Psalm. 5^5
Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me. This,
the common lot of all Adams posterity, and even of David among the rest. Yea
Job long before David, said, Job. 14.4
Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one. So then, Adam by the
fall becoming unclean: all Adams children, naturally, and by ordinary
propagation descending from him, are naturally unclean also. This sinful
uncleanness of nature, we call Original sin, or Original corrup^ion. That we
may the better discern the venom and sinfulness of Original sin, Let us a
little consider. 1. The names. 2. The Nature. 3. The Aggravations of it.

The Names given to Original sin, in Scripture are diverse, and very
observeable. It is called, 1. Sin, by way of Emphasis; as being the sin of
sins, the mother sin. -- P^. 51.5,
In sin did my mother conceive me. 2. Sin-dwelling-in-us; Because it has its
continual abode in our natures while we continue in these Tabernacles, whether
we wake or sleep, etc. As Ivy abides in an old wall, till the wall be pulled
down. Hence Paul; Romans 7 17.
It is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me. 3. The
easily-encompassing-sin, -- Heb. 12.1. (...).
Let us lay aside every weight, and the sin that does so easily-beset us. By
weight, ^^z. Annot. in Heb. 12.1.
Beza seems rightly to understand all burdensome worldly impediments, which
hinder us in our Christian course: By Sin easily-encompassing, Original
corruption of our natures, that like snares besets us before, behind, and on
every side; tangels our Minds, Consciences, Wills, Affections, and all our
members; is as fetters to our feet, manacles to our hands, etc. so that we
cannot run the race set before us. 4. The fle^h; Gal. 5.17
The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit lusts against the
flesh. It Is called flesh to set forth the ba^enesse of sin, the flesh being
^he base part of man. 5. The old man; ^o called, Partly because of the long
continuance of it in us; it is an in^eterate di^ease, as old as our selves.
Partly because of the corruptness and deceitfulness of it. -- Ephesians. 4.22
Put off concerning the former conversation the old man, which is corrupt
according to the deceitful lusts. 6. The Romans 7.23.
law of sin in our members: because it as it were commands, compels, and even
necessitates us to sin: As a law rules them that are under it. 7. Finally,
Original corruption is styled Romans 7.24.
A body of death; because. As the natural body has many members, so Original
sin has many lusts, as limbs thereof. And because this body of sin exposes
unto death. These and such like are the denominations of Original sin, by all
which the vileness of it may in some measure appear.

The nature of Original sin seems especially to consist in the^e three
particulars, v^z. 1. In a total priva^ion of the Image of God, and of all that
Original righteousness and integrity, wherein we were at first created, 2. In
an utter inability to any true spiritual good, yea in an absolute enmity
thereunto. -- Romans 5.6
For when we were yet without strength. -- Verse. 10.
When we were enem^es, we were reconciled to God. -- Romans ^.7
The carnal mind is enmity against God: for it is not subject to the Law of
God, neither indeed can be. 3. In an universal and continual pronenesse to all
evil; Genesis 6.^ with Rom 3.10. to 20
God saw that every imagination of the thoughts, of men's hear^s was only
evil, continually -- Their throat is an open Sepulcher, etc. And our Savior
tells us, Mat. 7.18 and ^^, 3^.
A corrupt tree cannot brings forth good fruit. This is the nature of Original
corruption. Oh how deadly is the Poison of it to the Nature of man!

The Aggravations of Original corruption, whereby it appears to be extremely
sinful, are these; viz. 1. Original sin is Psalm. 51.5 with John ^.6.
Natural and Hereditary. It Is bred and born with us, it is propagated with our
very natures, and rooted in our bones and inmost principles, and consequently
more dangerous and desperate; As those corporal diseases, which are not
accidental and occasional only, but Hereditary and natural, are most perilous
and remedi^esse. 2. Original sin is univer^all. And the more universally
extended, the more bitterly to be lamented: As epidemicall, univer^al diseases
are the most terrible diseases* as o^^e in Egypt, when Ex. 12.30
There was not an house wherein there was not one dead. Now Original sin is
universal; Partly in that All men men ordinarily descended of Adam, are defiled
with it! Jews, Gentiles, bond, free male, female, all are involved in it* Romans
5.12.19. and 3.10. etc.
All are sinners by it. Partly in that All of all men are tainted hereby, Romans
3.13, 14, 15. Genesis 6.5, Romans 7.1^ Tit. 1.^5.
soul, body, all the faculties and affections of the one, all the senses,
parts, and members of the other: Mind, Conscience, Memory, Will, Love, Hatred,
etc. mouth, hands, feet, etc. all are wholly depraved and unclean. -- I know
that in me, ( that is in my flesh) dwells no good thing. 3. Original sin is
reigning over all the sons of Adam, it reigns whilst they continue in the first
Adam; And it reigns most cruelly and tyrannically. It enthrals men unto Sa^^n
at his Will: unto actual Ephesians. 2.2, 3. with 2 Timothy 2.26.
fulfilling the lusts, and wills of the flesh: and unto death. Romans 5.21. and
6.12 13, 14.
That as sin has reigned unto death, etc. The Turkish slavery, Spanish
Inquisition, E^yptian cruelty, ^abylonian captivity, are all ^^ort of this
tyranny and dominion of sin. Thi^ reign of sin is evidenced, Partly by our
being, Romans 6.20.
Servants of sin. Partly by our Romans ^.20.
ob^ying (...) in the lusts thereof. Partly by our Romans ^.13.
yiel^ing (...) members as weapons of unrighteousness^ (...), to take sins
part, to fight for it, defend it, justify it, etc. against opposers. 4.
Ori^^nal sin, whilst we are in this body, is in some sort incurable. The reign
of it cannot be ^ured till Christ come to reign in thee, and pluck thee out of
^hy carnal state: And the Romans 7.18, etc.
^^-dwelling or in-being of Original sin cannot (...) fully cured, no not in a
believer, whilst he (...) here on earth; As the Canaanit^s (though tributaries
and slaves, yet) would dwell among the Israelites, or as Ivy will remain in an
old wall, till it be utterly pulled down to the ground.

^. We are all by nature wholly disposed: and pro^e to run headlong into all
Actual sins for kind^ and degree. Into all impiety against God, all
unrighteousness against man, and intemperance against our selves: contrary to
all the Commandments of the first and second Table: and this in thought, word,
and work. Into open, and secret sins: Omissions of good, and Commissions of
evil: Wilfulnesses and Weaknesses: etc. Against ligh^ of mind, checks of
con^cience, motions of Gods Spirit, means of grace, professions and promi^es of
better wa^king, multitudes of mercies, terrib^enesse of judgments; etc. and
this in youth and age, in ^o^iety and ^olitarinesse; yea, by Original
corruption, we are fundamentally dispo^ed to that unp^rdonable sin against
the Holy Ghost. Oh Ps. 19.12
who can understand h^s errors! who can comprehend his sinfulness! who can
choose but admire the patience and mercy of God to such masses of all corruption
and abomin^^^^^*

(2.) The evil of punishment, whereunto we (...) continually liab^e by reason
of this evil o^ (...) is manifold and un^peakable, both for this world and the
world to come. In thi^ world the soul is expo^ed to ^^^^^tual judge^ents, vi^.
E^^. 4.^8 2 Cor. 3.4. Rom 1.28. 2 These. 2.11.
b^indnesse of ^ind, g^d^iness, (...), infatuation and strong (...) Mat. 27.3
5. 1 Timothy 4.2. Romans 1.28.
horror, searednesse, and senslesnesse of Conscience. A reprobate sense, etc.
See Deuteronomy. 28.15. ^0 the end
The body, name and state, lies open to all external and temporal mi^eries and
cur^es. In the world to come, both soul and body are liable to Math* 25.46, 41.
Mar. 9.43. to 48. Luke 16.24, 26.
endless, easelesse; and remediless torments in hell fire: wherein they shall
be ever dying, and never dead: ever burning, and never consumed: ever tortured,
but never eased or pitied. The Mat. 9.44, 46, 48.
worm of conscience ever gnawing, 2 Peter 2.17.
blackness of darkness ever amazing, the infernal fiends ever torturing, the
wrath of God ever devouring and swallowing up the whole man, etc. Oh the misery
of a mere carnal man is extremely miserable!

III. What should we, and what may we be in Jesus Christ the second Adam? For
clearing of this, consider chiefly the^e three things; viz. 1. The necessity of
Getting out o^ our natural state into a supernatural cond^tion in Christ. 2.
The Duties we are to perform when once we are brought into Christ* 3. The
Privileges which we shall enjoy in Christ.

1. The necessity of our getting out of our natural, into a supernatural
state in Christ, is ^o great, that we cannot otherwise possibly be saved. For,

1. The proper adequate Romans 6.23
wages of every sin is etern^ll death: Much more the state of sin must needs be
most deadly and damnable.

2. Every man that remains in his ca^^all condition in the first Adam, not
having accepted Christ, lies under the Covenant of works, requiring Gal. 3.10
personal, perfect, and perpetual obedience, under pain of death and the curse.
And since the Fall, no man can keep this Covenant by reason of the Romans 8.^3.
infirmity of the flesh; nor avoid the curse for not keeping it. For Christ
alone, Gal. 3.13.
redeems us from the curse, becoming a curse for us. Hence every carnal
Christlesse man is a cursed man.

3. There Is no possibility of escaping damnation, or obtaining salvation, but
only by Jesus Christ and spiritual interest in him. Act. 4.11.12.
There is not salvation in any other. For there is no other name under heaven
given, whereby we may be saved. -- Hence it is said, Mat. 18.3
Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye cannot enter into
the Kingdom of God. -- And, Joh. 3.3.^.
except a man be born again of water and the holy Ghost, he cannot enter into
the Kingdom of God. -- Mar. 16.^6.
He that believes not shall be damned. -- Yea, Joh. 3.18
He that believes not, is condemned already, because he has not believed in
the name of the only begotten Son of God.

4. Our natural condition without Christ is most mi^erable: but our
supernatural condition in Christ will be most happy. For,

By nature we are utterly Luke 15. throughout.
lost, and in the way of perishing for ever; but in Christ we that were lost,
are found.

By nature we are 1 Cor. ^.14. Ephesians. 4.17, 18. and 5.8.
dark and blind in spiritual^; but of Christ we Revel. 3.18.
buy eye salve that we may see, and by him we are 1 Pet. 2.9
called out of darkness into his mavelous light.

By nature we are Ephesians. 2.1. etc. Phil. 4 11, 12, 13.
dead in sins and trespasses, and c^nnot acceptably act or move at all in
spiritual courses: but when we come to Christ, we shall be quickened and enabled
to do all things.

By nature we are Col. 1.21. Romans 8.7.
enemies, yea enmity against God, and against all goodness: but in Christ we
shall be reconciled to God, and made friends by the blood of his Cross.

By nature we are old and corrupt: but in Christ, 2 Cor. 5.17.
Old things shall pass away, and we shall become new Creatures.

By nature we are unregenerate; but by Christ we shall be Joh. 3.3.5, 6.
born again.

By nature we are full of spots and deformities: but in Christ we shall 1 Cor.
6.11. Ephesians. 5.27.
be washed and purified, at last, from every spot and wrinkle, through his
blood, and by his grace become full of beauty.

Finally, by nature we 1 Pet. 2.9.
are not a people, having not obtained mercy: but when we shall come to Christ,
we shall become the People of the living God, and shall obtain in him the Mercy
of mercies. Now therefore unless we resolve to die in this natural misery; and
to despise all this supernatural felicity, it is most necessary that we hasten
unto Jesus Christ, and the acceptance of him.

The Duties which we are to perform, being once brought unto Christ, are many,
and of high importane. Generally, we are to Romans 6.4, 5, 6, 7.
walk in newness of life, this comprehends all. Particularly, we are to walk.

1, In (...) b. 6. Luke 13, 1, 2. Act. 17.30.31.
repentance from all dead works, not only bewailing, but hating and forsaking
them.

2. In Self-denial. We must Luke 9.23
deny our selves, In all our Tit. 2.11.
Self-sinfulnesse, In all our Phil. 3.7 8, 9.
Self-righteousnesse, In all our 1 Cor. 3.1^.
Self-wisdom, In all our Matthew. 16 10.
Self-will, In all our Mat. 10.37.
Self-love. Our self-sinfulnesse is abominable, our self-righteousnesse is as
filthy rags and rottenness, our self-wisdome is but folly, our self-will is
but a crooked Rule, our self-love is but self-hatred, and all the carnal
worldly objects of self-love, but loss and dung in comparison of Jesus Christ.

3. In Heb. 6.1
faith toward God and Jesus Christ. This is a fundamental duty. And Romans 1.17.
Gal. 2.20* Hab. 2.4
by faith we must live, drawing all vital supplies from Christ, depending upon
Gods all sufficiency, and his never-failing promi^es.

4. In all Christian obedience, and in all manner of good works. Tit. 3.8.
They that believe in God should be careful to maintain good works: and to be
1 Cor. 15.58,
always abounding in the work of the Lord. For they are Ephesians. 2.10
His workmanship created in Jesus Christ unto good works, which God has before
ordained, that they should walk in them.

5. In all piety to God, righteousness toward men, and sobriety toward our
selves. For the Gospel of Titus 2.11, 1^.
Gods grace teaches us, that denying all ungodliness and worldly lusts, we
should live soberly, righteously, and godlily in this present world.

6. In all good conscience and inoffensivenesse toward both God and men. Thus
the Act. 2.3.1 and 24.16.
Apostle Paul lived: and so should we.

7. In all Purity and Holiness. Heb. 12.14.
Without holiness no man shall see the Lord. 1 Pet. 1 15.
As he therefore that has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of
conversation.

8. In all exactness, strictness, accuratenesse of conversation: Ephesians. 5.15
Walk circumspectly; (Greec accurately, exactly) etc. We must walk closely with
God, looking narrowly to our thoughts, words and works.

9. In a word, we must constantly walk on unto Perfection, laboring to 2 Peter
3.1^.
grow in grace and in the knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ. As he that swims,
if he press not forward, the stream carries him backward: so in Christianity;
if we press not on to perfection, the stream of corruption and temptation will
drive us back again. Therefore Phil. 3.13, 14.
Forgetting what is behind, let us reach forth to those things which are
before, and press toward the mark, for the price of the high calling of God
in Christ Jesus.

These and many like duties we are to perform, if we be in Christ. It Is no
small pittance of grace that will serve turn for such performances.

3. The Privileges which we shall enjoy in Christ, are generally such as
carnal 1 Cor. ^.9
Eye has not seen, ear heard, nor the heart of carnal man has conceived. More
particularly these that follow especially, viz.

1. Adoption Ephesians. 1.5. John 1.12, 13.
into the family of God, as his sons and daughters in Jesus Christ. So that now
we are Ephesians. 2.19
of Gods household, and partake of Romans 8.15.
the Spirit of Adoption whereby we cry Abba father. And we are Gal. 4.^. Romans
8.17.
not only sons, but heirs of God, coheirs with Christ. 1 John ^.1, ^.
Behold what manner of love the father has manifested to us, that we should he
called the sons of God. This is a grand fundamental Privilege.

2. Sanctification of our natures by the Spirit of Christ, Ephesians. 4.23 24. with
Col. 3.11.
renewing our whole man after Gods image, with all kinds of Grace; and Romans
8.2, 14.
mortifying more and more all the relics of sin in us:

3. Justification of our persons, Romans 3.13, 24, ^5.
freely of Gods mere grace, through Christ's Romans 4.6, 7, 8, and 5.17, 18.19.
obedience and death imputed to us by faith whereby all our sins are pardoned,
and our persons accepted as righteous before God. O thrice blessed are they
that are thus pardoned and justified!

4. Sweet Communion with God, Joh. 1.3. 2 Cor. 13.14.
Father Son, and Holy Ghost. This fellowship is the Saints heaven-on-earth.
Such walk with God, converse with God, have their conversation in heaven. They
1 John 4.16.
dwell in God, and God in them, Rev. 3.20.
Sup with Christ, and Christ with them.

5. All the promises of this and the world to come. 2 Pet. 1.4
The promises of God are most great and precious. 2 Cor. 1.20.
All Yea and Amen in Christ: And all the 1 Timothy 4.8
godly man's peculiar inheritance. That soul cannot be poor that has faith to
trade with God, in his promises.

6. Compare. 1 Cor. 3.2^, 22, 23. wit^ Psalm. 34.9, 10.
All things are ours, if we be Christ's, whether the world, or life; or death,
or things present, or things to come: All are ours, if not in actual
possession, yet in Evangelical right unto them in Christ, and we shall actually
enjoy all that shall be good for us.

7. Finally, Cooperation of all things for our good; crosses and comforts,
losses and gains, pains and ease, sickness and health, etc. life and death.
Every wind shall blow us profit. Romans 8.28.
We know that all things work together for good to them that love God, to them
that are she called according to his purpose.

These and the like are their Privileges that obtain Jesus Christ.

Hitherto of the second point of knowledge, viz. The Knowledge of our selves,
requisite to prepare for worthy communicating.

3. Knowledge of Jesus Christ.
Knowledge of Jesus Christ our Mediator, is, the next branch of knowledge
requisite to a worthy Communicant.

How necessary a competent knowledge of Jesus Christ is, has been formerly
showed, Christ being the Author, Matter, and End of the Lords Supper, without
due knowledge of whom we cannot possibly discern the Lords body.

But what are we principally to know touching Jesus Christ, in order to worthy
communicating? Answ. We should especially know these seven particulars. 1. That
there is but only one true Christ and Mediator. 2. That Jesus the Son of the
Virgin Mary is the only true Messiah, true Christ. 3. That this Jesus Christ is
God and man in one Person. 4. That Jesus Christ God-man, has in order to
sinners salvation taken upon himself the office of Mediatourship betwixt God
and man. 5. That Jesus Christ is a Mediator All-sufficient. 6. That this
All-sufficient Mediator Jesus Christ saves none but those to whom he is
actually applied. 7. That Jesus Christ is the substance and marrow of all
Sacraments, Promises, Ordinances, and of the whole S^riptures.

I. That there is but one only true Christ and Mediator, and no more; There
are many counterfeit Christ's, Math. 24.23, 24. Mar. 13.21 Luke 17.23
false Christ's, foreprophesied of, able ( if it were possible) to deceive the
very Elect. But if any shall say, lo, here is Christ, or lo, there is Christ,
believe them not. For 1 Cor. 8.6
unto us, as there is but one God, so there is but one Lord Jesus Christ. -- 1 Timothy 2.5.
There is one God, and one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus,
-- Act. 4.1^
Neither is there salvation in any other, for there ^s none other name under
Heaven given among men whereby we must be saved.

II. That Jesus the Son of the Virgin Mary is this only true Messiah, true
Christ and Mediator that should come into the world to save sinners, according
to the prophecies and promi^es of God in the whole Old Testament. This is
evident three ways.

1. By certain Testimonies; As, -- Act. 10.38.43.
To him, (that is, to Jesus of Nazareth) give all the Prophets witness, that
through his name, whosoever believes in him shall receive remiss^^^ of sins.
-- Act. 3.18. See also v. 20, to the end of the Chap.
But those things which God before had showed by the mouth of all his Prophets,
that Christ should suffer, he has so fulfilled. And Paul professes himself to
be separated unto the Gospel of God, Romans 1.1, 3, 4.
-- Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, which was made of the seed of
David decording to the flesh; and de^^^red to be the Son of God with power, etc.

By the Genealogy of Jesus Christ. The ^ine or Pedigree of Jesus Christ, the
Son of the Virgin Mary, is described by Mat. 1.1. to 18.
Matthew and Luke 3.23 to the end of the Chap.
Luke, and drawn down from David, Abraham, yea Adam himself to Joseph and Mary;
from generation, to generation; and principally for this end, to evidence, That
thi^ Jesus is the only true Messiah promised under the Old Testament. Matthew
describes Joseph's line, (the supposed father of Christ, because he was the
Virgins husband) and shows that he came from David, for it is said, Matthew. ^.^6.
Jacob begat Joseph the husband of Mary. Luke delineates Mary's line the mother
of Christ, how she also descended from David etc. So that Matthew sets down
Christ's legal, Luke Christ's natural line. For he says, Luke 3.23
Jesus being ( as was supposed) the son of Joseph, which was the Sun of Eli.
Joseph was the natural son of Jacob, who begat him, as Mat^hew shows* the
legal son, or son in law of Eli, by marrying Mary the daughter of Eli, as Luke
imports. Joseph's name is put in both the Genealogies, because the Jews were
wont to reckon their Genealogies by the men, and not by the women. So that
Jesus descended of Abraham and David, according to Gods promise, both by father
and mother, etc. therefore is the very Christ.

3. By the Histories of the four Evangelists, describing Christ's Birth, Life
and Death, in all points so exactly agreeing with the prophecies and promises
of Christ of old, as may appear by comparing the Prophets and Evangelists
together* it is clear that Jesus the son of the Virgin Mary is the very and
only Christ indeed.

If we hold not fast this point, That Jesus the Son of the Virgin Mary is the
only promised Messiah, we overthrow all the New Testament, and the whole frame
of Christian Religion.

III. That this Jesus Christ the only true Messiah is God-man, that is, is
true God and perfect man in one person: The humane nature of Christ's soul and
body, being personally united to the Son, the second person in the Godhead.
Joh. 1.1.
The Word (viz. the substantial Word the Son, by whom God makes his will known
to us, as man utters his mind by a word) was God: There Is his Divinity. --
Joh. 1.14
And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us; there is his humanity. -- Gal.
4.4.
When the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman.
This is 1 Timothy 3.16.
The great Mystery of godliness, God manifest in the flesh. A great Mystery
indeed, that the most glorious God, infinitely above all created beings should
stoop so low as to become personally one with dust and ashes: and that frail
dust and ashes should be advanced so far above Angels, as to become personally
one with the only blessed God. We cannot fully comprehend this Mystery, let us
faithfully apprehend it. Consider here three things.

1. Why was it needful Christ should be God and Man in one person? Answ. Christ
became a middle person betwixt God and man. 1. That he might be a fit 1 Timothy 2.5
Mediator reconciling God and man. His office is founded in his person. 2. That
God might accept, and the godly apply to themselves the Acts 20.28. Heb. 9.14.
Mat. 3.17.
properties and peculiar works of each nature, as the 1 Pet. 2.5.6, 7.
properties and works of Christ's whole person.

2. Why was it requisite that Jesus Christ should be man? Answ. Christ our
Mediator must needs be man; 1. That he might Heb. 2.16
exalt and sanctify our nature which we had deba^ed and polluted. 2. That he
might be our Heb. 2.14 15. Gal. 4, 4, 5.
Kinsman, and so the right of our Redemption might belong unto him. 3. That in
our nature which had offended* he might Romans 5.17. to the end. Heb. 2 14. and
^. 14 25.
fulfill all righteousness both in his acti^e and passive obedience, suffering
and interceding for us. 4. That he might be Heb. 2.17 18, (...) 16. (...)
a merciful and compassionate H^gh Priest for us in things pertaining unto God,
Ha^ing an experimental fellow-feeling of our temptations and infirmities. 5.
That as Christ became the Son of man by Nature: ^o we in him might become the
Gal. 4.4.
Sons of God by Adoption and Grace. 6. That he being our Mediator and Advocate
in our flesh, we may Heb. 4.15, 16.
come boldly to the Throne of grace, for obtaining mercy and find^ng grace to
help in time of need.

3. Why was it necessary Christ our Mediator should be God? Answ. It was
necessary our Mediator should be God as well as man, 1. That his Godhead might
Heb. 9.14. Romans 1.4. Acts 24, 25.
uphold his manhood from being swallowed up with Gods infinite wrath, and the
fruits thereof for our sins; which wrath no mere creatures, no not Angels could
undergo and not be utterly overwhelmed. 2. That his obedience Active and
Passive, his Intercession, and other acts of his Mediatorship might be
Compa^e^Acts 20.28. with Heb. 7.25, 26, 27. Romans 3.24, 25. T^t. 2.13, 14. He^r.
5.8, 9. and 9.14, 15.
filled with such excellency, worth, and efficacy: as to be every way
satisfactory and well-pleasing to God, and sufficient for the salvation of all
his Elect.

IV. That Jesus Christ God-man, has taken upon him the office of a Mediator
betwixt God and man, in order to the salvation of his Elect. 1 Timothy 2.5.
There is one God, and one Mediator betwixt God and man, the man Christ Jesus.
Consider here, 1. How. 2. In what state Christ executes his Mediatorship.

1. How does Christ discharge and execute this his office of Mediatorship?
Answ. Christ executes his office of Mediatorship, chiefly three ways, Viz. 1.
As a Prophet, 2. Priest, and 3. King. And these are the three branches or parts
of Mediatorship.

1. Christ is the Prophet which Moses foretold the Jews, Acts 3.22.
God should rai^e up like unto him; and charged them to hear him in all things
under penalty of destruction. As a Prophet, he in all ages makes known to his
Church, his Fathers Will for his Elects salvation. Hence he is styled Isa. 9.6.
Counselor; 1 Pet. 2.25.
The Shepherd and Bishop of our souls. He 1 Cor. 1.30.
is made unto us wisdom. And he is fully acquainted with all his Fathers
counsels and bosom secrets, therefore able to discover to us the whole counsel
of God. John 1.18.
The only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared
him. Christ reveals Gods Will to his Church, 1. Outwardly in his Acts 20.27.
with 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.
Word and Ordinances, wherein the sum of all divine mysteries necessary to
salvation are contained completely. This is the light without us, even Col. 3.16
the Word of Christ. 2. Inwardly by his 1 Cor. 2.10, 11, 12. with 2 Cor. 3.18.
Spirit, opening and illuminating our dark minds, that we may spiritually and
savingly understand the counsels of God in his Word. This is 1 Job. 2.20, 27.
the Anointing from Christ, which teaches all things.

2. Christ is our Priest. Our Heb. 4.14.
great High Priest. A Priest of a far more perfect order then Aarons, even Heb.
7.17.
A Priest for over after the order of Me^chizedech. Christ as our Priest, 1.
Made satisfaction for us, Heb. 10.10, 12, 13, 14, and 7.27.
purging our sins by his own blood once for all, when he was on earth; In which
act himself was both Sacrifice, Altar, and Priest. Sacrifice, as Man: Altar, as
God: Priest, as God-man. 2. Makes continual intercession for us in heaven, Heb.
7.25. and 9.24. 1 John 2.1, 2.
appearing there as our Advocate with the Father.

3. Christ is our King. Our Heb. 7.2.
King of Righteousness: Our King of Peace. Isal. 2.6.
Yet have I set my King upon my Holy Hill of Sion. Christ acts and executes his
Kingly Authority and Power, 1. By Ps. 110.3
cal^ing his Elect effectually, 2. By Ephesians. 4.11.12. 1 Cor. 12.28. Isa. 33.22.
Mat. 18 17, 18.
go^erning them visib^y and in^isibly. 3. By recompencing their obedience with
gracious rewards, their failings with just fatherly Rev. 3.19.
chas^isements. 4. By supporting them under all their Isa. 43.2. etc. and 63.9.
trials, afflictions, and persecutions. 5, By over pouring and ordering all,
even the worst and most unlikely occurrents for Romans 11. last. and 8.28.
his own glory and his peoples good. 6. By Psalm. 110. 1 Cor. ^5.25.
restraining, subduing, and crushing all his and his peoples enemies. 7. And
finally, by Act. 17.31.
judging and justly rewarding all men and Angels at the great day. Thus Christ
executed his Mediatory Office, as a Prophet, Priest, and King for us.

2. In what state or condition did Christ thus execute this his Office? Answer.
Christ executed his Med^atory office in a double condition. 1. Partly in a
state of ignominious Humiliation. 2. Partly in a state of glorious Exaltation.

Christ's Humiliation (he being the eternal Son of God,) was exceeding deep and
ignominious, and that principally in these five degrees. 1. In his Conception,
in that he was Gal. 4.4.
in fulness of time made of a woman: Luke 1.35, 48, 52, 53.
conceived by the Holy Ghost in the womb of a Virgin of low estate and degree.
He that comprehends heaven and earth, is comprehended in the narrow womb of a
Virgin. Who can sufficiently admire his disvesting himself of such Majesty,
and investing himself with such meannesse? 2. In his Birth in that he who is
eternal before all time should be borne in time. He who brought forth the
who^e world, should be brough^ sorth in the world. And that so meany; But at
home, but abroad; not in a Palace, but in a common Luk 2.4, 3, 6, 7.
Inn: not in the best room in the Inn, but in a Stable, there being no room
for him in the Inn. There he was borne, wrapped in swadling-cloaths, and laid
in a manger. O wonderful ab^sement! 3. In his whole life. In that he was Gal.
4.4. and 3.13.
made under the Law to do and endure it: John 15.18.
Coorsely entertained and used in the world: Mat. 4.1. etc.
impudently tempted by Satan; and continually Heb. 2.16^ct 4.15. Isa. 53.2, 3,
4, 5, 6.
subject to humane sin-lesse infirmities, and in some fort below us therein. 4.
In his death, in that he who was Truth, was betrayed by Judas, and falsely
accused by the Jews: He who was Safety, was forsaken by his Disciples, denied
by Peter; He who was Love, was hated and rejected of the world: He who was
Righteousness, was condemned by Pilate, and abused by the soldiers: He who
was Holiness, and Col. 1.13.
the Son of Gods love, wrastled under Gods wrath: And he who was Life, died
shamefully, painfully, and cur^edly on the Cross, as the Evangelists abundantly
testify. 5. Finally, In his Burial. In that he who was the Resurrection should
be buried, and remain in the state of the dead three days as a bond man under
the grave.

2. Christ's Act. 2.33.
Exaltation (after this his Humiliation) was great and g^orious. And that
especially in fi^e other degrees also. 1. In his Rev^ving in the grave. He who
was dead and b^ried, Luke 24.5. with Romans 1.4. Acts 2.24. Rev. 1.18. and John
10 18.
quickened himself in the grave by his Godhead; loosing the bands of death,
when he was fastest bound by them. His Reviving in order of nature must go
before his Rising: and he rose alive, not dead; Con^equently his Reviving, the
first degree of his Exaltation, began in the grave, wherein was the last and
lowest degree of his Humiliat^on. 2. In his Resurrection, from the dead out of
the grave the 1 Cor. 15.4, etc.
third day. He both revived and rose again, 1 Cor. 15.21, 22 Ephesians. 1.20, 21,
22.23.
As a second Adam, and Head of his Church for our Romans 4.25.
Justification, Col. 2.12, and 3.1.
Spiritual raising of our souls out of sin, and 1 Cor. 15.20.
Corporal raising of our bodies out of the grave at the last day, declaring
hereby, his infinite Romans 1.4
Godhead: His Romans 14.9
Lordship over quick and dead; His Romans 8.34.
full satisfaction of Gods justice for us, and his absolute Heb. 2.14
victory over sin death, and the devil. 3. In his Act. 1.2, 3. Heb. 2.20.
Ascension up into heaven, forty days after his Resurrection as our Head and
Forerunner. Thereby to Ephesians. 4.8.9, 10.
lead Captivity Captive most triumphantly; To receive, and give gifts for men.
To cause our hearts, and Col. 3.1, 2.
Affections spiritually to ascend after him: To prepare a place for us, John
14.2, 3.
that where he is we might be also. 4. In his Session, or Heb. 8.1. Phil. 2.9.
sitting down at Gods right hand, as God-man, our Mediator, in highest Majesty
and Glory far above all Angels. Having complete dominion, not only over his
Church, but Ephesians. 1.21, 22.
over all things in the whole world for the good of his Church; Ephesians. 4.10, 11,
12.
Pouring his Spirit upon his people* and continually Romans 8.34. Heb, 9.12.24.
making intercession for them. 5. Finally, In his coming again at the last day,
to Acts 17.31.
judge the whole world in righteousness. In his Humiliation at his first
coming, he was judged and condemned by sinners unjustly: In his Exaltation at
his second coming, he shall judge both men and Angels justly. And he shall come
in Luke 9.26. Mat. 25.31.
His own and his Fathers glory, 1 These. 4.1.6.
descending from heaven with a shout, and the voice of the Archangel, and the
Trumpet of God, attended most gloriously, with the triumphant train of
innumerable Saints and Angels, Romans 2.6. Rev. 22.12.
to render to every one according to his works. Thus we are to know that Christ
di^charged his office of Mediatourship, as Prophet, Priest, and King, both in
his state of Humiliation and Exaltation.

V. That this Mediator Jesus Christ is an absolutely All-sufficient Mediator.
There can be nothing required for sinners salvation, which is not completely to
be had in Christ. Is it Redemption? He has Heb. 9.12
obtained eternal Redemption for his Elect. -- And Heb. 10.14.
by one offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified. Is it
reconciliation to God? Romans 5.10.
When we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son. Is it
Justification? He 1 Cor. 1.30.
is made unto us righteousness: He is Jer. 23.6.
The LORD our Righteousness. 2 Cor. 5.21.
He who knew no sin became sin for us, that we might become the Righteousness
of God in him; for he is Mat. 6.33.
the Righteousness of God, viz. which God has devised and will accept So that
Christ has more righteousness than we have unrighteousness: more pardons
than we have debts: more justification than we have condemnation. Is it
Holiness? He is John 1.14, 16.
full of grace and truth, that out of his fullness we might receive, and grace
for grace. Is it any thing? He has Col. 1.19. and 2.9.10.
all fullness in h^mself, that we may be complete in him. And he is Heb. 7.25
able to save to the utmost all that come unto God by him, seeing he ever
lives to moke intercession for them.

VI. That though Jesus Christ be such an All-sufficient Mediator and Sa^iour,
yet he will sa^e none at all, but them only to whom he is actually applied. 1 John 5.12.
He that has the Son has life, but he that has not the Son has not l^fe. He
justifies sinners: but only those sinners that Romans 3.23, to 27.
believe in him. He Mat. 11.28.
gives soul-rest to wearied souls: but only to those wearied and heavy-laden
^ouls that come unto him. He John. ^.12.
g^ves Privilege to become the sons of God: But this Privilege he only gives
to them that rece^ve him, etc. Our union to Christ is the found^tion of all our
Communion with Christ. No Union, no Communion.

VII. Finally, we are to know touching Christ that he is the sub^tance of all
the Sacraments both of Old and New Testament. The Center of the Covenant of
grace, and of all the Promises. 2 Cor. 1.2^.
And the very marrow of all the Scriptures. They that know not Christ aright,
know nothing of the Holy Scriptures to purpose: for they principally John.
5.3.9. Act. 10.43.
testify of him. They are as the ^tarres that lead to Christ: They are as the
Sunbeams that discover this Sun of Righteousness: They are the secret
swadling-clothes of the child Jesus.

These things we should know touching Christ, before we come to the Lords
Supper.

4. Knowledge of the New Covenant.
Knowledge of the New Covenant is the fourth point of knowledge, requisite to a
worthy Communicant before receiving of the Lords Supper. In the Institution of
the Lords Supper, it is said of the Cup, Mat. 26.28.
This is my blood of the New Testament. That is, this Wine in the Cup is a
Sign and Seal of my blood by which the New Testament is ratified. So that by
the Lords Supper the New Testament or New Covenant is confirmed to us; and in
receiving the Lords Supper, we renew Co^enant with God. This we cannot do
judiciously, unle^s we competently understand the nature of the New Covenant.

Now for the opening of the New Covenant in some measure: Consider these
following Propositions, which may afford some true taste of the nature of the
New Covenant.

1. The New Covenant is not the same Covenant which God Genesis 2.16, 17.
made with Adam in Innocence: but far different from it, and that in diverse
particulars. For,

1. The Covenant with Adam, was a Covenant of amity or friendship made by God
with him, as by a Creator with his creature: But the new Covenant is a Covenant
of 2 Cor. ^5.19, 20.
reconciliation made by God as a Redeemer with the sinner.

2. The Covenant with Adam was upon Genesis 2.16, 17. Gal. 3.10.
terms of personal, perfect, and perpetual Obedience to the Moral Law written
in his heart, the curse and death being threatened to the least transgression
thereof: But the New Covenant is upon terms of Romans 3.36. and 4.5. and ^.33*
Faith and new obedience, as the fruit thereof, and testification of our
thankfulness. The Zech. 12.10.
Spirit of Grace, being promised to work that faith and obedience whereunto
eternal lif^ is promised, etc.

3. The Covenant with Adam, was with a person, Eccle. 7.29.
perfectly able to fulfill the Covenant in his own person alone: The New
Covenant is with persons, Romans ^.6. 2 Cor. 3.5.
unable of themselves to do any thing acceptably before God without divine
Grace assisting, and therefore performing Covenant only in Jesus Christ their
Surety.

4. The Covenant with Adam was w^^hout a Mediator; Adam in his innocence
n^eding no Mediator of Redemption or Reconciliation: But the New Covenant is
with a He. 8.6.
Med^ator Jesus Christ, most nec^ssary unto sinners for their salvation.

II. The New Covenant is the same in substance and essential constitution; but
far different in circumstance and manner of administration from the Old
Covenant. By ( Old Covenant) I understand Ephesians. 2.12
The Covenant of promise; That is to say, all the Covenants and Promises
touching Christ, from the first promise of Genesis 3.15.
The seed of the woman immediately after the fall, till Christ's incarnation,
which were made first to Adam, and renewed after to Genesis 17.1 2, etc.
Abram, Ex. 34.27.28. Deuteronomy. 5.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc. and 29.1.
Moses, 2 Samuel 23.5. with Psalm. 89.3, to 38.
David, and Ezekiel. 11.16, to 21. and 36.24. to the end.
Israel. These are called The Covenants of promise, because they were made in
Christ as then only promised, not actually performed; and Covenants, not
Covenant; because though but one Covenant, yet several times renewed, and that
with considerable enlargements from time to time.

Now this New Covenant is the same for substance with that Old Covenant, called
Ephesians. 2.1, 2
The Covenant of promise. For, 1. They are both of them the Covenant of ^race,
not of Nature. 2. They are both of them the Covenant of Reconciliation with
corrupted mankind, not of amity and friendship with incorrupted mankind. 3.
Jesus Christ was the Mediator of them both: though with some difference.
Typically he was Mediator of the Old Testament or Covenant, but Truly of the
New. 4. The terms or conditions of them both were the same, viz. faith in
Jesus Christ the Mediator, not works. 5. The benefits and spiritual
advantages of both were the same in the blood of Christ. viz. Pardon of sin;
Sanctification of our natures; Enjoyment of gracious interest in, and Communion
with God; and Eternal happiness at last with Christ in heaven, as the tenor
of them clearly evidenceth. Herein the Old and New Covenant do notably agree.

But they differ only in some Circumstances, and the manner of Administration.
For 1. The Old Covenant was dark and obscure. All the spiritual mysteries
therein being clouded in types and shadows: A typical Priesthood, typical
Sacrifices, typical Altar and Tabernacle, typical blood, typical Mediator,
typical Sacraments, typical Canaan, all typical. Hence in the promulgation of
this Old Covenant in Sinai, the Jews Heb. 12.18.
came unto blackness and darkness. But the new Covenant is 2. Cor. 3.7, to
the end.
bright and clear, being administered without all types and shadows, (Christ
the body being comn already) in open spiritual glory. The Mosaical 2 Cor
3.14.18.
veil is done away in Christ, -- And we all with open face beholding as in a
glass the glory of the Lord. 2. The Old Covenant was carnal and earthly in the
administration of it: They Heb. 12.18, 19.
came to the Mount, that might be touched, and to the sound of a Trumpet, and
the voice of words: And it brought them to an earthly Canaan, and an earthly
Jerusalem. But the New Covenant is dispensed spiritually bringing us to the
spiritual Canaan, Heb. 12.22.
To Mount Sion, and unto the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem;
That we may John. 4.23, 24.
worship God, the God of Spirits, in Spirit and Truth 3. The Old Covenant was
more imperfect, according to the imperfect state of the Church in those times,
(which the Apostle compares to Gal. 4.1.2, 3.
A child in his nonage and minority.) And so it was revealed more and more
clearly by degrees, as the Church grew riper and riper till Christ's coming. But
the New Covenant is perfect and full, never more to be enlarged or increased
till the end of the world, it being revealed, in Christ fulfilled, and comne in
the flesh already. 4 The Old Covenant was terrible in the manner of its
dispensation, making not only the Heb. 12.19, 20, 21.
People tremble but even Moses himself exceedingly to fear and quake. But the
New Covenant is dispensed with all inviting amiableness, and alluring
sweetness, every thing herein being sweet, pleasant, and delectable nothing at
all terrible: As appears in that admirable passage to the Heb. 12.22, to 25.
Hebrews. And if it be said; God the judge of all there mentioned is terrible.
I answer, No; God the judge of all is not terrible to them that come into
Covenant with him; for he is a Judge absolv^ng them, and only a Judge
condemning His and all their enemies; and that is most comfortable. 5. That Old
Covenant was limited and restrained to the people of the Jews only, and to
those that became Jewish Proselytes: Gentiles were all Ephesians. 1.12.
Strangers to the Covenant of Promise, But the New Covenant is unlimited,
universally extended both to Ephesians. 2.14, to 20.
Jews and Gentiles ^f all sorts. Thus the Old and New Covenant especially
differ.

III. The New Covenant gloriously assures them that embrace it, Heb. 8.10, 11,
12.
That God will write his law in their minds and heart; That he will be to them
a God, and they shall be to him a people; That they all shall know him from the
least to the greatest; And that he will be merciful to their unrighteousness,
and remember their sins and iniquities no more. This is the chief tenor and
substance of the New Covenant. Glorious Privileges! Here consider and admire
them, viz.

1. Gods Inscription of his Law, 2 Cor. 3.3.
Not in Tables of stone, as of old, but in the fleshy living Tables of his
peoples minds and hearts. That writing was without, this within. That was
broken, this shall not be broken: Hereby they shall be kept from backsliding.

2. Gods new relation to his people, and theirs to him, covenanted and
promised, He will be to them a God: not only a Portion, a Protection, a
Friend, a Redeemer, a Savior, a Comforter, a Father, an Hushand, etc. but
beyond all these, A God; and beyond God, there can be nothing. This is the
excellentest bl^ssing that can be promised; and the highest promise that can be
made. If God will be a God to his People, consequently he will be All to his
people. And they shall be to him a People: not only their thoughts, words, and
actions, his; nor only their minds, or wills, or affections, his; nor only their
sen^es, or members, or bodies, his, etc. But they, whole they, whatsoever they
are, can do, or endure for him, must be wholly his. This is the greatest duty,
and the highest obligation that can be upon any people. But this is the
comfort: God here undertakes for both sides, for both Parties to the Covenant;
for Himself, that he will be theirs; for his people, that they shall be his. So
that th^^e shall be no failing on either side.

3. Gods univers^^ (...) ^ore perfect illumination of his people, with the
knowledge of himself. They shall not be so dull of understanding as the Jews
of old, nor divine knowledge be so restrained to one sort of people; but more
generally to all sorts of people, and more completely in all degrees of
knowledge The Isa. 11.9.
Knowledge of the Lord shall fill the earth, as the waters cover the Sea.

4. Gods merciful and eternal Act of oblivion, past upon their sins and
iniquities. There shall not be, as of old under the Old Covenant, a He^. 10.1,
2, 3.
yearly and daily remembrance of their sins, by their yearly and daily
sacrifices repeated, which in effect was a re-iteration, or continuation of
their arreignment, indictment and condemnation for their sins: But an utter
blotting out of their iniquities, by the blood of Christ once offered for ever;
so that they shall never be remembered more to their condemnation.

IV. The New Covenant-Priviledges can actually be claimed by none but those
that are effectually made Partakers of the New Covenant-Grace. None can say,
That God is their God in Covenant, and he will remember their sins no more:
till they can truly say, The Lord has written his law in their hearts, and
made them know him. For, carnal unregenerate men who seek not for a saving
interest in Christ the second ^^am, according to the tenor of the New (...),
they do evidently content the^ (...) with their lapsed condition in the first
Adam, and so remain still under the forfeit, penalty, and curse of the first
Covenant of Works, broken by Adams fall.

These things are principally to be known touching the New covenant by worthy
Communicants, that they may have a true notion or apprehension of that Covenant
which is sea^ed unto them by the Lords Supper.

5. Knowledge of the Lords Supper it self.
Finally, the fifth and last point of Knowledge, especially necessary to
qualify a person for worthy communicating, is, The knowledge of the true
nature of Sacraments, and particularly of the Lords Supper it self. For, How
can that be duly managed which is not truly understood. To this end we are to
know:

1. That the Lord has been wont to deal with his Church and people by way of
Sacraments in all times and ages. As, 1. With Adam and his posterity in a sort.
For it is supposed by the learned, that when God Genesis 3.21.
clothed Adam and Eve with skins, he taught them also to sacrifice the bodies
of those beasts, with whose skins they were clothed, and this is the more
probable, because the Scripture declaring Abels Religion, makes mention only of
his Genesis 4.4.
Sacrificing the firstlings of his flock and the fat thereof. These Sacrifices
were types of Christ; yea pledges, tokens, and as it were Sacraments confirming
the first promise, Genesis 3.15.
of the seed of the woman Jesus Christ. 2. With Abram, when God stablished his
Covenant with him and his seed, he annexed Genesis 17.10, 11.
Circumcision as a Token or Sacrament of the Covenant. 3. With Israel, when God
by the hand of Moses brought them out of Egypt, destroying Egypts firstborn
that they might let Israel go, he appointed the Sacrament of the Ex. 12.1, to
14.
Passover, as a pledge of the preservation of all Isreal's firstborn from Gods
wrath. 4. When God brought them through the wilderness in an extraordinary
sort, Israel also had 1 Cor. 10 1, 23, 4.
four extraordinary Sacraments, signifying to them spiritual Mysteries in
Christ, viz. (1) Baptizing in the cloud, that both sheltred them from the heat,
and guided them in their way. (2) Baptizing in the Sea, which saved them when
the Egyptians were drowned. (3) Mannah, that spiritual meat. (4) Water out of
the Rock, that spiritual drink. These four Sacraments were extraordinary, and
continued but a while, viz. during Isreal's abode in the wilderness: The other
lasted till Christ's coming in the flesh. 5. With the people of God under the
New Testament, the Lord deals also by way of Sacraments, Mat. 28.19.20. 1
Cor. 11 23, 26.
ordaining Baptism and the Lords Supper, as standing Sacraments till the end
of the world.

But why does the Lord thus deal with his people by way of Sacraments in all
ages? Answ. This comes to pass, 1. From Gods familiar love and condescension
to his people, delighting most plainly and easily to make known spirituals unto
them. 2. From the abstrusenesse and mysteriousnesse of Christ, and the things
of Christ, which are sublime, high, heavenly, worthy of the quickest 1 Pet.
1.12.
in^pection of Angels themselves, and therefore so far above humane
^pprehension in their heavenly ^u^^re, that God represents them in earthly
resemblances. 3. From the dullness of our understandings, in conceiving aright
of the great Mysteries of Christ; therefore God ^^oops to us, ^etting them
forth in sensible and visible Elements. He descends to our Carnalnesse, that we
may a^cend to his Spiritualnesse. He helps our outward senses, that they may
help our inward graces.

II. Sacraments are part, not of Gods natural but of his instituted worship.
Gods Natural worship is that which is required in the first Commandment, and
which the light of Nature dictates to be due unto him. Instituted worship is
that which is contained in the second Commandment, which light of nat^re cannot
particularly lead us unto, but only some pos^tive divine Institution. Now
Sacraments are not of Gods Natural, but only of his Instituted worship. No
light of nature can intimate to us, that under the Old Testament God would be
worshipped with Ci^^umcision and the Passover, and under the New Testament
with Baptism and the Lords Supper had not God by express and positive
In^^itution appointed both. Whatsoever Sacraments are they are wholly by
Institution. We have no other particular ground, or foundation for them at all.
Therefore in the administration of the Lords Supper, and of every Sacrament,
both Ministers and People respectively must cleave close to the Institution.
The nearer we come up thereto, the more acceptable we are to the Lord. As 1
Cor. 11 23, etc.
Paul both in planting Sacraments at first; and reforming Sacrament-abuses
afterward, precisely followed the Lords Institution.

III. All the Sacraments that ever were instituted since Adam's fall to this
day, were Tokens, Pledges, or Seals of the Covenant of grace. As Genesis 17.11.
Romans 4 11.
Circumcision was a Token of this Covenant: a Seal of the righteousness of
faith, etc. For since the fall, God never set on foot any other Covenant, but
the Covenant of Grace. The Old and New Covenant are both the Covenant of Grace.
When therefore we come to the Lords Supper, we come to renew Covenant with God,
and to have his gracious New Testament sealed to us.

IV. Every Sacrament both ordinary and extraordinary, of Old or New Testament,
represents principally Jesus Chrst, and him as crucified. Adam's sacrifices,
types of Christ the true sacrifice. Col. 2.11.12.
Circumcision, a pledge of our heart-Circumcision through Christ's blood The 1
Cor. 5.7.
Passover, a token and type of Christ our Passover sacrificed for us. The 1
Cor. 10 1, 2, 3.
extraordinary Sacraments, Signs of Christ and his sufferings. By Romans 6.3, 4,
5.
Baptism we are said to be baptized into Christ, and into his death. And by
the Cor. 11.26.
Lords Supper, we, so often as we eat and drink it, are said to show forth the
Lords death until he come. So that Christ and his death, Christ as crucified,
is the golden thread that runs along through every Sacrament, and is the
substance and mystery of all Sacraments. When therefore we come to the Lords
Supper, we come to partake a Seal and solemn Memorial of Christ crucified, and
of all the benefits of his death.

V. Sacraments are of several sorts, viz.

1. Sacraments of the Old Testament, signifying Christ crucified to come
afterward: and these were either ordinary or extraordinary. Ordinary
Sacraments of the Old Testament were chiefly two; (1) Circumcision, the
initiating Sacrament, denoting the Col. 2.11 12.
cutting off of the corruption of the heart by Christ and his grace. (2) The
Passover, the consummating Sacrament, signifying spiritual nourishment by
Christ, and pre^ervation from Gods wrath through him. Extraordinary Sacraments
of the Old Testament were 1 Cor. ^^.1, 2, 3, 4.
four. (1) The Cloud. (2.) The Sea. (3) Mannah from Heaven. (4) Water out of
the Rock. All these were Sacraments of the Old Testament. 2. Sacraments of the
New Testament, signifying Christ crucified already come in the flesh, are two,
viz. (1) Baptism; or Mat. 2^.19. with Joh. 1.33.
washing with water in the Name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; whereby we are
solemnly admitted into Christ's mystical body visible, signifying and sealing
the souls spiritual washing from the guilt and filth of sin by the blood and
Spirit of Christ. (2) The Lords Supper, or Mat. 26.26, 27, 28.
eating bread, and drinking Wine in re^embrance of Christ's body broken, and
blood shed, according to the Institution; whereby o^r spiritual nourishment
and growth in Christ's mystical body is sealed. Baptism answers to
Circumcision, the Cloud, and Sea; The Lords Supper to the Paschal Supper,
Mannah, and Water out of the Rock. The Sacraments of the New Testament are for
number, more few; for observation, more easy; for signification, more
excellent.

VI. In all Sacraments are two parts, and a Sacramental union betwixt them. 1.
The Two Parts, are (1) The outward sign, or signs signifying, as water and
washing with it, in Baptism; Bread and Wine with the actions belonging thereto,
in the Lords Supper. (2) The inward mysteries, signified by those signs, as
the washing away of our sins by the blood and Spirit of Christ in Baptism, and
the nourishing of our souls by the benefits of Christ's death in the Lords
Supper. 2. There is a Sacramental union betwixt the Signs, and things
signified, founded in Chri^ts Institution. Whence the sign is sometimes said
to be the thing signified; As, Mat. 26.26, 28. 1 Cor. 11.25.
This is my body: This is my blood; This is the New Testament in my blood; And
the^ thing signified is called the sign* As 1 Cor. 5.7.
Christ our Passover is s^crificed. This Sacramental union consists in a
Sacramental relation, which the signs have to the things, in signifying,
sealing, and exhibiting them. Hence flows another union ^etwixt the worthy
Communicant and the Sacrament; So that he who truly partakes the sign
according to Christ's Institution, partakes also the thing signified. This is to
be well ob^erved as a special ground of comfort in communicating.

VII. Finally, The particu^ar nature of the Lords Supper may be notably
discerned in the causes of it, viz, Efficient, Material, Formal, and Final.

1. The Efficient cause, or Author of it, is 1 Cor. 11 23.
The Lord Jesus in the same night in which he was betrayed Mat. 28.18.
All power was given to him as Mediator, therefore to institute what
Ordinances he pleased for his Church. He first gave Being to the Lords Supper,
and he also can give a Blessing and virtue to it, in the right use. In that
night he instituted it, 1. To show the abrogation of the Pa^chal-Supper, and
the succession of the Lords Supper in the room thereof. 2. To imprint more
notably a living and lasting character of his death and sufferings upon this
Supper. 3. To restifie his singular care and love to his Church, in that when
he knew he was now ready to be betrayed and crucified, he would leave this
Legacy and Love-Token of his Supper to his Church, Now if Christ be the Author
of the Lords Supper, we should highly esteem it, Christianly partake it, and
walk accordingly; knowing that all abuse of the Lords Supper re^^ects and
terminates upon the Lord Christ.

2. The Material cause, or matter of it, is Outward and Inward. 1. Outward, is,
(1.) Partly the Elements. viz. Mat. 26.26, 27.
Bread and Wine, Complete Provision against hunger and thirst. Christ gives his
Church full nourishment. Bread is expressed; Wine is figuratively employed in
the Cup, because immediately after Christ said, Mat. 26.29.
Henceforth I will not drink of the fruit of the Vine, etc. (2) Partly the
Sacramental actions, which are either on the Ministers part, as 1 Cor. 11 23,
24, 25, Mat. 26.26, 27.
Taking, Blessing, and Giving Thanks, Breaking, and Giving to the Communicants;
Or on the Communicants part, as Receiving, Eating, and Drinking: 2. The Inward
matter, are the Mysteries signified by the outward: As by the Elements of Bread
and Wine; Christ's Mat. 26.26, 28.
Body and blood Christ crucified, our spiritual nourishment. By the actions,
Christ's separation and Consecration to his Mediatory office, Christ's
brokennesse and sufferings for his Elect, Christ's free Tender, and bestowing
himself for spiritual nourishment upon the true Believer; And the believers
Accepting and applying of Christ thus tendered particularly.

3. The Formal cause, or Form of the Lords Supper (understand not the outward,
but the inward Form) is that Sacramental union that is betwixt the outward and
inward matter, betwixt the signs and things signified viz. such a Sacramental
relation betwixt them, in signifying, sealing, and exhibiting, and this by
virtue of Christ's institution, that he who duly receives the signs, receives
the things signified, as was said before. As the law of the land makes such a
relation betwixt a twig and a turfe, and the lands whence they are taken, that
he who in due form of law takes li^ery and seizin of them, is also as fully
seized and possessed of the whole Lands or Manor.

4. The Final cause, or End of the Lords Supper is manifold, viz. 1. The 1 Cor.
11 24, 25, 26.
solemn Remembrance of Christ crucified, and showing forth of Christ's death to
the worlds end. 2. The 1 Cor. 11 20, 24, 25.
spiritual nourishment of our inward man, of our faith and all our graces for
strength and growth. 3. The Mat. 26.28. 1 Cor. 11.25.
Confirmation and individual Application of the New Testament, and all the
Promi^es, Comforts, Benefits, and Privileges thereof to us. 4. The Sealing up
unto our he^rts the Mat 26.28.
pardon of our sins in Christ's blood. 5. The Ratification and Augmentation of
our Cor. 10.16.
Communion with Christ crucified, in all the benefits of his death. 6. Finally,
the public Testification of our true love to, and 1 Cor 10 ^7.
Communion with the Saints, as Christ's members, and fellow members with us in
him. For these ends especially was the Lords Supper instituted by Christ, and
ought to be celebrated by us.

Hitherto of those Points of knowledge, principally necessary to qualify a man
for worthy communicating, whereupon we are to examine our selves. Next, of the
Properties of true sanctified knowledge, and of our self-Examination therein.

II. The Properties of true sanctified knowledge are the second way, whereby we
may examine and try our Knowledge. In the particular points of Knowledge
forementioned, an Hypocrite may possibly go as far as a true Believer: but in
these following Properties of sanctified Knowledge, the true Believer goes
beyond an Hypocrite.

What are the Properties of sound sanctified Knowledge? Answ. Sanctified
Knowledge is, 1. Experimental. 2. Heart-humbling. 3. Communicative, for others
edification. 4. Growing. 5, Affectionate. 6. Spiritualized. 7. Pure. 8.
Obedientiall.

1. An Experimental Knowledge, whereby a Christian has a particulal taste,
savor, and relish of the divine things which he knows. (...). Phil. 1.9.
And this I pray, that your love may abound yet more and more, in Knowledge,
and in all judgment. The Greek word rendered judgment, properly signifies
sense. Not a corporal, but a spiritual ^ense, whereby we Heb. 5.14.
have a spiritual and experimental sensiblenesse, feeling, and taste of the
things of God in our own spirits. This sense differs from Knowledge, thinks
Zanch. Com. in loc.
Zanchy, as the Knowledge of the sense differs from that of the understanding.
This, is of generals and universals learned out of Scripture: that of
particulars, learned by experience, Or as a Physicians theoretick skill out of
his Books, from his experimental skill upon his Patients. Or as a Scholars
knowledge of far countries, obtained by Maps and Books, differs from a
Travelers knowledge of them, who has seen them with his own eyes. Such is the
sound knowledge of Christians; it has a sweet experimental sense, relish,
taste with it. Psalm. 34, 8
O taste and see that the Lord is good. And in the New Testament, 1 Pet, 2.3.
If so be that ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious. -- Heb. 5.14.
By reason of use have their senses exercised to discern both good and evil. A
child of God knows God, Christ, the New Covenant, Sacrament, Pardon of sin,
etc. not remotely, speculatively, or generally, according to Scripture
Revelation: but most nearly, experimentally, and particularly, according to his
own spiritual sense and feeling. He knows the woefulness of a sinful state, the
happiness of a sanctified condition, the Paradise of Communion with God, the
Agonies of a troubled conscience, what a Father of mercies God is, what a sweet
All-sufficient Savior Jesus Christ is, what a reviving Comforter the Holy
Ghost is, how sweet Gods pardons are, how sure his Covenant, how precious his
promises, etc. And all this he knows by his own personal and particular proof
of these mysteries; whereupon his knowledge is more distinct, clear,
affectionate, comfortable, and infallible. Whereas unsound knowledge is but
speculative, remote, general, confused consisting in certain empty,
comfortless, swimming not^ons, arising from natural or artificial abilities,
not from spiritual experience.

2. An Heart-humbling, and soul-abasing Knowledge. It makes a Christian vile
and despicable in his own eyes. The more he knows of God and divine Mysteries,
the more humble, self-empty, self-denying, and self-abhorring he becomes. As in
Job; Job 42.5, 6.
I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye sees thee.
Wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes. As with Paul, who
never came to have meaner thoughts of himself, then after his greatest
acquaintance with God, abundance of Revelations, and his Rapture into the third
Heavens, Romans 7.18, 24.
I know that in me, that is, in my flesh dwells no good thing -- O wretched
man that I am! -- Gal. 2.20.
I live, yet not I, but Christ in me. -- Phil. 337.8.
But what things were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ, yea
doubtless and I count all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge
of Christ Jesus our Lord: for whom I have suffered the loss of all things; and
do count them but dung, that I may win Christ. -- He counts himself, 1 Cor.
15.9.
The least of the Apostles, and not worthy to be called an Apostle. -- Ephesians. 3.8.
Less then the least of all Saints. And if this be not yet low enough, he
calls himself, 1 Timothy 1.13.15
The chief of sinners. O blessed Paul, how has thy true knowledge in
spirituals abased thee: whereas thy Pharisaical knowledge, which was far
inferior, did exalt thee! And no wonder sanctified knowl^^^e humbles the soul;
for, thus the more (...) knows, the more he discerns Gods tran^cendent
excellencies and perfections, Christ's unsearchable wisdom, the Non solum in
alius innumerabilibus reb^^ mu^^^ me latenet sed etiamin ipses sanctis
Scripturis multo plura^ nescio, qu^m scio. Aug.
Scriptures incomparable exactness, and his own ignorance, unworthiness,
sinfulness, nothingnesse: As the light of the Moon borrowed from the Sun,
serves to render her own spots far more remarkable. And all this tends to
dis-robe a Christian of self-conceit.

Whereas carnal unsanctified knowledge swells a man with pride, self-conceit,
self-admiration, contempt of others, etc. 1 Cor. 8.1 (...)
Knowledge puff^th up. The Greek word is a metaphor, from bellows or bladders,
puffed up with w^nde; intimating what a windy swelling Tympany of pride and
vainglory, arises from un-sanctified knowledge; ye^ such knowledge is indeed
no knowledge, in Gods account. 1 Cor. 8.2.
If any man think that he knows any thing, he knows nothing yet as he ought
to know.

3. A Communicative knowledge in order to others edification. A sanctified
knowledge is not like a candle under a bushel, or shut up in a dark-Lanthorn,
that enlightens nothing but the Lanthorn it self: but as a Candle on a
Candlestick, that gives light to all in the room. A man that has it loves to
disperse it, for the spiritual good of wife, children, friends, servants, all
associates, as there is occasion, by way of counsel, reproof, exhortation,
comfort, etc. Pro. 15.7. (...) a (...) ventilavit, dispers^^.
The lips of the wise disperse knowledge: but the heart of the foolish does not
so. [ Disperse;] the Hebrew word is a Metaphor from scattering abroad with a
Fan, or from Seedsmen's, scattering abroad of their seed in the furrows of the
field. The godly wise are such Seedsmen, they sow and scatter their good
counsel to others; would have all acquainted with Gods ways of salvation, with
themselves. Thus David promises when God shall give him experimental knowledge
of his salvation, and uphold him with his free Spirit; Psalm. 51.12, 13.
Then will I teach transgressors thy ways, and sinners shall be converted unto
thee.

But the foolish, the ungodly and carnal ones imprison their knowledge within
their own breasts, lock up this Jewel. Or if they communicate their knowledge,
it is, to corrupt and seduce others; or to withstand and divert edifying
counsel; or vain-gloriously to procure to themselves popular applause and
admiration, or hypocritically to advance some unworthy ends, rather then the
spiritual benefit of Christ's body and members.

4. A Phil. 1.9. Col. 1.10. 2 Pet. 3.18
growing and a prospering knowledge. The more true gracious knowledge a man
has, the more he discovers his own ignorance, and discerns the excellency of
spiritual mysteries to be known, and this provokes him to press on in
knowledge to perfection. A small taste is so sweet; he longs for a full
draught. David knew much, and yet prays; Psalm. 119 18. Verse. 33. Verse. 34.
Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy law; --
Teach me, O LORD, the way of thy Statutes; -- Give me understanding, and I
shall keep thy law; yea the godly, Pro. 2.2, 3, 4.
cry after knowledge, and lift up their voice for understanding, seek her as
silver, and search for her as for hid treasures. They would Phil. 1.9.10
abound yet more and more in knowledge, and in all judgment, or sense: that
they may approve things that are excellent.

But carnal ones are not for the increase of this knowledge, yea they content
themselves in darkness, are willingly ignorant of spiritual mysteries; Job
21.14.
They say unto God, Depart from us: for we desire not the knowledge of thy
ways.

5. An affectionate, or heart-affecting Knowledge. Sound ^anctified knowledge
breeds and kindles in the heart wonderful love, desire, joy, delight, and dear
affections toward God, Christ, Covenant, Promises, Communion with God, and
other spirituals known. 1 John 4.7, 8.
Beloved, let us love one another; for love is of God, and every one that
loves is born of God, and knows God. He that loves not, knows not God,
for God is love. This the Apostle intimates in his prayer for the Philippians:
Phil. 1.9.
And this I pray, that your love may abound yet more and more in all knowledge
and sense. The more knowledge we have of spirituals, the more we love them;
because the more we know them, the more we know their excellency and
amiablenesse. But the more we know temporals, the more we contemn them, because
the more we know them, the more we know their emptiness and despicablenesse.
Who can know Christ aright in his person, offices, excellencies, sufferings,
love, pardons, power, truth, comforts, graces, privileges* etc. which indeed
pass knowledge, and not to be enamoured with him? When the Churth had
described Christ to the daughters of Jerusalem, who were before ignorant of his
excellencies; how are their affections stirred after him! and they enquire,
Cant. 6.1.
Whether is thy beloved gone? O thou fairest among women, whither is thy
beloved turned aside? that we may seek him with thee. After Paul came once
truly to know Christ, he Phil. 3.8
counts all things loss and dung for the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus
Christ his Lord. And he 1 Cor. 2.2
determined to know nothing among his Corinthians, but Jesus Christ and him
crucified. Looking breeds liking. Knowledge is the inlet to love. We so far
love as we know: what we know not, we love not. This holds especially true in
spirituals, knowledge of them sweetly scrues and raps up the heart unto them,
yea transports it with surpassing delight and contentment in them. Does thy
knowledge thus affect thine heart?

6. A spiritualized knowledge. True sanctified knowledge is a spark of
heavenly, not of earthly light. It Is elevated above the pitch of nature, flesh
and blood; and is of a divine spiritual temper. Looks upon all things both in
this, and the world to come, especially spirituals, not carnally, but
spiritually. Does not judge and value persons or things, according to outward
carnal respects, as beauty, wealth, honor, wit, learning, country, etc. which
commend not to God, but according to inward, spiritual respects of grace,
holiness, etc. yea knows not Christ in carnal respects; 2 Cor. 5.16.
Henceforth know we no man after the flesh: yea though we have known Christ
after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no more. Not, as wicked
Servetus denied Christ to have true flesh: But, we know not Christ according to
outward carnal respects and relations, as they did who conversed with him when
once on earth; but according to his spiritual and heavenly state now in Heaven.
This knowledge 1 Cor. 2.14.
spiritually discerns spirituals: and spirituallizeth carnals. Yea it dives and
pierces into the kernel, pith, marrow, mystery of the things of God. Mat.
13.11.
To you its given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom. -- 1 Cor. 2.7.
We speak the wisdom of God in a mystery. There Is a secret mystery in Christ,
Covenant, Justification, Adoption, Godliness, etc. which no eye but a piersing
spiritual eye can discern.

Contrariwise unsound knowledge is carnal, earthly, natural, etc. as the person
knowing is: and it apprehends all things, even those that are most spiritual,
carnally; yea, and it looks upon the counsels and ways of God as 2 Cor. 2.14.
and 2 Cor. 4.3.
foolishness, riddles, paradoxes. The Gospel is sealed up and hid from them
that are lost.

7. A pure knowledge. Sound sanctified knowledge, is a sin-purging knowledge.
It will not suffer a man habitually to wallow in the puddle of any known sin:
but puts a man upon denying, mortifying, and abhorring of all filthiness. Jam.
3.17
The wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable, etc. And the
Apostle John is very positive; 1 John 3.6
Whosoever sins, viz. habitually, and as carnal men sin) has not seen him,
neither known him. And no wonder; for true knowledge discovers the odious
sinfulness of sin, the severe justice of God against it, the manifold mischief
of it, etc. and so sets the soul against it.

But men of mere carnal knowledge continue in their sin notwithstanding that
knowledge. Romans 1.32.
Who knowing the judgment of God, (that they who commit such things are worthy
of death) not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them.

8. Finally, A true sanctified Knowledge is obediential, practical, and
fruitful in all good works. James says, Jam. 3.17.
The wisdom that is from above, -- is full of mercy and good works. John makes
obedience a sure character of true knowledge indeed. 1 John 2.3, 4.
Hereby we do know that we know him, if we keep his Commandments. He that
says I know him, and keepth not his Commandments, is a liar, and the truth is
not in him. -- Again, 1 John 4.6
We are of God, he that knows God, hears us: he that is not of God, hears
not us. Christ says, Joh. 10.4
The sheep follow the good Shepherd, for they know his voice. And he intimates
elsewhere, that it is only the practical knowledge that renders happy. Joh.
13.17.
If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them. And David commends to us
the excellency of his knowledge, by the uprightness of his obedience; Psalm.
119 98.99, 100
Thou through thy Commandments have made me wiser then mine enemies: for they
are ever with me, I have more understanding then all my teachers: for thy
testimonies are my meditation. I understand more then the Ancie^ts: because I
keep thy Precepts. The doing Christian, is the knowing Christian. He knows
best, that obeys best. He that obeyes not, knows nothing as he ought to know,
though he seem to know never so much. Yea, 1 John 2.3, 4.
He is a liar that says he knows God, and yet is not obedient to him.

True knowledge cannot choose but make obedient. For, 1. Knowledge of God and
his ways, fills with love to them. And Joh. 14.14. 2 Cor. 5.14 1 John 5.3.
love sweetly compells to obedience. 2. True knowledge discovers the excellency
of the spiritual path wherein we are to walk, and that moves to obedience. 3.
True knowledge considers the excellency of Gods commands, being Romans 7.12.
Psalm. 19.7, etc. Ps. 119 throughout.
holy, just, and good, and this makes us delight in them. 4. True knowledge
discerns, that Ps. 19.11.
in keeping Gods statutes, there shall be great reward: and this quickens to
the observance of them. Consider now, is thy knowledge resolved into obedience?
that is right knowledge indeed. A disobedient non-practising knowledge, is no
knowledge at all.

Hitherto of the trial of knowledge, 1. By the particular Points of it. 2. By
the Properties of it. Such knowledge comfortably fits for worthy communicating.

II. FAITH. This the next grace fitting for worthy communicating, whereof every
Communicant is to examine himself. Touching faith, Consider* 1. What faith this
is. 2. How necessary this faith is to worthy communicating. 3. How this faith
may be tried and examined.

1. What faith this is, about which we are to examine our selves before
communicating? Answ. This may be resolved, Negatively and Affirmatively.

Negatively, 1. It is not a mere Historical faith, whereby a man barely
assents to the truth of Scripture-History, that every thing in Scripture is
true. Such a faith Acts 26.27.
Agrippa had: the Jam. 2.19
Devils have. 2. It is not a Faith of Miracles, or Miracle-working faith,
whereby a man believes without doubting the particular concurrence of God with
him, to bring to pass some extraordinary effect, beyond the ordinary power and
activity of natural causes. Judas and other Reprobates may have such Mat. 7.22,
23.
faith, and yet be rejected of Christ at last, as Workers of Iniquity. 3. It is
not an imaginary faith, whereby a man may imagine that Christ is his, his state
good, etc. without any due Scripture-ground for it, himself meanwhile
continuing in his mere carnal state, bringing forth no fruits of faith. This
James calls a Jam. 2.14*17, 20, 26.
d^ad faith, which cannot save a man. And indeed this is plain down right
Presumption. 4. Finally, it is not a temporary faith, which goes beyond all the
rest, whereby a formal Hypocrite Luke 8.13. with Mat. 13.20, 21. Mar. 16.17
Believes for a time. For this faith at last vanishes like a Comet, and he
that has it, falls away when temptation, trouble, and persecution arises
because of the Gospel. Therefore unless a man have a faith beyond all these, he
cannot be fit for worthy communicating.

Affirmatively, It is only the true Jam. 2.14 Mar. 16.16
saving faith in Christ, the true Romans 5.1
justifying faith, that will sufficiently fit and prepare a man for the Lords
Supper, which may be thus described, what it is;

True saving faith is a grace of the regenerating Spirit, whereby a man knowing
and assenting to the truth of Gods Record touching Christ, accepts him upon his
own terms for salvation.

In this description of faith consider, the general nature, and the special
difference of it.

The General Nature of it, wherein it agrees with all true saving grace, is
expressed in the^e words; True saving faith is a grace of the regenerating
Spirit. See this proved. Faith is Gods gift; Ephesians. 2.8.
By grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the
gift of God. A grace of the Spirit; Gal. 5.22
The fruit of the spirit is love, -- goodness, faith. And also a grace of the
Regenerating Spirit; -- Joh. 1.12, 13.
Them that believe on his Name, which were born, not of blood, nor of the w^ll
of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. So that believers are
regenerate persons, and believing originally flows from Regeneration, and Joh.
3.5.
Regeneration is the work of the Spirit.

The special difference, whereby Faith is distinguished from all other saving
graces, is in these words; whereby a man knowing and assenting to the truth of
Gods record touching Christ, accepts him upon his own terms for salvation.
Herein are expressed the three graduall acts of faith, viz. Knowledge, Assent,
and Application. 1. Knowledge, which is the first and fundamental act of faith.
We must know Gods Record before we can assent to it, we must assent before we
can apply. Faith is sometimes therefore expressed by knowledge, Isa. 53.11
By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many; that is, by faith
in Christ, whereby we know him: it is by faith that we are justified. Joh. 17.3
This is life eternal, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom
thou have sent. 2. Assent to the truth of Gods Record touching Christ. This Act
is the same with Historical faith, 1 John 5.10, 11.
He that believes not God, has made him a liar, because he believes not the
Record that God gave of his Son. And this is the Record, that God has given to
us eternal life, and this life is in his Son. The whole Scripture is Gods book
of Record touching Christ, that he will save sinners by him, that will believe
in him. 3. Application of Christ, when after knowledge and Assent a man accepts
Christ upon his own terms for salvation. The applying Act, is accepting or
receiving of Christ. To receive Christ is to believe: Joh. 1.12
To as many as received him, gave he power to become the Sons of God, to them
that believe on his name. The manner of this applying and accepting Christ is
upon his own terms, viz. Self-denial, bearing the Cross, and following
Christ, Luke 9.23.
If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross
daily, and follow me. The end of this accepting Christ, is for salvation by
him. -- Heb. 10.39.
That believe to the saving of the soul, Acts 16.31.
Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved,

This now is that true saving faith, fitting them that have it for worthy
receiving of the Lords Supper.

2. How needful this true faith is to worthy communicating. This saving faith
is necessary before communicating, 1. For due qualifying of our persons and
actions. 2. For discerning Christ's body, and other Sacramental mysteries. 3.
For applying Sacramental mysteries discerned. 4. For enabling duly to walk
afterward. And doubtless no one grace is more absolutely necessary in all
these respects for the Lords Supper then this Faith is, which is as a Queen
among the graces.

1. For due qualifying of our Persons and Actions. Heb. 11.6
Without faith it is impossible to please God. Without faith, we cannot please
him in our persons, nor in our actions. Faith is the Gal. 2.20
soul and life of our souls and duties: the salt that seasons all our spiritual
sacrifices.

2. For discerning Christ's body, and other Sacramental mysteries in the Lords
Supper: 1 Cor. 11.2^.
Not to discern, judge, distinguish, and apprehend aright of Christ's body,
dashes upon that fearful Rock, of eating and drinking damnation to our selves.
And a Christians principal discerning faculty in this business is his faith,
This faith is the Eagles eye, whereby a man pierces through the Clouds and
shadows of the outward Elements, to those heavenly Mysteries in and beyond
them, Christ's body and blood. Faith is that acute spiritual sense, whereby a
Communicant can taste and relish Christ crucified in the Lords Supper.

Faith is tha spiritual Prospective, by which the soul can behold Christ
sweating drops of clotted blood in the Garden, suffering many cruel things in
the Highpriests Palace, and dying a painful, shameful, and cursed death,
betwixt two thieves upon Mount Calvary. And further, faith can read and discern
many strange Mysteries in Christ crucified, of high concernment to Christians,
both in the Lords Supper, and in his whole life, viz. The efficacy, sweetness,
victories, triumphs, satisfactions, expiations, purchases, privileges, etc. of
his Cross for our sakes. Our liberty, in his imprisonment: Our acquital in his
accusation: Our peace in his perplexity: Isa. 53.5
Our healing in his stripes and wounds: Our honor, in his Reproach: Our
Exaltation, in his Humiliation: Our Comfort, in his Cross: Our blessing in his
Curse: Our Mannah and Honey, in his Vinegar and Gall: Our strength in his
weakness: Our purity, pardon, and peace, in his blood: Our justification, in
his condemnation: Our life, in his death: and in his Crown of thorns, our Crown
of glory. Faith can discover these mysteries, when all carnal reason, wit, and
policy cannot discern them.

3. For applying sacramental mysteries discerned. As faith is the spiritual
eye, whereby we discern Christ crucified, and the mysteries of his death in the
Lords Supper: so faith is the spiritual hand, whereby we 1 John 1.12. with 1
Cor. 11.24, 25.
take Christ tendered in the Elements: The spiritual mouth and stomach,
whereby we eat and digest Christ received. Take ye and eat, take ye and drink.
What must we take, eat and drink in this Ordinance? Answ. Not only bread and
wine: these, the least matters. But also Christ's body and blood, and all the
benefits thereof. So that we must here take, 1 Cor. 11.26.
A lively memorial of Christ's death, 1 Cor. 11.20.
A rich banquet for our inward man; Mat. 26.
A sealed pardon of our sins; 1 Cor. 10.16.
A blessed bond of our communion with Christ crucified; ^ Cor. ^1.25.
A sensible ratification of the New Testament, with all its promises and
privileges. These things we must take, eat and drink in the Lords Supper; and
wherewith shall they possibly be thus taken and applied, but by true saving
Faith alone?

4. Finally, faith is necessary for enabling us duly to walk after
communicating. This Sacrament affords 1 Cor. 11.20.
heavenly nourishment: Con^equently after it we should walk as nourished,
strengthened, comforted, enlivened, etc. Now it is faith especially that acts,
moves, rule^+, does all in a Christian from Christ assisting. Faith in Christ,
being the very Gal. 2.20 Romans 1.^^.
L^fe of a Christian. Thus of the necessity of faith before communicating.

^. How this saving faith, thus necessary, may be typed and examined before we
come to the Lords Supper. This is the last branch to be considered touching
Faith. We may try and examine whether we have true saving faith or no, Partly
by the former description of true saving faith. See if thou have such a faith.
Partly by these ensuing properties and qualities of faith.

1. True saving faith notably softens, supples, and melts the heart. It thawes
and dissolves the most stony, hard, adamantine spirit into streams and floods
of penitential sorrow. Zach. 12.10, etc.
I w^ll pour upon the house of David, -- the spirit of grace and of
supplications; and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, [there's
faith] and they shall mourn for him as one mourns for his only son; and
shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his
firstborn. In that day shall there be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the
mourning of Hadadrimmon, in the valley of Megiddon, etc. The Spirit of grace
shall make men look upon Christ by faith, as Israel looked upon the type of
Christ, the brazen Serpent in the wilderness: and looking shall melt them, make
them mourn. How mourn? Mourn with a witness for their sins, whereby they
pierced Christ; They shall mourn; they shall be in bitterness; there shall be a
great mourning; As for an only Son; As for a firstborn; as for that peerless
King Josiah, in Hadadrimmon. Emphaticall expressions!

Naturally man's heart is closed up as a compacted Rock of Flint or Marble:
Faith comes as another Moses, smites this Rock, and brings forth Rivers of
waters. Faith brings the soul to Christ crucified, sets him, as it were with
Mary, under his Cross in Golthotha: makes him view the transcendent anguish,
agonies, bitterness and torments of his sufferings, and all this for our sins;
his, thy, my sins in particular. Isa. 53.5.6.
For he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities,
etc. -- The Lord has made to meet on him the iniquities of us all. -- 2 Cor.
5.21.
He was made sin for us who knew no sin. Oh how this strikes to the believers
heart! How this makes him sigh with Christ, lament with him, smart with him,
bleed with him, cry out with him, and as it were die with him! nothing melts
the heart so kindly, as faith looking on Christ pierced for our sins
particularly. Here faith reads the intolerable sinfulness of sin, that could
not be expiated but at so dear a rate. Here in Christ's sufferings, faith reads
the sinners doom: If this befell the surety, what was due to the principal? If
sin imputed be so plagued, what might have been expected for sin inherent? If
this be done to the green tree, what would have be fallen the dry? Here faith
reads the boundless Ocean of Gods matchless love in Christ: What? such a God,
give sitch a Jewel as his only Son, to such a death, and that for such
worthless, loveless, hopeless, godless sinners? Joh. 15.13.
Greater love then this has no man. -- Oh Ephesians. 3.17, 18.
the breadth, and length, and depth, and height of Christ's love passing
knowledge! Oh how do these and like considerations of faith pierce the heart,
break the spirit, imprint contrition, and overcome the soul!

2. True saving faith having pierced the heart, purifies the heart: Act. 15.9.
Purifying their hearts by faith. Faith cleanses not only the outward, but the
inward man; not only the actions, but the fountain of those actions, the heart
and affections; washes not only the outside, but the inside of the cup and
platter; makes a man forbear not only outward gross acts of sin: but inward
imaginations, and impure inclinations to sin. A true believer as truly makes
conscience of, and laments for the vileness of his heart and thoughts in the
sight of God, as the enormity of his life and actions in the sight of men.

But how does faith cleanse and purify the heart? Answ. 1. By Augmentation
from the word against sin, which discerns the odiousness and danger of sin. How
shall I do this wickedness which God so forbids and abhors? etc. In this
respect the Word has a sanctifying efficacy. Joh. 17.17.
Sanctify them through thy truth: thy word is truth. 2. By application of
Christ's blood and death. Christ's blood is that Zech. 13.1.
Fountain opened for sin, and for uncleanness to wash in. And faith is that
hand which puts us into this Fountain, applies Christ's death, and makes us
Phil. 3.9.10.
conformable thereunto. That as Christ died for sin; so we die to sin. 3. By
inward efficacy and operation. Faith is not only an Instrument of
Justification, but an eminent Gal. 5.22.
part of Sanctification: and so does of its own nature purge out sin, as wine
works out the Dregs, Honey, the Dross; or as fire purifieth unwholesome air.

Show now thy faith by thy purity. A faithful soul cannot have a foul heart.
As that soul that by faith looks upon Christ pierced for his sins, cannot choose
but be wounded and pierced with Christ: so that soul that is pierced for
piercing Christ by sin, cannot but abandon and abhor all those sins for which
Christ was pierced. Faith having endeared the heart to Christ, embitters the
heart against sin. Sin being the Judas that betrayed Christ, the Pilate that
condemned him, the Crown of Thorns, nails, and spear that pierced him.

3. True saving faith makes a man sincerely obedient, and fruitful in good
works. This is a duty charged upon the faithful; Tit. 3.8.
This is a faithful saying, and these things I will that thou affirm
constantly, that they which have believed in God, might be careful to maintain
good works. This is an intrinsecal property of faith, Gal. 5.6.
To work by love: and Romans 13 8, 9, 10.
Love is the fulfilling of the Law, therefore the nursing-Mother of all good
works: And that faith that is Jam. 2, 17.20.26.
without works is dead, as a body without a soul. A workless faith is a
worthless faith. And this the faithful in all ages have practiced: the alacrity
of their obedience, has born witness to the integrity of their faith; as in
that Heb. 11. throughout.
cloud of witnesses. Try now thy faith by thy gracious works and sincere
obedience.

But how shall I discover the truth of my faith by mine obedience? Answ. Make
trial in these particulars. 1. Does faith make thee so obedient to the Word of
God, that it makes thee faithfully to cleave to the sincere and powerful
Ministry of it, though mocked, despised, opposed by the wicked multitude? --
Acts 17.32, 34.
Some mocked, -- howbeit certain men clave unto him and believed. 2. Does faith
make thee set upon the strangest and hardest tasks, when imposed by God? As
Noah upon building of his Ark, which he was one hundred and twenty years in
building. Heb. 11.7.
By faith Noah being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with fear
prepared an Ark. 3. Does faith incline and bow thine heart so unto obedience,
as to make thee deny thine earthly friends, outward privileges, and carnal
affections, rather then foregoe thine obedience? Heb. 11.8, 9, 17.
Abraham through faith so obeyed God, as to leave his own Country and follow
God, not knowing whether he went, yea as to offer up his Isaac, his only
begotten Son. 4. Does faith make thee perform all thine obedience to God
sweetly, cheerfully, lovingly; loving God, his commands and his obedience? Gal.
5.6.
Faith works by love. Faith puts upon all duties, and services to God in
love, without whimpering or murmuring.

4. True saving Faith wonderfully loosens and unglues the heart of a Christian
from the world and all earthly felicities. Heb. 11.9.
By Faith Abraham, Isaac and Jacob sojourned in the Land of Promise, as in a
strange Country, dwelling in tents. It had been much, patiently to sojourn in
a strange Land: but to sojourn in the Land of Promise, as in a strange
Country, was excellent. They had not fixed Houses, but moving Tents. They were
not dwellers, but sojourners in their own inheritance: because in and beyond
Canaan. Faith eyed and expected Heaven. By Faith also Heb. 11.24, 25, 26.
Moses, though a great Courtier in Egypt, and the supposed son of King
Pharaoh's Daughter, yet preferred suffering affliction with Gods people beyond
enjoying the pleasures of sin for a season. And esteemed the reproach of Christ
greater ^iches then the treasures in Egypt. How did Moses esteem Christ's
riches: that so esteemed Christ's reproaches? And no wonder that Faith thus
disobligeth the heart from the World. For Faith beholds in Christ the Covenant
and promises, Treasures beyond ten thousand Worlds, Redemption, Righteousness,
Adoption, Holiness, Communion with God, Cooperation of all things for good;
yea in sum, Grace and Glory: and upon view thereof, how easily does she
slight and despise honors, riches, pleasures, gold, silver, houses, lands, and
all such low, muddy, perishable, unsatisfying things! How self-denyingly does
she desire them, use them, and part with them when there is occasion? Does thy
faith thus make thine heart sit loose from the world?

5. True saving faith is a quickening, enlivening Grace: yea, the very life of
a Christian. Romans 1.17.
The just shall live by his faith, -- And Paul says, Gal. 2.20
The life that I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God!
As the body lives by the Soul; So the Soul lives by Faith; Faith by the Promise
and by Christ the marrow and kernel of the Promise. But of this life of Faith
elsewhere. Do thou live by Faith?

6. True Faith is ^^tended with Sense of its own infirmity, with a Spirit of
Prayer, and with Divine Peace. 1. With a true Sense of its own infirmity. This
made the man in the Gospel say; Mark 9.24.
I believe, Lord, help min^ unbelief. And the Apostles say; Luke 17.^.
Lord* increase our faith. Its a sign of life to be sensible of weaknesses: the
dead body feels no infirmity. Art thou sensible of thy doubts, etc. 2. With a
Spirit of Prayer. Believing in God, puts upon praying to God. Psalm. 116.10.
I believed therefore have I spoken. Contrariwise, No Faith; no Prayer. Romans
10.14.
How shall they call on him, in whom they have not believed? Can thou Romans
8.26.27.
pray with groans that cannot be uttered? this argues true Faith. 3. With a
Divine Peace: Faith justifies us, Justification pacifies us. Romans 5.1.
Being justified by faith, we have peace with Go^. But Isa. 48.22.
there is no Peace, says the LORD, to the wicked.

7. True saving Faith is mightily puissant and victorious. It fetches strength
from Christ, and conquers all a believers spiritual enemies 1. Faith conquers
the world. The world fights against us with the Smiles of Prosperity, and with
the Frowns of Adversity. Faith overcomes both. 1 John 5.4.
This is the victory that overcomes the world, even our Faith. 2. Faith
conquers the flesh. For, Act. 15.9
Faith purifies the Heart. -- 1 John 3.2, 3.
Every one that has this hope in himself, purifieth ^^m self even as he is
pure. Now Faith and Hope are Twin-graces, and act alike. 3. Faith overcomes the
Devil. We are commanded to 1 Pet. 5.9
resist the Devil, steadfast in the Faith. And for our encouragement herein, we
have this Promise; Jam. 4.7
Resist the Devil, and he will flee from you. Yea Ephesians. 6.16. (...)
Faith is the Christians Buck^er and Shield [ A Shield like a door that will
shelter him from top to toe,] whereby he quenches all the fiery darts of the
Devil. Satan's sudden temptations are his fiery Darts: Faith quenches them all
in Christ's blood, which is the Christians Apology against all temptations and
accusations whatsoever.

8. True saving Faith upholds the believers spirit from sinking and fainting
under heaviest pressures and extremities of trouble. The Lord propounds this to
the Jews as a support against the Babylonish 70. years Captivity, Hab. 2.4.
That the just should live by his faith; and this was to uphold them under all.
Job was in a deep Sea of calamities, and yet in midst of all, as it were li^ts
up his head above the waves, with this triumphant expression; Job 13.15, 16.
Though he Slay me, yet will I trust in him. -- He also shall be my Salvation.
And again, after a doleful recapitulation of his miseries, Job 19.25, 26, 27.
I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon
the earth. And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh
shall I see God, whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold, and
not another, though my reins be consumed within me. Yea Faith is of such
masculine strength, that it makes believers even Romans 5.1, 2, 3.
Glory in Tribulation: Yea enables them to endure Heb. 11.35.
tortures, not accepting of deliverance. We read of Martyrs, so far upheld by
Faith, as to smile at the Prison-doors, sing in chains, kiss the stake,
embrace the faggots, and triumphantly clap their hands in flames, as having
gotten the victory.

What support and stay now has thy faith yielded thee in thy plunges and
extremities? Can thou Psalm. 8.17
wait upon God though he hide his face from thee? Can thou say with Paul? 2
Cor. 4.8, 9.
Troubled on every side, but not distressed: Perplexed, but not in despair.

9. Finally, True saving Faith is daily growing, and constantly persevering.
Faith lives; but because its life is imperfect, it still 2 Cor. 10.15.
grows and increases. It is said that Romans 1.17.
the Righteousness of God is revealed in the Gospel, from Faith to Faith. That
is, as Faith grows more and more capacious and quick-sighted, so Gods
righteousness is more and more discovered to it. The Apostle commends his
Thessalonians, and thanks God for this; That, their 2 These. 1, 3.
Faith grows exceedingly. And faith so grows, as that it perseveres. It Is
fails not. It Heb. 10.39.
draws not back to perdition, Luke 22.32.
but believes to the saving of the soul. It makes Rev. 2.10
faithful to the death, and so the believer receives the crown of life. If thy
faith grow and persevere, that is true Faith indeed. False Faith is like the
picture of a man on a wall that grows not: and like a blazing-star, it Luke
^.13.
continues but for a time.

III. REPENTANCE is another Grace that fits us for worthy communicating.
Examine thy self therefore, whether thou have true Repentance or no, before
thou communicatest. To this end consider, 1. The Necessity of it. 2. The Nature
of it. 3. The Notes of it.

1. The Necessity of Repentance to fit for worthy communicating, appears diverse
ways.

For 1. No duty can be performed acceptably to God by impenitent sinners. Tit.
1.15
Unto them that are defiled and unbelieving, is nothing pure: but even their
mind and conscience is defiled. Hence the Lord so Isa. 1.11. to 29. See also
Isa. 66.3. Psalm. 66.18.
abhorred all the Jews Religious performances, because their hands were full
of blood. But withal added, Wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of your
doings, cease to do evil, learn to do well: (here is Repentance,) Come and let
us reason together, though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be white as
snow, etc. here is Acceptance. Upon this consideration, David says, Psalm. 26.6
I will wash mine hands in innocence, so will I compass thine Altar, O LORD.

2. Purging of Exodus 12.
leaven out of their Houses, and cleansing themselves from all Numb. 9.6. and
Ez^. 6.21.
Ceremonial defilements, was a necessary Preparative of the Jews under the Law
before they did eat the Passover: So proportionably the purging of the old
leaven of sin out of our hearts by Repentance is as necessary a Preparative of
Christians under the Gospel before they eat the Lords Supper. 1 Cor. 5.7, 8.
Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us. Therefore let us keep the Feast,
not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and wickedness: but
with the unleavened bread of Sincerity and Truth. All this time of the Gospel,
is as a continued Feast and Christian Passover: and this whole time is to be
managed holily and sincerely; much more the duties of Religion. And some
observe, that the Exodus 12.8. Ainsw. in Ex. 12.8
sour herbs, wherewith the Passover was to be eaten under the Law, did not
only point out the bitterness of Christ's suffering our true Passover, but
also the bitterness of our sorrow, mortification and repentance for our sins
the cause of Christ's sufferings.

3. When we come to the Lords Supper, which is the token of the 1 Cor. 11 25.
New Covenant, or New Testament, we come to renew Covenant with God in Jesus
Christ, and to set to our Seal. Therefore it is convenient and necessary we
renew our Repentance for all our unfaithfulnesses and failings against our
Covenant with God from time to time. Thus of the necessity of Repentance before
Communicating.

2. The nature of Repentance may be set forth in this brief Description of it.
Repentance is a grace of God, whereby a sinner after true sense of sin, and
godly sorrow for sin, is changed and converted in heart and life from sin to
God.

In this description note, I. The general nature of Repentance, wherein it
agrees with all saving graces; It is a Grace of God. So the Scripture
intimates; Act. 11.18.
Then has God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life. -- 2 Timothy
2.25.
If God per adventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the
truth. II. The special difference of repentance from all other saving graces;
whereby a sinner after true sense of sin, and godly sorrow for sin, is changed
and converted in heart and life from sin to God. Wherein consider the
Preparatives to Repentance, and the Substance of Repentance 1. The Preparatives
to Repentance that as Harbingers and Inlets to it, make way for it into the
soul, are two, viz. (1) Conviction or true sense of sin; Acts. 26.18.
To open their eyes, and turn them from darkness to light. There can be no
repentance and conversion from sin, till first there be a true sense of sin,
and thorough conviction, Partly of the sinfulness of sin, how grie^ous and
odious it is; Ezekiel. 36.31.
Then shall ye remember your own evil ways, and your doings that were not
good, and shall loath your selves in your own sight for your iniquities, and
for your abominations. Partly of the mi^chievousness and dangerou^nesse of sin,
how harmeful it is unto the sinner. Thus God foretells his people falling to
Idols, that they should be convinced of the mischief of those ways, which
should move them to return again to God; Hos. 2, 6.7.
Then shall she say, I will go and return to my first Husband, for then it was
better with me then now. Thus the Luke 15.17, 18, 19,
Prodigal had a true sense of his misery whereunto his sin had brought him,
that he was perishing with hunger; and then resolves penitentially to return to
his Father. And Joh. 16.8, 9.
convincing the world of sin, is one of the first works of the Spirit. (2)
Contrition or godly sorrow for sin, follows upon conviction, and is another
Harbinger to Repentance, as John Baptist was the Harbinger of Christ, For 2
Cor. 7, 10.
Godly sorrow works repentance to salvation, not to be repented of: but the
sorrow of the world works death. Godly sorrow then in propriety of speaking,
is not repentance, but works repentance, makes way for it, as the needle for
the thread. This is called Joel 2.13
Renting the heart. Both this conviction and contrition may be observed in Acts
2.36, 3^.
Peter's hearers, the Jews; They were convinced of the sinfulness of their sin
in betraying and murdering of Christ: and they were contrite, pricked in their
hearts, stabbed as it were to the very soul with grief for it. These the
Preparatories to Repentance. 2. The Substance of Repentance has in it three
things, viz. The Act, the subject, and the Terms. (1) The formal Act of
repentance; it is a changing and converting. Hence so often set forth by turning
in Scripture; Jer. 31.18, 19,
Turn thou me, and I shall be turned. -- After that I was turned, I repented.
-- Matthew. 18.3.
Except ye be converted, and become as little children, -- Act. 26.18.
To turn them from darkness to light. -- This is the Act of Repentance wherein
it consists. (2) The Subject changed and converted, is both the sinners Heart
and Life. First his heart, then his life. First his person, then his practice
and Conversation. Isa. 1.16.
W^^h ye, make you clean; There Is the change of their persons: Put away the
evil of your doings from before mine eyes, cease to do evil; There Is the change
of their practices. So, Ezekiel. 18.31.
Cast away from you all your transgressions, whereby ye have transgressed;
There Is the change of the life. And make you a new heart and a new spirit;
There Is the change of the heart. (3.) The Terms of this change and conversion,
From which, and To which, both heart and life must be changed; From sin, to
God. The heart must be changed from the state and power of sin: the life from
the acts of sin; but both, unto God The heart to be under his power in a state
of grace: The life to be under his rule, in all new obedience. Acts 26.18.
To open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light: and from the
power of Satan unto God. -- Isa. 1.16, 17.
Cease to do evil: learn to do well. -- Isa. 55.7.
Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts; and let
him return unto the Lord. Thus of the Nature of true Repentance.

3. The Notes of true Repentance follow. The Nature of Repentance thus
described and opened, may be a rule of trial, and that chiefly in three
particulars, viz. Conviction, and Contrition, Conversion.

1. Have thou a true Conviction and sense of sin? A true sight of sin, is the
first step to Repentance. No man will come to the Physician till he feell
himself sick. To this effect, 1. Art thou convinced and sensible of sins
sinfullness? (1) How extremely opposite and contrary sin is to God. 1 John 1.^,
6.
God is light, sin is darkness Joh. 1.4 Ephesians. 2.1.
God is life, sin is death. God cannot do it in himself, nor endure it or Hab.
1.13. T^t. 1.2.
look upon it with the least approbation in any his creatures. Men become Ephesians.
4.1^ Col. 1.21.
enemies in their minds against God through wicked works. Yea Romans 8.7
the carnal mind is enmity it self against God. (2) How repugnant sin is to
Gods holy, just, and good Laws. 1 John 3.4.
Sin is the transgression of the Law Romans 8.7.
The carnal mind is not subject to the Law of God, nor indeed can be. (3.) What
power sin has over thy self and every man by nature: It is Romans 7.23.
a Law in thy members; A Romans 6.12.
re^gn^ng King A Act. 8.23.
bond of iniquity, etc. (4) In a word how filthy, odious, ^oul, and abominable
sin is in it self. Scripture in this re^pect resembles it to the Jer. 13.23
Ethiopians black skin. To Iam. 1.21
the filth under the nails, or Arm-holes, as the Greek word signifies: To the
Zec. 13.1.
uncleanness of a menstruous woman: To the filthiness of the Isa. 1.10.
Sodomites: To the stinking purrified deadly steam of an Romans ^.13.
opened grave; To the Romans 3.13.
poison of Aspes and Serpents: to the 2 Pet. 2.22.
vomit of a dog: To the mire and puddle wherein a swine wallows; yea it is
called Jam. 1.21
superfluity of naughtiness, or (as the Greek signifies,) the excrement of
malice. The Holy Ghost uses such coorse expressions in describing of sin, to
let us see no language is bad enough for it. Yea sin is far more ugly, black,
filthy, then the devil himself; for through sin he becomes a devil; so, ugly
and abominable. Art thou thus sensible of sins sinfulness, as the glass of
Scripture represents it? 2. Art thou convinced and sensible of sins
mischievousnes? How it Gen, 2.22 23, 24.
cast Adam and all his posterity out of Paradise and Communion with God there,
depriving all of Gods Image. How it makes all men by nature spiritually Ephesians.
2.1, 2, 3. with ^ Tim. 2.25
dead in sin, slaves of Satan, children of wrath, heirs of all Gods Gal.
3.10.13.
curses, and every moment liable to death temporal, spiritual, and eternal. How
not only man, but Romans 8.22, 23.
the whole Creation groans under the burden of it. How by reason of sin thou
art naturally in a Luke 15 32. John 3.18, 26.
lost, undone, damned state, in the very Act. 8.23
gall of bitterness, being Ephesians 2.22
godless Christlesse, and hopeless in this present World, etc. Have thou such
apprehensions of sins mischief and danger, that thou see plainly thou art but
a dead and damned wretch if thou gettest not out of thy sinful state? etc. This
is to be truly sensible of sin.

2. Have thou true Contrition of heart, and godly sorrow for sin thus
discovered? Art thou so sensible of thy sins, as that thine heart, is broken
with sighs and sobs, and thine eyes run down with tears? who can aright discern
his sins, and refrain from sorrows?

Thou say, I mourn for sin: but how may I know that I mourn aright, and that
my sorrow is not carnal, but godly sorrow? Answ. Thou may discover the truth
of thy godly sorrow for sin, by these particulars. 1. True godly sorrow is
sincere. It is for sin, as it is sin, especially. More for the sinfulness of
sin, then for the dangerousnesse of sin. Hence the godly mourning soul is most
wounded for offending God, and piercing Christ by sin. For offending God; So
David, Psalm. 51.4
Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight. He
had sinned also against Vriah, shedding his blood: against the Church, giving
them offense and cause of mourning: against the enemies of God, giving great
occasion to them of blaspheming: and against his own soul, wounding it with all
this guilt, and doubtless he mourned for all these; but nothing so stabbed him
to the heart, as that he had offended against such a God. For piercing Christ
by sin. This also most deeply pierces the soul of him that mourns for sin.
Zech. 11.10, 11.
They shall look upon him whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him,
and be in bitterness for him, etc. for Isa. 53.5.6.
He was wounded for our transgressions, etc. What (thinks the bleeding soul)
were my sins the Judas that betrayed him, the Pilat^ that condemned him, the
nails, spear, and thorns that pierced him, the gall and vinegar given him to
drink? him that so loved me as to pray, sigh* weep* bleed, and die for my
redemption* Weep bitterly for this, oh my soul, let thine eyes run down with
floods of tears. 2. True godly ^orrow is great: the greatest sorrow in the
world. Hence it is called, Ze^h. 12 10, 11, 12.
A Mourning as for an only son: being in bitterness, as one that is in
bitterness for his firstborn: A great mourning, as the mourning of
Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddo: A mourning Ille dolet vere, qui sine
test dolet.
apart. All this to show that godly sorrow for sin is beyond all worldly
sorrow. When Peter wept for his sins, Matthew. 26.75.
he wept bitterly. True, there may be such a sudden push of worldly sorrow for
a wife, child, etc. that may seem greater then godly sorrow: but this sorrow
lasts not like godly sorrow. So godly sorrow is greatest intensively, for
degree; or extensively, for continuance. A land-flood may have a greater stream
for present, than a Spring: but the Spring sends forth more waters, because
it is still arunning. 3. True godly sorrow is penitential, it never leaves a man
till it reform him of his sins. 2 Cor. 7.10
Godly sorrow works repentance not to be repented of, but the sorrow of the
world works death. Try now, is thy sorrow such a sorrow? Is it sincere? more
for offending God, and wounding Christ, then for any other respect. Is it
transcendent? thou can mourn more for sin then any worldly occasion. Is it
p^nitential? it has never left thee; till it has reformed thee. Doubtless
this is true godly sorrow indeed.

3. Have thou a true change and conversion of thine heart and life from sin to
God? This is the truth and life of Repentance, when it brings us to a
converting change. Unchanged men are impenitent men. In repentance there is a
double conversion and change wrought, viz. 1. Of a man's Heart and Person. 2. Of
his life and Conversation. His person and heart is brought to a new state.
Ezekiel. 18.31.
Make you a new heart and a n^w spirit. His life and conversation is brought to
a new course; Romans 6.2
That we should walk in newness of life.

A man's person and heart is changed, when he is brought from a state of sin to
a state of grace. Now a man is brought from his carnal to a spiritual state; 1.
When he is converted from the darkness of sin, ignorance and spiritual misery;
to the light of holiness, knowledge, and spiritual happiness. -- Acts 26.18.
To turn them from darkness to light. -- Ephesians. 5.8.
Ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord. 2 When he is
con^erted and raised from death in sin, to life in Christ. -- Ephesians. 2.1, 2.
You has he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins: wherein in time
past ye walked. The father said of the repenting Prodigal, Luke 15.32.
This thy brother was dead, and is alive again; was lost, and is found. 3. When
he is converted from the reign of sin and power of Satan to God and Christ, and
brought under his dominion. -- Acts 26.18.
To turn them from the power of Satan unto God. -- Romans 6.17, 18.
Ye were the servants of sin, but ye have obeyed from the heart that form of
doctrine which was delivered you. Being then made free from sin, ye became the
servants of righteousness. Now we are free from the reign of sin, (1) When
Romans 6.12, 13
we obey it not in its lusts. (2) When we yield not our members as weapons or
instruments of unrighteousness unto sin. And we are delivered from the power of
Satan, (1) When Ephesians. 2.2.
The Prince of the air works not in us, as in the children of disobedience. (2)
When 2 Timothy 2.25.
we are not led captive by Satan at his will: but resist him, and fight against
him, Romans 12 1,
and yield up our selves wholly as spiritual sacrifices to God. Try whether
thine heart and person be thus changed from the state of sin to a state of
grace.

A Man's life and Conversation is changed, when he is brought from a sinful to
a gracious course. Now a man is then truly and effectually brought from a
sinful to a gracious course of life; 1. When he converts from sin to Sanctity,
sincerely forsaking sin, because it is sin, and contrary to God and his holy
Law ^ following holiness for holiness sake, because it is most agreeable to
God and his Will. As Joseph, Genesis 39.9
How shall I do this great wickedness, and so sin against God? 2. When he
converts from sinfulness to holiness of life completely. He that hates sin,
because sin, hates all sin: and he that follows holiness, because holiness,
follows all holiness. Ezekiel. 18.30, 31
Repent and turn from all your transgressions. -- Cast away from you all your
transgressions. -- As 1 Pet. 1.14, 15
obedient children^ not fashioning your selves according to the former lusts in
your ignorance: But as he that has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all
manner of conversation. Yea he that truly turns from all sin, turns from every
special sin, whereunto he is inclined by Nature, Calling or Temptation more
peculiarly; Ps. 18.22
I was also upright before him, and I kept my self from mine iniquity. 3. When
he turns from sinfulness to holiness of life continually. Hypocrites though
they seem to repent, yet they 2 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22.
are again entangled and overcome of their corruptions, turning from the holy
Commandment; as the Dog turns to his own vomit again, and the Sow that was
washed, to her wallowing in the mire. But the true Convert returns not to his
vomit, but becomes Romans 6.11.
dead to sin, and alive to God through Christ. Whereupon the Apostle thus
argues; Romans 6.2
How shall we that are dead to sin, live any longer herein? And where there is
no living in sin any longer, there is a continual converting from sin to
sanctity of life.

Both heart and life are converted truly unto God; 1. When we accept God as our
God in Covenant, and we become his people, according to the tenou^ of the New
Covenant, as was See the ^ryal of our right ^o the Lords Supper, by our
interest in the New Covenant.
formerly showed. 2. When heart and life are acted, ruled, and guided by God
inwardly and outward^y, by his Spirit and Word. Then Romans 6.13, 16, 22.
we yield our selves unto God as servants of God. And Romans 8.14.
being led by the Spirit of God, we are the Sons of God. Gods Psalm. 11.24.
Testimonies also being our delight and Counselors. 3. When heart and life
tend to God as their ultimate End. When our desires, love, delight, etc. are
toward God more then to any thing in Heaven or Earth; 1 Cor.6.20
Whom have I in Heaven but thee: and in Earth there is none that I desire
besides thee. And when our hearts and affections, desire, love, or delight in
other things in order and subordination unto God. And when both heart and life,
Persons and Conversations are devoted unto God and to his Glory* 1 Cor. 6.20.
Ye are bought with a price: therefore glorify God in your body, and in your
spirit, which are Gods. -- Romans 14 7, 8.
None of us lives to himself, and no man d^eth to himself. For whether we
live, we live unto the Lord: and whether we die, we die unto the Lord: whether
we live therefore or die, we are the Lords. This is to be truly converted in
heart and life from sin to God.

IV. NEW OBEDIENCE, which is an immediate fruit and effect of Repentance, is
another qualification requisite in a worthy Communicant. And therefore in the
next p^ace consider: 1. The Necessity of it. 2. The Trial of it.

1. The Necessity of New O^edience, to Qualify a Christian for worthy
communicating, appears diverse ways. For,

1. Without true Obedience, See Ezekiel 33 31, 32. 1 Samuel 15.22. Matt. 7.26, etc.
All outward Professions of Religion, seeming love to Gods Ordinances, and
outward performances of service are dis-regarded of God, as vain; hypocritical,
and abomina^^e. Tit 1* 16.
They profess that they know God, but in works they deny him: being abominable,
and d^sobedient, and unto every good work reprobate. Con^equently, Receiving of
the Lords Supper will be in vain, without new obedience.

2. The Lords Supper, being a Token and Seal of the New Covenant, 1 Cor. 11.25.
The New Testament in Christ's blood, is also a Bond and Obligation to Compare
^er. 31.33.34, and 32.38, 39, 40. with Ezekiel. 11.19.20. and 36.26, 27.
New Obedience, whereby we solemnly engage our selves to fear and obey God for
ever, as his Vovenant People. And so often as we renew the Lords Supper, so often
we renew this Bond of Obedience; without true Obedience, communicating is but
dissembling.

3. In the Lords Supper we have a solemn Record and Memorial of the rarest and
highest obedience in the world, viz. The Compare 1 Cor. 10.16. and 1^.24, 25
with Phil. 2.7, 8
Obedience of Jesus Christ the only begotten Son of God, and that to the Death,
for our sakes. Such obedience, of such a person, to such a death, even the
death upon the Cross, and all for such sinners as we are: How admirable and
incomparable is that obedience! Ita obediens ^uit, ut vitam perd^derit, ne
obedientiamperderet.
Christ herein was so obedient, that he lost his life rather then he would lose
his obedience. Now how can we think to meddle with this Memorial of Christ's
obedience for us, acceptably: unless we be tru^y obedient unto God in Christ,
proportionably? Or, What fellowship can obedience have with diso^edience?

2. The Trial and Examination of New Obedience may be according to these
Properties of Obedience. True Obedience is, 1. Conscientious. 2. Cordial. 3.
Transforming. 4. Resolved. 5. Complete. 6. Increasing. 7. Continuing.

1. True Christian Obedience is Conscientious. Arises from a Conscientious
respect to Gods Command, and an awful filial fear of God commanding. 1 Timothy 1.5
The End of the Commandment is Love, out of a pure heart and a good conscience.
Such the ground of Noah's obedience; who Heb. 11.7
being warned of God touching things not seen as yet, moved with fear, prepared
an Ark. Such Abraham's; who Heb. 11.8
followed God, not knowing whither he went; mere conscience and awe to Gods
call and command, made him obey. Such David's; Psa^ 11* 120.161.
M^ne heart trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments. --
M^ne heart stands in awe of thy Word. Do thou obey in an holy awe and
conscience to Gods commands, though thou have no other Motives to obedience?

2. True Obed^ence is cordial, hearty and affect^onate. Not an out^de but an
inside-Obedience a^^o: not a mere superficial and comp^emental show, but a
reality, flowing from the inward frame of the soul, and the very heart-root.
Ezekiel. 11.19.20 and 36 26.27.
Arising from the inscription of the Law in the heart. Ps. 40.8.
I delight to do thy will O my God yea thy Law is within mine heart. -- Romans
6.17.
Ye have obeyed from the heart that form of Doctr^ne, which was delivered you.
Is thine obedience from the heart-root?

But how shall I di^co^er whether my obedience be cordial and hearty?

Answ. Thou may discover the heartiness of thine obedience, 1. By thy
willingness to it. The heart makes a man a volunteere, ready and forward to all
duties and performances. Ps. 110.3
Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power. -- Isa. 1.19.
If ye be willing and obedient. -- Ps. 119.60
I made haste and delayed not, to keep thy Commandments. 2. By thy cheerfulness
in it. What is done heartily, is done cheerfully, delightfully. Ps. 4^.8.
I delight to do thy will, O my God, yea thy Law is in my heart. 1 John 5.3
This is love that we keep his Commandments, and his Commandments are not
grievous. Job was so hearty in obedience, that he esteemed Gods Job 23.12.
words more then his necessary food. Christ so delighted in obedience, that he
said, Joh. 4.32 34.
My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work. Do
thou go as cheerfully to the doing of Gods will, as to thy meat and drink when
thou art hungry? 3. By thy grief at contrary courses of disobedience in others,
and fai^ings of obedience in thy self. Thus Paul, finding that Romans 7.21, 22,
23, 24
when he would do good evil was present with him: and that, however he
del^ghted in the Law of God touching the inward man yet he saw another Law in
his members, rebell^ng against the Law of his mind, and bringing him into
captivity to the Law of sin: He hereupon thus laments his failings; O wretched
man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of th^s death! And as Paul
grieved at his own failings of obedience: So David at others disobedience:
Psalm. 119.53, 136.
Horror has taken hold upon me, because of the wicked that forsake thy Law.
-- And again, Rivers of waters run down mine eyes because they keep not thy
Law. If thus thou art willing to obedience, cheerful in it, and grieved for
failings; thine obedience is cordial, sincere and acceptable to God.

3. True Obedience is a transforming Obedience, mightily alters and changes
a man from impurity to purity, from sin to sanctity, from Sodomites to Saints,
etc. 1 Pet. 1.14 15.
As obedient children, not fashioning your selves according to the former lusts
in your ignorance; but as he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in
all manner of conversation. Otherwise, as Samuel said to Saul, when he bragged
of his obedience: 1 Samuel 15.
What means then this lowing of the oxen, and ble^ting of the sheep. etc? so
it may be laid to all dissemblers in obedience, Are you obedient? What means
then the noise of your profanation of Sabbaths, of your swearing,
drunkenness, uncleanness, etc?

4. True Obedience is a fixed and resolved Obedience. Like David's Worthies,
will break through an host of Philistines: through an Army of difficulties,
impediments and discouragements to the contrary. For,

No contrary commands of man shall deter the truly obedient from their duties.
They will Act. 4.19. and 5.29.
obey God rather than man: when both cannot be obeyed, without crossing each
other.

No stream of the multitude, or current of corruptest times wherein they live,
shall bear them down from their obedience. Josh. 24.15.
Ioshuah and his house will serve the Lord, though all Israel should serve
Idols. And Noah was Genesis 6.9. and 7.1.
upright with God, when the whole world was overspread with violence, and all
flesh had corrupted his ways.

No worldly profits, advantages, or privileges shall bribe them from their
obedience Heb. 11.8.
Abram will obey and follow God, though he forsake all the benefits and
contentments of his Native Country, and of his fathers House: not knowing
where his lot should fall.

No carnal disputes or reasonings with flesh and blood shall dissuade them.
Heb. 11.7.
Noah might have raised many Objections against that strange attempt of
building an Ark, a work of 120 years continuance: but Noah waves disputing, and
falls to building his arc, which God commanded. Gal. 1.15.16.17.
Paul late^y a Persecutor and but newly converted, receives command to be a
Preacher to the Gentiles: immediately he conferred not with flesh and blood,
(though he might have made multitudes of objections) but went into Arabia, and
fell close to his Masters work.

No flood of Natural affections (which oft-times pro^e most dangerous
stumbling blocks to well-doing,) shall drown or conquer their obedience. As in
Genesis 22. throughout with Heb. 11.17.18.19.
Abraham; when Sarah desired him but to cast out Ishmael the son of the
bondwoman, the thing was grievous in his eyes: yet when God commands him to
sacrifice Isaac as a burns-offering, (though the son of the freewoman, his
on^y son, the son of his old age, his son whom he loved, the son of the
promise, in whom all the Nations of the earth should be blessed:) he goes about
it readily, and never acquainting Sarah, lest she should hinder his obedience,
he traveled three days journey to effect it. Thus the Exodus 31.
Levites did execution, according to Gods command by Moses, upon them that had
sinned in the idolatrous Galfe of Aaron, without favor or affection to
brethren or kindred. Hence Levi is so commended; Deuteronomy. 339
Who said unto his father, and to his mother I have not seen him; neither did
he acknowledge his brethren, nor knew his own children; for they have observed
thy Word, and kept thy Covenant. Natural affection is strong: but supernatural
obedience is stronger.

Finally, no terrors of threats, reproaches, afflictions, bonds,
imprisonments, or death for obedience, shall deter and fright them from their
obedience. Paul Act. 24.14
professes to worship God according to the way of Christianity, though it was
reproached with the brand of Heresy. Acts 20.23, 24.
The Holy Ghost in every city, witnessed that bonds and afflictions abode Paul;
yet, says he, None of these things move me, neither count I my life dear unto
my self so that I might finish my course with joy, and the Ministry which I
have received. And when for fear of bonds, Paul was importuned with tears not
to go up to Jerusalem; He answered, Acts 21.12.13.
What mean ye to weep and to break mine heart? for I am ready not to be bound
only, but also to die at Jerusalem, for the name of the Lord Jesus. And when
those Dan. 3.14 10, 19.
three heroick-spirited Jews were threatened by King Nebuchadnezzer to be cast
alive into the burning furnace, seven times hotter then usual, if they would
not worship his golden image; they answer, Our God whom we serve, is able to
deliver us from the burning fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of thine
hand* O King. But if not, be it known unto thee, O King, that we will not serve
thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou have set up. Their bodies
shall rather burn to ashes, then they will (contrary to Gods command) bow to
his Idols.

Have thou now such a well-resolved obedience?

5. True obedience is complete. It Is complete two ways, viz. 1. Partly in
re^pect of the subject or heart obeying. A man truly obedient, obeys with an
entire heart and perfect spirit: Psalm. 119.34, 69.
I will keep thy Precepts with my whole heart. 2. Partly in re^pect of the
object or Commandments obeyed. A man truly obedient, does not indent, pick, and
ch^se: These commands he will obey, not those: the first Table, but not the
second, etc. but will obey all, will have a respect and a regard to all. As
Numb. 14.24. and 32.12. Deuteronomy. 1.36 Josh. 14.8, 9, 14.
Caleb and Ioshuah, who followed the Lord fully. They were thorough-paced in
their obedience. And as David, Psalm. 119.6.
Then shall I not be ashamed when I have respect unto all thy Commandments.

6. Finally, True obed^ence decays not, but is growing and l^sting. Growing, as
in Thyatira, who^e Rev. 2.19.
last works were more then the first, La^^i^g also and constantly continuing;
as in David Psalm. 119 112, 20 33
I have inclined mine heart to do thy statutes always even unto the end. -- My
soul breaks for the longing that it has unto thy ^udgements at all times. --
Teach me, O LORD, the way of thy statutes, and I shall keep it unto the end.
False obedience decays and dies. Thus thou may try the truth of thine
obedience.

V. LOVE is another special qualification of a worthy Communicant, fitting for
due receiving of the Lords Supper. Touching which we should aforehand examine
our selves. Now because in this Ordinance we have 1 Cor. 10 16, 17.
Communion, not only with Christ, as our Head, but also with one another, as
fellow members: Therefore we are to be furnished with, and to examine our
selves of a twofold love, viz. 1. Love to Christ. 2. Love to Christians.

Love to Christ. Touching which, consider di^igently, 1. The Need that
Communicants have of it. 2. The Trial they make of it. 1. The Necessity of our
true love to Christ before we communicate, and as a qualification for receiving
the Lords Supper, appears upon the^e following considerations.

1. They that do not truly love Jesus Christ, are under one of the heaviest and
bittere^t curses of God, in the whole Bible. 1 Cor. 16.22.
If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha.
Herein note, 1. The ground or cause of this curse; The not loving of Jesus
Christ. He says not, if any man hate the Lord Jesus Christ, or reproach him,
or blaspheme and curse him, or persecute him, etc. but that which is far less,
If any man love him not. The bare want of this a^fection to Christ, is enough
to separate from Christ. 2. The nature of the ^urse; Let him be Anathema
Maranatha. These two words are of two several languages, both denoting a curse;
To intimate, this is a double, a peremptory, and bitter cur^e: as Genesis 41.32.
Pharoahs dreams were doubled for the greater certainty. Anathema is a Greek
word, and elsewhere is translated; Accursed: Gal. 1^8, 9.
If any man preach any other Gospel to you, -- let him be Anathema; or, let him
be accursed; as if he should say; Let him be devoted, viz. to the devil, and
separated from Christ and his Churches Communion. Maranatha; some learned
Writers take this (as Bez. Annot. in 1 Cor. 16.22.
Beza observes) to be a Syriack word. Calvin. Com. ibid.
Calvin seems not so well satisfied with their judgment. Buxtorf. Lexic.
Others count it a Chaldee word, yet used in Hebrew, and known familiarly even
among the Greeks. It seems to be compounded of three words. Mara na atha, that
is, Our Lord comes. As intimating that such as were under this curse, were
given up and re^erved to the Lords coming, to be judged by him. That they are
to expect nothing but the terrible coming of Christ to take vengeance of them.
And that prophecy of Enoch seems to allude to some such curse; ^ude ver. 14,
15.
Behold, the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints, to execute judgment
upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them, etc. Bez. An^not. in
1 Cor. 16.22.
Beza thinks this an^wers to the heaviest curse among the Jews; They had first
their (...) Niddui. Secondly, their (...) Cherem, that is, Anathema. This their
Cherem was either the simple and single Anathama: or their (...) Schematha, or
Maranatha. Paul therefore not contenting himself to say, Let him be Anathema,
he adds, Maranatha, to denote the vehemence and grievousnesse of the curse: Oh
what a terrible curse is this! 3. The extent of this curse, If any man. As if
he said, let it be who it will that loves not Christ Jew or Genti^e, bond or
free, Master or servant, rich or poor, young or old, King or beggar, that loves
not Christ, (understand it especially of them within the visible Church) let
him be utterly accur^ed. Now if the Non-lo^ers of Christ be thus under this
curse, how can they possibly come to the Lords Supper, so remaining without
true love to Christ, but be abomin^ble to him?

2. The Lords Supper is a sweet love-token betwixt Christ and his Church:
Christ and his members. Herein they mutually seal up their reciprocal
affections to each other. What love does Christ herein signify, seal, and
exhibit to us? As is every way evident. The time of instituting this Ordinance
speaks love: It was 1 Cor. 11 23.
in the same night in which he was betrayed. How warm were his affections even
then to us, when within a few hours after that, he was to pour out his warmest
hearts blood for us? even then he was so mindful of his Church, as to leave her
this farewel-Token, and legacy of his Love: that she might never forget his
love. The mysteries tendered in this ordinance speak love; Here Is Christ's body,
not whole but broken; Christ's blood, not as in his veins, but shed and actually
severed from his body; and these represented under the familiar elements of
bread broken, and wine severed from the bread: and all this for us sinners.
What Romans 5.6. John 3.16. Romans 8.32.3.16.
greater love can be imagined then to die for sinners* The benefits intended us
by this ordinance also, speak love abundantly. For, why was it appointed? but
for nourishing our faith, and all the graces of the inward man; for assuring us
of the remission of our sins; for stablishing our interest in the New
Testament, and all its promi^es and privileges; for endearing us more and more
to Christ; and to one another in spiritual Communion; and for perpetuating the
memorial of Christ's death, and love to us, till his second coming? O what a
torrent of love flows toward us from Jesus Christ, in this sacred channel of
the Lords Supper! Now, shall we come to a Banquet of love, a true love-feast,
and have no love? Shall Christ come to ^eal such love to us: and shall not we
reciprocally seal love to him? Surely then we shall be but dissemblers, and
Iudas's when we come to his Table.

Thus of the Necessity of our true love to Christ, for worthy communicating. 2.
The trial and Examination of the truth of our love to Christ, may be
dispatched, 1. By the grounds. 2. By the degrees. 3. By the properties of true
love to Christ.

1. The grounds and causes of our true love to Christ, are especially these
three, viz. 1. Christ A^^ablenesse. 2. Faith in him. 3. Experience of him.

(1.) The Amiableness and Loveliness of Christ, is that attractive loadstone
that draws the hearts and affections of his people after him. Christ is most
lovely, both in his person, offices, and the benefits of his offices. He is Ps.
45.2.
fairer then the sons of men grace is poured into his lips. --, Cant. 2.3
As the apple tree among the trees of the wood: so is Christ among the Sons. --
Cant. 2.1
He is the Rose of Sharon, the sweetest: The Lilly of the valleys, the fairest.
-- Cant. 5.10. to the end
He is white and ruddy, the chief among ten thousand. See there how admirably
the Church paints him our, and concludes with the^e words, (as if all
particulars came short of him,) His mouth is sweetnesses, yea whole He is
delights, (as the Hebrew phrase signifies.) This is my beloved, and this is my
friend O daughters of Jerusalem. Now as lovlinesse breeds and inciteth love: ^o
Christ's most of all; Because his lovlinesse surpasses all. No sooner had the
Church described and laid open Christ's beauty and loveliness to the daughters
of Jerusalem, but presently they are taken and enflamed with him: and they
enquire after him; Cant. 6.1.
Whither is thy beloved gone* O thou fairest among women: whither is thy
beloved turned aside? that we may seek him with thee. Do thou love Christ for
his lo^eliness? not for his loaves, or for his bag, or for the worldly
advantages thou may^t have by him: but for his excellency, beauty* amiableness,
etc. This is to love Christ aright for this is to love Christ for Christ, this
is to love Christ for himself.

2. Faith in Christ is another cause of true love to Christ. Peter speaking of
Christ ^aith; 1 Pet. 1.8
Whom having not seen, ye love: in whom, though now ye see him not, yet
believing ye re^oyce with ^oy unspeakable, and full of glory. Seeing breeds
loving, but here is a lo^ing without corporal seeing: A loving of Christ which
arises from believing in him; And such a loving as increases to rejoicing,
and that rejoicing both unspeakable and g^orious. Faith sees not at all: and
yet best of all. Not at all, corporally; best of all, sp^ritually. Faith sees
Christ enthroned at Gods right hand, sending down his Spirit, ruling all things
for his Churches good preparing heaven for us, and hastening to come to
judgment, and fetch his Church and members home to himself, to be ever with
the Lord. Christ was always lo^e^y, even in his humiliation: but thrice so
lo^ely now in his exaltation. Faith eyes this in^isible lo^eline^s of Christ
clearly: and draws the heart to love him entirely.

(3) Experience of Christ, or experimental acquaintance with him, enkindleth
true love unto him. A spiritual savor of Christ's fragrancy, a spiritual
taste of his sweetness; is enough to ravish the soul with him. Cant. 1.3.
Because of the savor of thy good ointments, thy name is as ointment poured
forth, therefore do the Virgins love thee. Christ's good ointments are the
graces and gifts of the Spirit, wherewith as Mediator he was Psalm. 45.
anointed above all his fellows, which oil of gladness in some sort runs down
to all his members, yea to the very border of his garment. His Name is either
his Compare Isa. 42.4. with Mat. 12.21.
doctrine: or any other attributes, titles, etc. of Christ, whereby he makes
himself known, as a man is known by his name. Now these ointments poured forth,
made known, do send abroad such a sweet sent and savor of Christ, that all who
experimentally savor them indeed, cannot choose but love Christ with a chaste
Virgin-love. The Church says, Cant. 2.3, 4, 5.
I sat down under his shadow with great del^ght, and his fruit was sweet unto
my taste. He brought me to the banqueting house, and his banner over me was
love. (Here Is her heavenly experiences of Christ.) Stay me with Flaggons,
comfort me with Apples, for I am sick of love. (Here Is her love to Christ
flowing from that experience: Yea she is so tran^ported with love to him, that
she calls hastily for cordials to keep her from ^ainting and wouning, being
lovesick for Christ.) Thus the Penitent woman in the Gospel had much
experience of Christ's rich grace and mercy to her in pardoning her many sins:
therefore Luke 7.38.
she loved him much, and she testified it most affectionately; she stood at his
feet behind him weeping, and began to wash his feet with tears, and did wipe
them with the hairs of her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them with
ointment. But the Pharisee, that at that time had invited Christ, having no
such spiritual experience of Christ, testified no such love to Christ. Christ
says to him; Ver. 44.45.46.47.
Simon, see thou this woman? I entered into thine house, thou gave me no
water for my feet: but she has washed my feet with tears, and wiped them with
the hairs of her head. Thou gave me no kiss; but this woman, since the time
I came in, has not ceased to kiss my feet Mine head with oil thou did not
anno^nt; but this woman has anointed my feet with ointment. Wherefore I say
to thee, her sins, which are many, are forgiven: For she loved much. Without
spiritual experience of Christ, who can love him? And who can chu^e but love
him, that have true experience of him?

Does thy love to Christ arise from these grounds? Thou love Christ, because
he is lovely; because thou believe in him; because thou have such experience
of him. This is well-grounded love to Christ.

2. The Degrees or Gradual steps by which our true love to Christ rises, and
by which it may be tried, are principally these three, viz. 1. A benevolent
affection, or Good Will to Christ. 2. A fervent desire, and longing after
Christ. 3. A contented Acquiescence or Delight in Christ.


1. A Benevolent affection, or Good Will to Christ, is a first degree of love
to Christ. Christ's excellency and loveliness aright apprehended makes us have
high and precious thoughts of him, and bear great good will to him, to his
Glory, to his Truth, to his cause, to his Ordinances, to his church, etc. to
have them ad^anced, promoted, and exalted every where. Yea makes us content to
be abased, that Christ alone may be exalted; to be disgraced, that Christ alone
may be honored; to be eclipsed, that Christ alone may shine; to be as nothing,
that Christ alone may be all. Thus John Baptist testified his love and respect
to Christ, when the Jews came to John, and seemed to be troubled that Christ
should be so followed. Joh. 3.16.
Rabbi he that was with thee beyond Jordan, to whom thou bear witness,
behold, the same baptizeth, and all men come to him. Hereupon John answered, to
this effect; Joh. 3.27 to 30.
That Christ's Authority was from Heaven. That himself was not the Christ, but
his Harbinger sent before him. That Christ was the Bridegroom, and John but the
Bridegrooms friend, rejoicing greatly at the Bridegrooms voice. That Christ
must increase: himself must decrease. That Christ coming from above, from
heaven is above all: himself being of the earth is earthly, and speaks of the
earth. Thus Nicodemus Joh. 3.1. to 11.
though a stranger to the mystery of Regeneration, yet having some seeds
thereof sown in his heart, expresses his benevolent affection to Christ, in
that he came to Jesus by n^ght, acknowledging him to be a Teacher come from
God, because of his Miracles. Thus Paul showed his good will to Christ,
counting Phil. 3.^, 8, 9.
all his Pharisaical excellencies and perfections loss, yea and all things but
dung for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ, and for the winning of
Christ.

2. A ^ervent desire and longing after Christ, is a second degree of true love
to Christ. Love pants after enjoyment of the object beloved: so love to Christ
breaths after union to him, and more f^ll communion with him. This is called
love of union, as the former love of benevolence or well-willing. Thus the
Church of the Jews lo^ing Christ, longs for his incarnation, and the sweet
kisses of his Gospel-Doctrine and dispensation; Cant. 1 2
Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth: for thy love is better then
wine. And again; Cant. 8.1
Oh that thou were as my Brother, that sucked the breasts of my Mother! that
is, O that thou were my natural Brother, revealed in humane nature! And
because her love to Christ was impatient of delay, and thirsting after full
enjoyment of him in Heaven, she cries to him, Cant. 8.14.
Make haste my beloved, and be thou like to a Roe, on to ^ young Heart upon the
Mountain of spices. Make all haste upon the heavenly Mountains, to come and
fetch me home to thy self, that I may ever be with the Lord. And it is the
periphra^is of Christ's lovers 2 Timothy 4.7.
that they love his appearing, they love and long for his coming to judgment.
Rev. 22.17, 20.
The spirit and the Bride say, come -- Christ ^aith, Surely I come quickly.
Every true Christian answers in the desires of his soul, Amen, Even so come
Lord Jesus.

3. A Contented Complacency, and satisfied delight in Christ enjoyed is the
third and highest degree of love to him. And as the enjoyment of Christ is more
or less perfect: proportionably the complacency or resting satisfied in him,
is more or less complete. There is true delight in Christ enjoyed in Heaven.
When the Church after a desertion, found Christ again, how was she contented
and satisfied with him! she says, Cant. 3.1 2, 3, 4, 5.
I found him whom my soul loves: I held him, and would not let him go, until I
had brought him into my Mothers house, and into the chamber of him that
conceived me. I charge you O ye Daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes and by the
hindes of the field that ye stir not up nor awake my love till he please.
Having regained Christ, she holds him fast in the arms of her affections, she
brings him into the Chambers of more intimate Communion, she forbids all
disturbance to her enjoyment of him. All which express her Complacency and
sweet contentment in him: her restless desires were now stilled and satisfied.
And after another desertion, finding Christ, she thus declares her acquiescence
in him found: Cant. 5. compared with Cant. ^.3.
I am my beloved's, and my beloved is mine. As if she had said; Now that I have
found Christ whom my soul loves, I have enough, my heart is filled brim full
with him, I desire no more.

Have thou now such A Good Will to Christ: Such a fervent restless desire after
him, that thou may enjoy him: and such an Acquiescence* complacency and
satisfying delight in the enjoyment of him? how can it be other then sincere
love to him?

3. Finally, the properties of true love to Christ, are the best way whereby
you may examine your love unto him. True love to Christ is, 1. Obediential. 2.
Transcendent. 3. Breathing after more evidence and assurance of Christ's love.
4. Accepting Christ's rebukes. 5. Sincere. And 6. constant,

1. Obedential. True love to Christ, makes obedient to Christ's commands in his
word: yea to all his commands. Christ says; Joh. 14.15.
If ye love me keep my Commandments. And again, Verse. 21.
He that has my Commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me. And
farther; Joh. 15.10.14.
If ye keep my Commandments, ye shall abide in my love: even as I have kept my
Fathers Commandments, and abide in his love. -- Ye are my friends, if you do
whatsoever, I command you. What Child can truly love his Father, what Servant
his Master, etc. but he will be obedient to him? What Christian can truly love
Christ, but he will cheerfully and universally obey Christ? 2 Col. 5.14.
The love of Christ constrains us, says the Apostle. Both Christ's love to us,
and our love to Christ, compel us with a sweet force, that we obey him, and
cannot choose but obey him. Do thou thus obey Christ and keep all his
Commandments? then thou truly love him. But contrariwise they who are not
obedient and subject to Christ, are far from loving Christ indeed. Christ
counts Luke 19.14.27.
them his enemies, that would not have him to reign over them. And says; Job.
14.24.
He that loves me not, keeps not my sayings.

2. Transcendent. True love to Christ transcendeth and surpasses all other
love. The love of Father, Mother, Wife, Son, Daughter, Brother, Sister, yea and
of a man's own life also, must give place to this love of Christ. Christ must be
loved above them all: yea, all they must be hated in comparison of Christ.
Christ himself says; Mat. 10.37.38.
He that loves Father or Mother more then me, is not worthy of me: and he that
loves Son or Daughter more then me, is not worthy of me. And he that takes
not his cross, and follows after me, is not worthy of me. And elsewhere;
Luke 14.26, 27, to 34.
If any man come to me, and hate not his Father, and Mother, and Wife, and
Children, and Brethren, and Sisters, yea and his own life also, he cannot be my
Disciple. And whosoever does not bear his Cross and come af^^^ me, cannot be
my Disciple. Not that we must properly hate our allies and li^^: but
comparatively we must hate them: That is, we must love them less then Christ.
Christ must sit in the throne of our hearts and affections, and all these must
sit below at his footstool. Thus those Martyrs are commended, that for the
love of Jesus, Rev. 12.11.
They loved not their lives unto the Death. Excellently Ignatius* Ignat. Epist.
ad Roman. p. 86. Edit. Oxon. 1644.
Now begin I to be a Disciple. I ^eal^^sly affect nothing of visibles or
invisibles, that I may obtain Jesus Christ. Let fire and the Cross, and the
joynt-rising up of wild^ beasts, the dissections, separations, dissipa^ions of
my bones, cuttings in pieces of my members, dissolution of my whole body, and
the punishment of the Devil come upon me, only that I may win Jesus Christ.
Notably Paul, Act. 21.31.
(...) ready not to be bound only, bu^ ^lso to die at Jerusalem for the name of
the Lord Jesus. Do thou bear such fervent, transcendent, warm affection to
Christ, that thou would be content to part wi^h all, rather then part with
him?

3. True love to Christ, breaths after more assurance and evidence of Christ's
love to the Soul. They who dearly love Christ, long to have Christ's love more
confirmed, sealed, and manifested to them. A true taste thereof is so sweet and
pleasant: they desire a full draught. A glimps of it is so delectable they
desire still a fuller view, and manifestation. The more they love Christ, the
more they desire to be loved of Christ. And they have a kind of holy
jealousy, le^t Christ should not love them so as they desire. Love is a greedy
affection, still covering after more love, thus the Church says to Christ,
Cant. 8.6
Set me as a Seal upon thine heart, as a Seal upon thine arm; for love is
strong as death, jealousy is cruel as the grave; The coals thereof are coals
of fire, which has a most vehement flame. Here Is her request: and the reason
of it. Her request, To be set as a Seal upon his heart and arm. 2 Timothy ^.19.
Neh. 9.38 Romans 4.11
Sealing is for ratification, confirmation, or sure making of any thing.
Setting the Church as a Seal upon Christ's Heart and Arm, seems to imply a
confirming and stablishing of her in Christ's inward affection, and his outward
expression or manifestation thereof to her. This probably alludes to the High
Priest of old, who did Exodus 28.11, 12, 21* 29.
bear the names of Israel, engraven on Stones upon his heart and shoulder, for
a m^morial before the Lord. She desires that she may be deeply engraven in
Christ's heart, in Christ's love; and may be assured hereof also by the
expression of his love to her. Here Is her request. The reason of her request is
drawn from the vehemence of her love to Christ, ready to overcome her as death:
to swallow her up as the grave: and to consume her, as a burning flame: if
Christ do not support and comfort her with his love, bring her closer to his
heart, and manifest his affection to her. She should even die and perish
through love, if she might not be beloved. Do thou thus long to be set as a
Seal upon Christ's heart and arm, through thy love unto him?

4. True love to Christ accepts of his Rebukes, Peter had thrice denied Christ
a little before his death* Christ appearing to his Disciples after his
Resurrection, John 21.15, 16, 17.
thrice asks Peter, Love thou me? By this threefold question, secretly (as it
were) reproving Peter his triple denial, and giving Peter occasion to testify
his repentance by his thrice professing his love to Christ whom he had thrice
professedly denied. As Augustine says. ^edd tur n^gationi, trinae trina
confessio, ne minus amori lingua serviat, quam timori: and plus vocis ^liouisse
videatur mors quam vita praesens. -- ^inc invenit exit (...) ille negator and
amator, praesumendo elatus, negando prostratus, flendo ^u^gatus, confilendo
probatus, patiendo coronatus hunc invenit exitum, ut proejus nomine perfecta
dilectione moreretur, cum quo se moriturum perversa festinatione promiserat.
Aug. Tract. 123. in Evang. Joan. p. 566. A. C. Basil. 1569.
A threefold Confession is added to his threefold denial that his tongue might
not less serve his love then his fear. -- He was puffed up by presuming, cast
down by denying, purged by weeping, proved by confessing, and crowned by
suffering. Now Peter thus proved, and tacitly reproved, yet hates not Christ
reproving, but loves him, and thrice professes his love to him, twice appealing
to Christ (who knew his heart) in these professions. Thus he accepts his
rebukes, but they that cannot bear Christ's rebukes, thereby they testify their
hatred to Christ. Christ said to his unbelieving Brethren; The world cannot
hate you, but me it hates, because I testify of it, that the works thereof
are evil.

5. Sincere. True love to Christ is upright, Joh. 7.7.
without guil, dissimulation or hypocrisy. Cant. 1.3.
The Virgins love thee. They love Christ with chaste, undefiled, undivided
Virgin-affections. And again, Cant. 1.4
The upright love thee. Hebr. uprightness love thee, Vprightnesses, being put
for upright ones: the abstract for the concrete. Or, they love thee in
uprightnesses, that is, most uprightly; As the Hebrew may bear, and the margin
in our English Bibles intimates. Thus Peter evidenced the integrity of his
love to Christ, when he even appealed to Christ himself, that he loved him;
Joh. 21.16, 17.
Thou know all things, thou know that I love thee. The Elect love Christ
for himself, for his Cant. 1.3
odoriferous ointments, for his fragrant name: therefore they love him
sincerely. The love that carnal men bear to Christ, is for carnal respects,
Joh. 6.26
for his loaves, etc. or they love him only in word and tongue, in form and
complement, as Judas when he kissed him: but they love him not really and
cordially, in deed and in truth.

6. Finally, Constant. True love to Christ is a long-lasting, ever-living, and
continuing love. Not like Jonas his gourd, that comes up in a night, and
vanishes in a night, but like heart of Oak or Cedar, not subject to
putrefaction. Ephesians. 6.24
Gra^e be with all the^ that love the Lord Jesus Christ in incorruption. For so
the Greek word may, Benz. Anot. in lo. (...)
(as Beza observes) be more exactly translated, then, In s^^^^rity. Whereby the
Apostle intimates that true love to Christ is not liable to corruption,
putrefaction or decay* but still continues constant. Yea the flames of true
love to Christ are so hot, that no waters of affliction can quench it, no
floods of persecution can drown it. Cant. 8.6, 7.
The coals thereof are coals of fire, which has a most vehement flame, Many
waters cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it. Persecutors have
taken away the M^rtyrs lives for Christ, but could never destroy the M^rtyrs
loves to Christ. Therefore that love to Christ, that fades and ^ieth,
especially when trouble and persecution arises because of the Gospel, like the
withering affection of the Mat. 13.21. Luke 10 13.
s^ony ground he^rers, is but a counterfeit love, a mere empty shadow that
vanishes ^way.

By these properties, thou may discover ^hy love to Christ.

II. Love to Christians is another branch of that love which is requisite as a
previous qualification, fitting persons for worthy ^eceiving of the Lords
Supper, and t^ that end, to be examined before we come. Touching this, nore, 1.
The necessity of it. 2. The Trial of it. 1. The necessity of love to
Christians, of brotherly love, in order to worthy communicating, is exceeding
great. And, when ever more necessary ^he^ in our days, wherein the love of
many, both to Christ and Christians, is waxen ^old wh^^ disaffections,
divisions, rents revilings, evil ^^rmizings, wrath, clamor, bitterness, and
odious distempers, are crept ^n amongst br^thren in this Nation more then ever!
High time therefore now to cry out, where is the spirit of love? now to
endeavor the recovery of this fainting, swounding and dying affection. But
here the necessity of it is only to be pressed in reference to the Lords
Supper. To that end ponder seriously upon these ensuing considerations.

1. He that truly loves not his Brother* that truly lo^es not a Christian, is a
mere carnal man. For he is in his natural darkness* and walks therein. He is
spiritually dead, and in Gods account A Murderer of his Brother^ for there is
hand murder, by shedding men's blood: Tongue-murder, by cruel reproaches, etc.
Heart-Murder, by causeless anger and hatred. 1 John 2.9, 10, 11.
He that says he is in the light, and hates his Brother is in darkness, even
until now. He that loves his brother abides in the light, and there is none
occasion of stumbling in him. But he that hates his Brother is in darkness,
and walks in d^rkness, and knows not whither he goes; because that
darkness has blinded his eyes. -- And again it is said, 1 John 3.14, 15.
He that loves not his brother, abides in death. Whosoever hates his
Brother, is a Murderer: and ye know, that no murderer has eternal life abiding
in him. Now he that is a mere carnal man, in his carnal darkness, spiritually
dead in sin, A murderer, without eternal life abiding in him* Cannot possibly
perform any true service unto God: And consequently, not rightly receive the
Lords Supper; which is to be managed with more then ordinary abilities. God
tells the Jews, that all their duties and solemn services were abominable to
him, because Isa. 1.15.
their hands were full of blood. And Paul says, Romans 8.8
They that are in the flesh cannot please God. Wherein can they not please him?
Neither in their persons, nor in any of their performances whatsoever. They are
Mat. 12.33, 34, 35.
bad Trees, and cannot bring forth good fruit; for such as is the Tree, such is
the fruit. Such as is the treasury of the Heart, such are the things brought
out of that treasury. An evil man out of the bad treasury of his heart brings
forth evil things only.

2. No gifts or duties, though never so excellent in themselves, are of any
consequence at all in the sight of God without brotherly love. Paul says, 1
Cor. 13.1, 2, 3.
Though I speak with the tongues of m^n and of A^gels, and have not charity, I
am becom^ as sounding brass, or a tinkling Cymbal. And though I have the gift
of prophecy and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge. And though I have
all faith, so that I could remove Mountains, and have no charity, I am nothing.
And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor. And though I give my body
to be burned, and have not charity, it profits me nothing. Here he instanceth
in three sorts of eminent gifts; tongues, prophecy, and faith of miracles: and
in two sorts of most admirable acts or duties, greatest liberality to the poor,
and even martyrdom it self for the truth, yet all these nothing without charity
to the Brethren. So proportionably, the receiving of the Lords Supper, though
never so often, is nothing without brotherly love. Remarkable is that of our
Saviors to this effect, having reproved unbrotherly affections and words, as a
kind of murder; Mat. 5.23, 24.
If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy Brother
has ought against thee: leave there thy gift before the Altar, and go thy way,
first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. Christ
makes no reckoning of the most religious actions; if there be not true
brotherly affections. Therefore he requires brotherly love and reconcilement
first to be endeavored, before sacrifice to God be presented.

3. The Lords Supper is a Sacramental Seal and Token not only of our Communion
with Christ, but also of our Communion with his members, of our fellowship with
the Saints. This the Apostle clearly intimates, saying, 1 Cor. 10.16, 17.
For we being many are one bread, and one body: for we are all partakers of
that one bread. That is, we that partake that one bread in the Lord Supper,
made up of many grains of Corn: are mystically one with each other in Christ,
though we be many. We all are but one bread, though many grains: one body,
though many members. Such is our Union and Communion with one another,
confirmed in this Ordinance. Now without true brot^erly Col. 3.14
Love which is the bond of perfectness among Brethren, we shall but deal
hypocritically in the Lords Supper, professing Union and Communion with the
Brethren, to whom we have no true love, which is the bond of this Union and
Communion.

4. The Lords Supper was ordained to confirm unto us Gods remission of our sins
unto us in Christ's blood. For in the institution Christ says of the Cup, Mat.
26.2^.
This is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many for the
remission of sins. That is, this wine in the Cup is a sign and seal of my
blood of the New Testament, shed for obtaining remission of sins to many, even
to all the Elect. So that Christ's blood and remission of sins purchased
thereby, are signified and sealed to us in the Lords Supper. Now we cannot have
Gods pardon of our sins sweetly and comfortably by this Ordinance, or any other
assured to our Consciences, unless we have true brotherly love, and exerci^e it
also in forgiving one another our trespasses, and mutual injuries that may fall
out. Upon those te^^ (...) Christ taught us to pray for pardon; Mat. 6.12 Luke
11.4.
And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our deb^ors. For confirmation of which
Petition Christ adds; Mat. 6.14 15.
For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive
you. But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father
forgive your trespasses. And Christ farther shows in an eminent Parable to this
purpose, Mat. 18.23. to the end of the Chapter.
That if we forgive not to one another our small debt of an hundred pence, we
cannot expect that God will remit our great debt to him of ten thousand talents.

5. Finally, to come to the Lords Supper, without true brotherly love, with
divided, uncharitable, unbrotherly hearts, is most unsuitable and disgraceful
both to Christ and his Supper. To Christ, because he is one, and unites all his
Members to himself as head, and to each other as fellow Members, in one
mystical body: To the Lords Supper also, for that is a bond of our Union and
Communion with Christ, and with one another as his members. Now how can we draw
near to Christ this uniting Head, or to the Lords Supper this uniting
Ordinance, without brotherly love and union; but we cross and dishonor both?
In these respects true brotherly love is necessary before we communicate, to
fit for worthy receiving. And therefore it is necessary we try and examine
beforehand our Brotherly love.

2. The Trial of our true Brotherly love follows. True brotherly love has
these excellent properties, whereby it may be examined and discovered. 1. It
arises from our love to God. 2. It is pure. 3. Spiritual. 4. Universal. 5.
Sincere. 6. Kindly-affectioned. 7. Contenting in the society of the Brethren.
8. Fervent. 9. Constant.

1. True Brotherly Love arises from, and is accompanied with our true love to
God. 1 John 5.1
Every one that loves him that begat, loves him also that is begotten of him:
That is, he loves the godly for Gods sake, the spiritual Child for the Fathers
sake. But we love him that begat for his own sake. And John adds, Verse. 2.
By this we know that we love the Children of God, when we love God and keep
his Commandments. So that, make sure thy love to God: this makes sure thy love
to the Brethren. But how shall I know that I truly love God? Answ. By thy
cheerful keeping of all Gods Commandments without grumbling and murmuring.
Verse. 3.
For this is the love of God, (says John) that we keep his Commandments, and
his Commandments are not grievous. And brotherly love is one of his
Commandments. 1 John 4.21.
And this Commandment have we from him, that he who loves God love his Brother
also. And how shall I know whether I truly keep Gods Commandments? Answ. See
formerly in the trial of New Obedience.

2. True brotherly love is pure. It Is seated in, and flows from a pure heart:
an heart Act. 15.9
purified by faith justifying, and by the 1 Cor. 6.11.
spirit sanctifying. 1 Pet. 1.22.
Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth through the Spirit,
unto unfeigned love of the brethren, see that ye love one another with a pure
heart. So that a carnal unsanctified man can never, so remaining, truly love
the brethren. An impure carnal heart can afford no other then impure carnal
affections.

3. True brotherly love is spiritual. It is carried to Gods people in
spiritual, not in carnal respects. To love Gods people for their greatness,
wealth, beauty, wisdom, learning, friendliness, kindred, and like carnal
considerations, is but to love them carnally; a Reprobate may so love them.
True love respects them spiritually, and for spiritual considerations, viz. It
loves them,

1. As Gods Children. 1 John 5.1, 2.
Every one that loves him that begat, loves him also that is begotten of him.
By this we know that we love the children of God. -- Then we love aright, when
we love the regenerate for their Regenerations sake: Gods children for Gods
Image in them: the godly for their godliness: the Saints for their Saintship:
Christians for their Christianity. When we love them principally for God,
Christ, Grace, Godliness, Holiness, etc. which we apprehend to be in them. And
when, as their graces grow, our love grows also more and more toward them.
This evidenceth the spiritualness and truth of our love. What may we think of
them then, that most of all hate Gods people for their godliness, graces, etc?

2. As Brethren in Christ. There Is a spiritual Brotherhood in Christ, wherein
all his members relate to one another as Brethren, Christ being the firstborn
among many Brethren. Now we have true love to the Brethren, when we love them
as Brethren, for their brotherhood. 1 Pet. 2.17.
Love the brotherhood, -- 1 Pet. 3.8
Love as Brethren.

3. As fellow members. The Apostle at large shows, that all the members of
Christ's mystical body are also 1 Cor. 12.12. etc.
fellow members to one another And that they are so placed in Christ's mystical
body, that they all have a mutual dependence upon, and need of one another.
Hence from this relation of member-ship, he urged a double act of member-like
love, viz. 1. Mutual member-like caring for one another. Verse. 25.
The members should have the same care one for another, being mutually aiding
and assisting to one another, though never so mean: as the eye or hand will
stoop down, to help the foot that is wounded or pained. 2. Mutual member-like
sympathy and compassion to one another. Verse. 16.
And whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it: or one member
be honored, all the members rejoice with it. A truly loving member not only
rejoices with the rejoicing, etc. but also grieveth with the grieved, smarteth
with the pained, suffers with the afflicted, wants with the necessitated,
is in bonds with the imprisoned, etc. from this sympathizing disposition. Is
thy love to the brethren such a spiritual love in these spiritual notions and
considerations? 4. True brotherly love is universal: To one Christian, as well
as to another, to all as well as to any, whether rich, poor, bond, free, male
or female. Philemons love was commended by Paul, that it was Philem. Verse. 5.
toward all Saints. And upon the same ground, the Colossians love was matter
of Paul's thankfulness to God; Col. 1.3.4.
We give thanks to God, -- Since we heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, and of
the love which ye have to all the Saints. And no wonder; for he that loves one
person truly for godliness and grace, he will love every person, wherein grace
or godliness appears; those most, that discover most grace. For the like cause
will produce the like effect. Those then that have the love of the brethren
with respect of persons; that love the rich Saints with their gold Rings, and
gay Cloathings, but not the poor Saints with their vile raiment, etc. they deal
not sincerely in their love. For Christ is as truly precious and amiable for
substance, in one Christian as in another.

5. True brotherly love is sincere. The command is, Romans 12.9.
Let love be without dissimulation. The practice according to this command was
in these to whom Peter writes, who had 1 Pet. 1.22.
purify themselves unto the unfeigned love of the Brethren. The pattern of our
sincere love to the Brethren, is Joh. 13.34, 35. and 15.12. Ephesians. 5.2.
Christ's sincere love to us, often urged to this end. Now the sincerity of our
brotherly love, evidenceth it self principally two ways, viz.

1. By the reality of it. True brotherly love is not merely verbal and
complemental, in words and shows; but real and substantial, in deed and truth,
The Hebrews not only loved the Saints, but loved them really. Heb. 6.10
God is not unrighteous to forget your work and labor of Love, which you have
showed toward his name, in that ye have ministered to the Saints, and do
minister. John exhorts to this reality; 1 John 3.17, 18.
My l^ttle children, let us not love in word, neither in tongue, but in deed
and in truth. Complementall love may be false love, treacherous love. Job
offers to kiss Amasa, and strikes him under the fifth rib that he died. Judas
kissed Christ, and thereby betrayed him to be crucified.

2. By the scope and aim of love. True love to the Brethren seeks and intends
their good as wel^ as our own. 1 Cor. 13.5.
Love seeks not her own, That is, not only: not exclusively, so as to shut
out our Brethrens good and welfare. Phil. 2.2, 3, 4.
Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of
others. When men pretend o^e to the brethren, and intend only their own ends,
and to serve their own turns of them, never truly minding their brethrens good,
they exercise not brotherly love, but self-love. The world is full of this
counterfeit love.

6. True brotherly love is kindly affectioned. Romans 12.10. (...)
Be kindly affectioned one to another with brotherly love. The word here
rendered, kindly affectioned, is very emphatical, and originally signifies that
dear natural affection that is betwixt Parents and Children: as also the loving
of that affection. It is as much as, Be loving-kinde. Now this Loving Kindness,
or kind affectionateness, discovers it self diverse ways, viz. 1. In
courteousness, the Apostle urging diverse Acts and expressions of brotherly
love, says, 1 Pet. 3.8 (...) tanquam (...) qui sapit amica h. e. studet facere
ea que alteri amica sunt. Pisc. in loc.
be courteous. The Greek word here used, seems to intimate such a sweet
disposition, as studies and endeavors things grateful and acceptable to Gods
people, and to render it self well-pleasing to them. Contrary unto which is
churlishness, crabbidness, and crookedness of disposition. 2. In
compassionateness. (...). 1 Pet. 3.8.
Be pitiful. Or as the Greek may more exactly be rendered; Easily
compassionating. Or, Easily moved to bowels of compassion. This implies both a
compassionate disposition, and a quickness, easiness to that compassion. When
the heart beholding the distresses of brethren is tender over them, quickly
moved and melted toward them, presently bleeds over them. 3. In bearing one
another burdens. Gal. 6.1, 2.
Bear ye one another burdens. -- The Apostle having exhorted spiritual ones to
restore a man overtaken in a fault, with the spirit of meekness: presently adds
this of bearing one another burdens. He seems to intend the slips and
frailties, even among the spiritual, which are a burden to them. They must help
one another to bear these burdens, not by encouraging them, countenancing or
conniving at them, this were to burden them more: but by helping them to get
rid of their burdensome corruptions, by wise, kind, meek, loving reproofs,
admonitions, instructions, exhortations, having tender compassion over them.

7. True brotherly love is best contented in the godly society of the brethren.
David was a c^mpanion of all them that feared God and kept his Commandments.
Psa. 119.63.
He counted the Ps. 16 3.
Saints the excellent on earth: in them was all his delight. Such as truly love
the godly above all people, desire to live with the godly above all people.
Contenting Society is hardly dissembled: But such as are weary of the company
of the gracious, and delight more in the Society of the carnal, they are
strangers to true brotherly love. 8. True brotherly love is or ought to be
servent. 1 Pet. 1.22.
See that ye love one another with a pure heart fervently. And John intimates
so fervently, as if need require, not only to part with our goods to the
brethren, but when we have a just call, to part with our lives for the
brethren. 1 John 3.16, 17.
Hereby perceive we the love of God because he laid down his life for us: and
we In what cases we are to lay down our lives for the brethren. th^en. See in
my believers Evidences. Chap. 8. Sect. 5.
ought to lay down our lives for the brethren. This is the highest expression
of love: this is fervent love indeed, and fervent love may have many inferior
degrees. Generally there is such coldness and frozen-heartedness toward Gods
dear children, that it is evident, there is little true love to them in the world.

9. Finally, True brotherly love is constant and continuing, and so ought to
be. Heb. 131
Let brotherly love continue --, 1 Cor. 13.8.
charity never fails; but whether there be Prophecies, they shall fail;
whether there be tongues, they shall cease, etc. True love is not like Jonas
his Gourd, suddenly springing, and as suddenly dying: but like Cedar or heart
of Oak longlasting, yea ever-living. Love of the brethren will continue till
death, yea and beyond death in heaven. Then the Saints shall love one another
perfectly without all disaffection or corruption; and they shall jointly be
swallowed up in the love of God to all eternity.

Thus try the truth of thy brotherly love. And having found it in thy self,
abound and persevere therein. This it that which the Apostle so pathetically
urges upon his Phil. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Philippians, and in them upon us. This that excellent Grace which he so
commends above all gifts to the 1 Cor. 13.1. to 9.
Corinthians. And this is that which Christ himself so earnestly commends to
his Apostles, as the very badge and character of his Disciples. Joh. 13.34.3.
A new Commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another, as I have loved
you, that ye also love one another. By this shall all men know that ye are my
Disciples, if ye have love to one another.

VI. THANKFVLNES is a farther qualification, necessarily required to fit and
prepare us for worthy receiving of the Lords Supper. And touching which
consequently we are to examine our selves. Here understand that thankfulness
which peculiarly respects Christ, his Death, his new covenant, and his Supper.
Now consider, 1. The Necessity. 2. The Discovery of this thankfulness. 1. The
necessity of true thankfulness for Christ, his death, his new Covenant, and
Sacrament peculiarly, to fit us for worthy rece^ving of the Lords Supper, is
evident upon these grounds.

1. Thankfulness was used and expressed by Christ at his institution of the
Lords Supper; Luke 22.19, 20. and 1 Cor. 11.24, 25.
And he took the bread and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave unto them,
saying, This is my body which is given for you; This do in remembrance of me.
Likewise also the C^p after supper, saying, This cup is the new Testament in my
blood which is shed for you. That he gave thanks is clear. What was the Some
think that Heavenly Prayer in Joh. 17. was the Prayer which Christ used ^n
^nstituting the Lords S. 1. Partly from the suitableness of the matter of it.
2. Partly from the agreeableness of the time of it. s^e Joh. 18.1.
matter or form of his thanksgiving, is not evident. Yet it is most likely that
Christ who did all things properly, gave thanks with reference to the Action in
hand, viz. not only for the outward Elements, but especially for the inward
mysteries to be represented by them, that now his death approached, wherein his
body was to be broken, and his blood shed for the life of the world, for the
nourishment of his Elect, which he delighted to accomplish. And the Lords
Supper from Christ's giving thanks at the institution, is denominated by the
Greek Fathers (...), The Eucharist; That is, The Thanksgiving. It being the
Christians eminent Thank-offering. Now if Christ gave thanks at the first
institution: proportionably we are still to give thanks in all
after-Administrations of the Lords Supper, especially because Christ says, Do
this, in reference to the whole Action.

2. The matter of the Lords Supper eminently calls for thankfulness, viz. 1.
The Inward matter signified and sealed, Christ body and blood; That is, Christ
crucified, together with all the virtues, benefits, victories, Purchases and
Privileges of his Death. This the inward matter and mystery of the Lords
Supper. Oh wh^^ matter of thankfulness is this! Think how ^^^ellent Christ is,
Gods Joh. 3.16
only Son, Col 1.13
The Son of his love, yea Joh. 1.1. Phil. 2.6.
God himself; therefore far beyond ten thousand worlds. Think what his death
was! Such a death, as (all things considered) never was endured: wherein malice
of men, rage of all the powers of darkness, the wrath of God and Isa. 53.6.
sins of all the Elect did meet in him at once. And think what we worthless
sinners gain by this Death of Christ? What pardons, Reconciliation, Peace with
God, etc. And all these confirmed to us in the Lords Supper, that lasting
Monument of Christ crucified: Oh what manifold cause of thankfulness is here:
2. The outward matter of the Lords Supper, viz. the Elements of Bread and Wine,
together with the actions of taking, blessing, breaking, giving, eating and
drinking them; affords also much cause of thankfulness, that Christ would thus
condescend to our weakness, as to represent such heavenly mysteries to us by
such homely elements and actions. He deals herein with us, as once with
doubting Thomas, makes us (as it were) thrust our finger into the print of his
nails, that we may believe, helps our inward graces by our outward senses.

3. The ends of the Lords Supper are such, that they notably challenge manifold
thankfulness from us, whenever we partake the Lords Supper. These ends are;
The solemn Luke 22.19. 1 Cor. 11.26.
remembrance of Christ's Death, never to be forgotten: The 1 Cor. 11.20.
nourishing of the inward man, of faith and all our graces: The Mat. 26.28.
confirmation and application of the New Testament with all the Promises
thereof to us: The Ratification of the Mat. 26.28.
pardon of our sins in Christ's blood. And the sealing up unto us that sweet
privilege of 1 Cor. 1^ 16.17.
Communion with Christ and with one another. Not one of these but deserves much
thankfulness; How great thankfulness then is due for all of them together in
the Lords Supper?

2. The Trial of our thankfulness, which is thus necessary for worthy
communicating, comes next to be considered: and we may try the truth of our
thankfulness, by the three eminent Acts or degrees of thankfulness, viz. 1.
Notice-taking or acknowledgement of blessings received. 2. Estimation of
mercies received and acknowledged. 3. Retribution or rendering again for
mercies received, acknowledged and esteemed.

1. Notice-taking or acknowledgement of benefits received, is a first degree or
Act of thankfulness. Till a man take notice of a benefit; and whence it comes,
he can neither esteem it, nor render again for it as he ought. Thus when David
would express his thankfulness to God for enabling him and his people to offer
so willingly and liberally toward the building of the Temple, He takes notice
of the benefit and whence it came, even all from God alone; 1 Chronicles. 29.13, 14,
16.
Our God, we thank thee, and praise thy glorious name. But who am I, and what
is my people, that we should be able to offer so willingly after this sort? for
all things come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee. And in the Hebrew
phrase, Giving of thanks, is most usually expressed by, Ps. 105.1. and 106.1.
and 107.1. and 136.1. and frequently in the B. of Psalms.
Confessing to the Lord. For confessing and acknowledging what good we receive,
and whence we have it, is a prime point of thankfulness. Contrariwise it is a
point of deep ingratitude not to observe and acknowledge the benefits, and
whence they come. Israel is blamed for this, Hos. 2.8.
She did not know that I gave her corn and new wine, and oil, and multiplied
her silver and gold. Such, like Swine, eat up and devour the Acorns or mast,
but never look up to the Oak whence they fall.

Do thou now duly take notice of that mercy of mercies, Jesus Christ and his
Death? how mysteriously the saving of sinners by him is contrived in Gods
eternal Counsel, and revealed in the Scriptures? How Christ his death, and all
his benefits, originally flow from Gods mere grace* and the good pleasure of
his will? Do thou duly observe and acknowledge the mercy of the Lords Supper,
tendering and applying Christ and his death, and how it was from Christ's tender
love and care of his Church that he instituted it? This is some degree of
gratitude. But alas, how many come to the Lords Supper, who do not
considerately take notice of this Mystery of saving sinners by Christ, which is
the sum of all the Bible! etc.

2. Estimation of Benefits received and acknowledged, is a second Act or Degree
of thankfulness. The Virgin Mary thankfully magnifying the Lord for that
extraordinary mercy to her, Her Conception of Christ by the Holy Gho^t: She
notably estimates and amplifies the Mercy, by the Majesty of the Giver, the
meanness of the Receiver, and the Greatness of the Gift; Luke 1.46.48, 49.
My soul does magnify the Lord, -- For, he has regarded the low estate of his
handmaid; -- for he that is mighty has done to me great things. God had done
great things for Mary, in that Christ according to the flesh was conceived in
her womb: but he has done greater for thee, in that Christ according to the
Spirit is conceived in thy soul. She was happy in bearing Christ, much happier
in believing in Christ. She was happy in being Christ's natural Mother: Happier
in being Christ's spiritual member. Now as true thankfulness esteems and values
mercies, turns them over and over, views them on every side etc. so
unthankfulness debases, vi^ifies, discommends, twits, fleights the mercies, as
Israel the Mannah, Numb. 21.5. and 11.6.
Our soul loatheth this light-light Bread, as the Hebrew phrase is.

Art thou now qualified with thankfulness for the Lords Supper, where then is
thy due estimation of 1. Christ, 2. His Death, 3. His Supper? All the^e are
thankfully to be esteemed according to their respective worth, by thankful
Communicants.

1. Do thou esteem Christ, the Matter of the Lords Supper, according to his
worth? Paul so esteemed him, that he desired to 1 Cor. 2.2
Know nothing but Christ. That he Phil. 3.
counted all things loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ: yea
all things dung that he might win Christ. The Church so esteemed Christ, as to
count him, Cant. 5.10. etc.
The chief among ten thousand. How do thou estimate Christ? Do thou
amplify and commend Christ to thy self by such consideration, as may raise up
greatest estimation of him? As, 1. The greatness of the Giver; Joh. 3.16. Gal.
4.4. Genesis 1^.1.
the all-sufficient, self-^ufficient God. Having all happiness, fulne^s and
perfection in himself, and no way needing any of his creatures. Yet he gave
Christ for us. 2. The eminency of the Gift or Benefit. Christ is Joh. 4.10
The Gift of God, That is, The Gift of Gifts. No other Gift being comparable to
him. And therefore they are said to have 1 Pet. 3.10.
Received no mercy, that are not partakers of this mercy of mercies. He is Joh.
3.16.
the Son of God, the only begotten Son of God, Heb. 1.3.
the brightness of his Fathers glory, the express character of his person.
Col. 1.13.
The Son of his Love; Heb. 7.26.
Holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and higher then the Heavens;
etc. Who can truly know Christ, and not highly esteem Christ? 3. The indignity
of them for whose sakes Christ was given. He was intentionally indeed given
Joh. 10.11.15. Ephesians. 5.25.
for his elect sheep, and for his Church: But these all undone by the fall of
the first Adam, and whilst in that wretched state. Whilst Romans 5.6.8.10.
yet without strength, when sinners, whilst enemies, whilst Romans 8.7
enmity it self against God: when they were Ephesians. 2.1.
dead in trespasses and sins, Act. 8.23.
in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity: Even then when there was
nothing but unworthiness and abominableness in them, was Christ given for them.
And this, whilst Christ was not given for the Reprobates of the world, (for
whom Christ would not so much as Joh. 17.9
Pray, much less die,) and yet these in no worse condition by nature, then
those for whom Christ died. How does this heighten the mercy! 4. The motive or
impulsive why Christ was bestowed, was not any thing at all in the creature:
but merely the free Grace and Joh. 3.16.
Love of God. Upon these and like considerations what estimation have thou of
Christ?

2. Do thou esteem Christ's Death, The Mystery of the Lords Supper? Christ is
the matter, but how? Christ as crucified, as 1 Cor. 11.24.
Broken, as slain for us: in that respect Christ is the matter, his Death
therefore is the Mystery of it. How do value Christ's Death? Do thou
estimate it, according to the true valuableness of it? viz. 1. Esteemest thou
Christ's death according to the love evidenced in it? Joh. 15.13.
Greater love then this has no man, then that a man lay down his life for his
friends. But greater then this Christ showed, in laying down his life for
enemies. 1 John 3.16.
Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life for us. Was
ever love like this love? The Apostle prays for the Ephesians, (and his
expressions are admirable:) Ephesians. 3.18, 19.
That they may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and
length, and depth, and height: and to know the love of Christ, which passes
knowledge. He measures Christ's love by 4 Dimensions. Philosophy knows but
three, Length, Breadth and Depth: Divinity adds a fourth Height; intimating
that Christ's love is far beyond all ordinary measures and dimensions. There Is
Depth in it without bottom Height in it, without top: Breadth in it, without
side: and Length in it, without end. Yea, it utterly passes knowledge. Christ's
warmest love to sinners flowed with his blood out of all his wounds. Esteemest
thou his Death, according to Christ's love in dying? 2. Esteemest thou Christ's
death, according to the sufficiency of it? Christ's death was Ephesians. 5.2.
an Odor of a sweet smell, most acceptable to God. Heb. 10.14.
He by once offering up of himself has for ever perfected them that are
sanctified. So that there needs now no more Sacrifice for sins. The infinite
dignity of his person, so infinitely dignified his passion. Hence Christ by his
short suffering prevailed more for our salvation then all men on earth or
Angels in Heaven could have done, if they should have suffered to eternity. 3.
Esteemest thou Christ's death according to the many inestimable benefits of it?
Hereby Romans 3.25.
Sinners are justified and sins purged away: Hereby Romans 5.10.
Enemies to God are reconciled: Hereby Heb. 2.14 Col. 2.14, 15.
death, and he that had the power of death, the Devil, with all Principalities
and powers are subdued. Hereby Heb. 9.12
eternal Redemption from spiritual thraldom is obtained. In a word, hereby we
Heb. 10.19.20.
have access with boldness and entrance into the Holiest of all, Heaven it
self. Sanguis Christi Clavis C^eli.
Christ's blood is Heavens Key. Oh what soul can truly taste these saving
purchases of Christ's death; and not admire it!

(3.) Finally, do thou aright esteem the Lords Supper it self? It deserves
high estimation: 1. For the mysteries in it: Christ's death and all the benefits
of it: The New Covenant and all the promises of it: Communion with Christ, and
all the comforts of it. 2. For the familiarity of it. Herein Christ deals
familiarly with his members. He stoops to their senses below, that their senses
may lift up their faith to him above. He represents highest mysteries under
meanest elements and actions. Thus he condescends to our earthliness that we
may aseend to his heavenlinesse. 3. For the Firmness of it. In right use, the
Lords Supper does as surely signify, seal, and exhibit Christ crucified and
all his benefits to us, as we partake the outward elements; there being such a
Sacramental union betwixt signs and things signified. Do these and like
considerations raise up thy thoughts to an high estimation of this Ordinance?

3. Retribution, or rendering again according to the benefit received,
acknowledged and esteemed is the third and highest act or degree of
thankfulness. When David was most enlarged unto thankfulness, he says, Psalm.
116.12.
What shall I render unto the Lord, for all his benefits toward me? And
because King Hezekiah, recovered of his ^^knesse at his prayer, 2 Chro. 32.25.
rendered not again according to the benefit done unto him, therefore there was
wrath upon him, and upon Judah and Jerusalem. If non-rendring be ^o dangerous,
then how dangerous is it to render to God evil for good;

But what can we, or ought we, to render again for Christ, for his Death, for
his Supper, which are the eminent benefits that immediately call for thankful
returns or rendrings when we communicate? Answ. What should we not render again
for these benefits? All we can render is far too little. We should r^nder.

(1) Triumphant praises. Thus David resolved to render; Ps^. 116.13.
I will take up the cup of salvations, and call on the name of the Lord. That
is, I will take up the Cup of Thanksgivings for Gods salvations and
deliverances; and will pray and praise God, or preach abroad Gods mercies. For
Israel offered for mercies receied Thank-offerings, eating thereof with joy
before the Lord, and in their eating were wont to take up the Cup of wine, and
bless God; to this custom David alludes. In like sort we should be much in
Praises and Thanksgivings for Christ, his death, etc. As Paul notably 1 Timothy
1.11, 12, 15.16, 17.
thanks Christ, not only for calling him to the Apostolical Ministry, but also
and especially for coming into the world to save sinners, and himself chief of
sinners, making him a pattern of his grace, to all that after should believe.

(2) Indeared affections. Christ pardons the woman's many sins; this was one
fruit of his Death. Hereupon Luke 7.37 38, 47.
She loved him much, and testified the same by washing his feet with her
tears, wiping them with the hairs of her head, kissing them, and anointing
them with ointment; She has nothing too good, nothing good enough for Christ.
Has Christ Gal. 2.20
loved thee, and given himself for thee, leaving this Sacrament, as a legacy of
his love? Oh how should thou love him again, that thus loved thee first.

(3) True hearted repentance and reformation. Christ came into Zacheus's house
to dine with him, yea rather into Zacheus his heart, there spiritually to feast
his soul: presently Zacheus the Arch-publican penitentially reformes; Luke
19.2, to 11.
Behold, Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor, and if I have taken
any thing from any man by false accusation, I restore him fourefold. And Christ
testifies, This day is salvation come to this house, forasmuch as he also is
the son of Abraham. S^ul was a most cruel 1 Timothy 1.12. Acts 26.9, etc. and 9,
1, 2, etc.
Persecuter of Christ and his Members, as even himself testifies: but Christ
no sooner appears to him in his circuit of persecution, and converts him, but
he wonderfully reformes. Act. 9.20.
He straightway preached Christ in the Synagogues, that he is the Son of God.
Of a Persecutor he becomes a Preacher of Christ and his Gospel. This was a
thankful return indeed. Thy true thankfulness for Christ and his death, will
make thee render to him the like repentance and reformation.

(4.) The life of faith and new obedience, is another thankful return for
Christ and his death. Paul apprehending that Christ Gal. 2.20.
loved him, and gave himself for him; lived by faith. -- yea not so much he, as
Christ lived in him. -- Yea Christ being Gal. 1.15 16.
revealed in him, how immediately obedient was he in that extraordinary ser^ice
of preaching Christ among the Gentiles, not consulting with flesh and blood!
and this new obedience is the return that Christ expects from us, for giving
himself for us. That we Romans 6.4. etc. with Romans 14.7, 8.9.
should neither live, nor die to our selves, but to the Lord, who therefore
died, rose again, and revived for us, that he might be Lord both of quick and
dead.

5. Performance of vows and promises is another thankful return. When David
had questioned with himself, Psa. 116.12, 14.
What shall I ren^er to the Lord, etc? He answers himself presently, I will pay
my vows unto the Lord. We all of us have the vows of God upon us, according to
the tenor of the New Covenant, confirmed by Baptism and the Lords Supper,
Therein we promised to become Gods People, and to walk as Children of our
heavenly F^ther, as members of Christ, as Temples of the Holy Ghost, being
baptized into their name.

6. Finally, a willing cheerful readiness, if we be called thereto, to suffer
for Christ, who so willingly suffered for us. Christ spared not his blood for
us, nor should we spare our blood for him. Upon this account Act. 20.23, 24.
and 21.13.
Paul counted not his life dear unto him. -- Yea he was ready, not only to be
bound, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.

These are suitable returns for the great benefits of Christ and his death.
Try now whether thou can and do render such Praises, Affections,
Reformation, Life of Faith, and New Obedience, Performance of Vows, and (i^
need be) Sufferings for Christ and for Righteousness sake. Thus examine thy
Thankfulness.

VII. A SPIRITVAL APPETITE to this heavenly banquet, and to Jesus Christ
therein, is the next and last Communion qualification; touching which we are to
examine our selves before communicating. By spiritual appetite, I understand
that spiritual hunger and thirst, those holy desires, vehement pantings,
breathings and longings of soul after these heavenly dainties, and especially
after Jesus Christ therein.

1. The Necessity of this spiritual Appetite before we come to the Lords
Supper, is evident. For,

1. This Sacrament is a blessed feast, and spiritual banquet. It is called A
Supper. yea 1 Cor. 11.20.
The Lords Supper. Christ is the Master of the Feast: and Christ is the Matter
of the Feast. His precious body is here tendered as bread of life: and his
blood as water of life, to satisfy, strengthen, and enliven for ever every
believing soul. Now a Feast and an Appetite are Relatives: and so a spiritual
Feast and a sp^ritual Appetite. What good does the best Feast to him that has
no appetite? or what advantage is the keenest appetite to him that can come at
no food to satisfy it? it torments him but so much the more: So here. And if
ever dainties will stir up dull appetites, these rarest provisions will excite
spiritual hungrings and thirstings after them. What? feed upon Christ's body,
blood, merits, righteousness, pardons, purchases, victories, and all other
benefits of his death? who would not long for this Supper?

2. No small advantage will redound to us, by the sharpness and liveliness of
our appetites to this Ordinance. Hereby we shall feed upon Christ more
heartily: 1 Cor. 11.29.
Discern and relish him more sweetly: Be satisfied with him more contentedly:
Be affected with him more joyfully and thankfully: and be mightily cheared up
and strengthened for all sacred employments. Whereas if we come without
appetites, or with dull, weak, crazy appetites, we shall have small or no
delight in this banquet. Pro. 17.^.
The full soul loatheth an honeycombo, but to the hungry soul every bitter
thing is sweet.

2. The trial of a right spiritual Appetite to the Lords Supper follows.
Examine it by these ensuing properties.

1. A good sharp lively Communion-Appetite would be often eating. Hunger bites
and gnaws the sound stomach if but one meal be missed: The miss of this
ordinance, pains and grieves the soul of an hunger-bitten Christian. The
Primitive Christians had lively Appetites after this Supper; they desired it
often, yea they had it often. Paul 1 Cor. 11.25.26.
once and again, intimates a frequency of their communicating. And Luke seems
to insinuate, that it was their accustomed manner to communicate every Lords
day, which is the first day of the week; -- Act. 20.7.
And upon the first day of the week, when the disciples came together to break
bread, Paul preached unto them. Had we such hunger and thirst after Christ as
they had, we should desire the Lords Supper, as often as conveniently it might
be had. What weak and bad appetites have they, that can content themselves with
once communicating in the year, at Easter: yea perhaps with once in five or six
years?

2. Such as have good appetites will be at pains and cost to obtain food.
Hunger (we say) breaks the stone walls; will make a man labor early and late,
with sweat of his brows to get his bread, and not grudge to lay out his money
for necessary sustenance. Hunger made Jacob Genesis 42.23. and 43.13, 14.
send his sons into Egypt to buy bread, and at last made him willing to lend
Benjamin, his darling with them. Isaiah in his prophecy of Christ, says; Isa.
55.1.
Ha, every one that thirsts, (there is appetite,) come ye to the waters:
(there is paines-taking;) Come ye buy and eat; yea come, buy wine and milk; that
is all variety of spiritual Provisions in Christ; for to him is this
invitation: (There Is cost.) Consider now, what pains will thou be at for this
Sacramental Feast; will thou search and examine thy self aforehand diligently,
as has been directed? what cost and charge will thou be at^ will thou sell all
that thou have to purchase that pearl? will thou penitentially part with all,
even thy dearest corruptions, thy pride, covetousness, etc. that thou may
^e a welcome guest at this Table?

3. He that has a good spiritual appetite to this Feast, will be glad when
Christ by his Ministers invites him thereunto. Meal-time is a gladning time to
such as have good appetites, because then their hunger and thirst shall be
satisfied. It holds both in the corporal and spiritual appetite. David had many
a sweet meal in Gods house, by Prayer, Hearing, and other Ordinances: therefore
how was he affected, when opportunities of such refreshing were tendered! Ps.
122.1.
I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of the LORD. He
had a lively appetite, he was an hungry soul; that was gladned with such
spiritual invitations. Hence (some think) the sound of the Number. 10 2, to 11.
Silver Trumpets (which was among other uses for calling together the
Assemblies, and solemnity of their sacrifices) was called Ps. 89.15.
The joyful sound: because it made them joyful that had true appetites to the
public Ordinances. Now then art thou glad when the Sabbath comes, when the
Sacrament approaches, when they say to thee, Come, let us go to the Table of
the Lord, etc? Here Is a sign of a good appetite. But they that say, When will
the Sabbath be gone, the Sacrament be done, etc. having no kindly affectionate
movings? show their appetite is extreme dull, and diseased, if any at all.

4. A good stomach retains and closes fast with the food received, that it may
con^oct it. When the stomach returns and casts up its morsels, there is not
only no appetite, but the Party is dangerously distempered: So here, the soul
that is truly a thirst for Christ, when he has received him in the Sacrament,
or any other Ordinance, how does he clasp and close with him, that he may
digest and turn him into life, blood and spirits to the inner man, by Faith,
Prayers, and Meditation? He holds fast his death and the benefits thereof,
labors to walk as one in Communion with Christ, and refreshed therewith. And
charges all as the Church did once the daughters of Jerusalem; Cant. 2.7
I charge you -- that you stir not up, nor awake my love until he please.
But when men presently disgorge the Sacrament, forget Christ, his Death, his
New Testament and Communion with him unto which they have sealed in the Lords
Supper, returning to their lusts, covetousness, worldliness, drunkenness,
etc. as soon as they have turned their backs of the Lords Table, they have no
true spiritual appetites, but are woefully diseased.

6. Finally, A man of a good appetite not only retains food received, but also
finds strengthening, refreshment, comfort and much benefit by food retained.
His hunger is slaked; thirst quenched, crudities expelled, fainting spirits
revived, and decayed strength restored, whereby he becomes active for all
employments: So here, he that has a true spiritual appetite to the Lords
Supper, and to Christ crucified herein, he will extract and derive much
spiritual strength, comfort and refreshing from that banquet. Faith and all the
graces in the inner man will be nourished, ^latulencies of corruptions
corrected* Evidences of sin's pardon, Communion with Christ, and interest in
the New Testament will be farther confirmed and cleared, and spiritual strength
improved for all heavenly services: That the Communicant may walk in the
strength of this food many days, like Elijah till he come to the Mount of God.
This the very Scope of the Lords Supper thus to 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. and 11.23,
24. etc. Mat. 26, 26, 27.28.
strengthen, stablish, nourish, comfort a Christian in his inward man. Perhaps
for present these benefits may not be so evidently discerned at communicating,
as afterward: As in the corporal repast, the stomach is oft-times little
refreshed, yea sometimes becomes more sick by eating, yet afterward the body
is much advantaged by the food. Thus we may examine our Communion-Appetite.

And hitherto of our Due Preparation by Self-examination, for the Lords Supper,
before we communicate. Next consider we of The Right use of the Lords Supper
whilst we are Communicating.

II. Directions touching the Right Use of the Lords Supper in Communicating.
That thou may rightly use and handle the Lords Supper in the Act of
Communicating so as to be welcome and well-pleasing to Christ, and to reap
benefit thereby to thine own soul, carefully observe and follow these few
ensuing Directions.

I. Approach to the Lords Table in an humble Sense of thy Self-unworthinesse:
rather then with uncharitable censoriousnesse of others. Jesus Christ who
invites us to this Feast, is a great Lord and a Mighty King; even Rev. 19.19.
Lord of Lords and King of Kings: And we are but sinful lumps of dust and
ashes. What self-abasing thoughts therefore should dwell upon our hearts, in
all our approaches to him? Christ was Mat. 11.28.
meek and lowly of heart, and loves that we should learn of him to be meek, and
lowly also, that thereby we may find rest to our souls. He Luke 18.9, to 15.
justified the self-debasing Publican, when he condemned the Self-applauding
Pharisee. Thou know worse by thy self, then by any other: have therefore
meanest thoughts of thy self, be vilest in thine own eyes, Joh. 8.7
cast the first stone at thy self; say with Paul, Ephesians. 3.8.
I am least of Saints, but 1 Timothy 1.15.
chief of sinners; Say with the Canaanitish woman Mat. 15.27.
Truth Lord, I am a dog, yet the dogs eat of the crumbs that fall from their
masters Tables. Say not, this person is ignorant, that scandalous, that
unworthy, etc. but, say, Lord, I am ignorant, I am Luke 7.7.
unworthy to come unto thee Luke 1.16.
I am no more worthy to be called thy son, make me as one of thy hired
servants. The Apostles at the Supper censured not one another, but every one
most suspected himself, saying, Mat. 26.21, 22, 25.
Lord, is is I?

II. Propound to thy self, and actually level at right, not wrong ends, in
Communicating. Good Ends cannot justify a bad Action: but bad ends will
corrupt and condemn a good Action: Good Ends are the crown and glory of good
Actions.

Come not to the Lords Supper for these wrong Ends; viz. 1. Not to make the
Sacrament a bond of iniquity. As the bloody Papists abused the Lords Supper to
confirm themselves more strongly in carrying on the horrid Gunpowder-Treason.
To take the Lords Supper to strengthen a man's resolutions in any evil practice,
is blasphemously to make Christ a Patron to our sins, and the Sacrament a
stalking-horse to our corruptions. 2. Not for Superstitious purposes; as in
Popery, for Idolatrous Adoration of the Elements, carrying them about in
Procession, Reservation of them for healing of diseases in man or beast, for
casting them into dead men's graves, etc. These are abominable fooleries to be
abhorred, utterly besides the intention of the Lords Supper. 3. Not for
Conversion, or breeding Grace in a graceless heart. True, a man may possibly
be converted at the Lords Supper by the Word then opened and applied, but not
be converted precisely by the Lords Supper. For this sacrament was intended by
Christ as a spiritual Feast, 1 Cor. 11.20.
The Lords Supper; Therefore not to convert and give life to them that are
spiritually dead, but to confime and nourish them that are spiritually alive:
Not to breed Grace where there is none, but to feed Grace where there is.
Again, Who shall be converted by the Lords Supper? either they must be Pagans
from Paganism to Christianity, or professed Christians from a carnal to a
spiritual state in Christ; but neither of these are converted by the Lords
Supper. Not Pagans, for they are to be Mat. 28.18, 19.
converted by preaching the Gospel before they may be baptized, and till after
they be baptized they cannot be admitted to the Lords Supper. Not professed
Christians, for when they come to the Lords Supper, they either come worthily
or unworthily; if worthily, then they are true believers already and need no
conversion: if unworthily, then they are so far from being converted, that
they eat and drink their own condemnation. 4. Not for improving of Grace where
Grace is, ex opere operato, by the bare work done in communicating. The Lords
Supper is not like Physic or Medicine that works a cure by a natural property
therein whether the Patient sleep or wake, etc. but it is a spiritual Ordinance
that through Gods blessing, in the right use of it, improves and increases
Grace. Rest not therefore in the mere work done, but look to the well-doing of
it.

But come to the Lords Supper actually scoping and aiming at these right ends
in communicating, for which the Lords Supper was indeed instituted, viz.

1. For the solemn Remembering of Christ and lively showing forth of his Death.
Christ says in the Institution in reference to the Bread, Luke 22.^^.
This do in Remembrance of me. Paul reciting the Institution, annexes this
remembrance of Christ not only to the Bread, but also to the Cup; -- 1 Cor. 11,
24, 25, 26.
Take, eat, this is my body which is broken for you: This do in remembrance of
me. -- This Cup is the New Testament in my blood: This do ye, as often as ye
drink it, in remembrance of me. And he adds, in reference to both jointly; For
^s often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show the Lords Death
till he come. This remembrance of Christ and his Death therefore, is one
eminent and principal End for which the Lords Supper was ordained, and is to be
celebrated.

2. For the spiritual nourishment, support and strengthening of the inward man,
Faith and all saving Graces. Hence it is called 1 Cor. 11.20. and ver. 24.25.
The Lords Supper, And in this Supper here is spiritual food, The body of Christ
broken, and his blood shed. As also spiritual eating and drinking of this
heavenly provision. This is an other true End and use of it: for repairing the
wants, weaknesses, decays, etc. of the inward man, the Regenerate part in a
Christian.

3. For Ratification of the New Testament or New Covenant to us. -- 1 Cor.
11.25.
This Cup is the New Testament in my blood. That is, This wine in the Cup is a
Sign and Seal of my blood and death whereby the New Testament is confirmed.
For A Will, or Testament is confirmed and becomes of force by the Testators
Death. So that this Sacrament being a pledge of Christ's Death: Ratifies to us
the New Testament in Christ's Death, together with all the Promises, Privileges
and Comforts of the New Testament, as being all ours.

4. For Sealing up to our hearts, and helping on our Assurance of the Remission
of our sins. -- Mat. 26.28.
This is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many for the
remission of sins. Heb. 9.22.
Without shedding of blood is no remission; because otherwise Divine justice
had no satisfaction. And Heb. 10.4, and 9.9.10, 12, 13, 14.
no blood could satisfy Gods justice fully, and obtain remission of sins* but
the blood of Christ, God-man. Now as Christ Rev. 1.5.
has loved us, and washed us from our sins ^n his own blood: So he ordained
this Love-token, his Supper, to assure us that as certainly as we aright
partake this Sacrament so certainly our sins are pardoned, and our persons
justified through his blood. How sweet an use is this of the Lords Supper to
every soul that has experimentally felt the bitterness of his sins, the
Wormwood and the Gall!

5. For confirmation and increase of our Communion with Christ and him
crucified. 1 Cor. 10 16.
The Cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of
Christ? The Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the body of
Christ? The double Question does eleg^ntly and vehemently put it out of
que^tion, and beyond all doubt, that the Sacramental Bread and Cup are pledges
of our Communion with Christ's body and blood, That is, with Christ's Death, and
with all the Benefits, Victories, Purchases and Privileges of his Death: That
they are all ours, as truly as this Bread we eat, and this Cup we drink, are
ours. This communion of the Saints with Christ crucified, is as sweetest Honey
out of the Rock, as the Tree of life in the Garden of Eden, even their
spiritual Parad^se and Heaven on Earth. Who ever truly tasted the sweetness of
this communion with Christ: but must highly prize, and earnestly long for this
Sacramental Seal of that Communion?

6. Finally, For testification and improvement of our Communion with Christ's
Members. 1 Cor. 10.17.
For we being many are one Bread, and one Body: for we are all partakers of
that one Bread, The Saints have not only communion with Christ as their head
jointly, but also 1 Cor, 12.12, etc.
with one another as fellow members mutually: loving, pitying, helping and
taking care one of another. This reciprocal fellowship of Saints is signified,
sealed, etc. in the Lords Supper. As many grains of wheat make one bread and
many grapes one cup of wine: So they being many members yet are but all one
mystical body in Christ. And therefore from this spiritual and mystical union
and communion among them, sealed in this Ordinance, they ought to be more and
more dear to one another, every way careful ^or the spiritual good of one
another.

These are the right Ends and uses of the Lords Supper. In the Act of
communicating, still keep thine eye intentively upon them: As he that shoots
keeps his eye steadily on the mark or as he that runs directs his aims still to
the Goal.

III. In order to these excellent Ends manage the whole Sacramental Action
according to Christ's Institution. Sacraments are not Natural, but Instituted
worship, and therefore wholly depend upon Institution in their Being, and are
wholly to be regulated by Institution in their use. Bread does not naturally
and in it self signify Christ's body, more then the flesh of Beasts does: Nor
wine his blood, more then water or the blood of Sacrifices does: But by
positive institution bread and wine in the Lords Supper so signify Chr^sts
body and blood, as no other Elements can, because these alone were instituted
to that purpose. Therefore the institution must be the Rule and Standard for
regulating the whole Action of communicating. So Christ commands; Luke 22.19.
Do this, That is, Do this that I command, that I do in this Institution:
follow ye my Precept, and my Pattern herein all-a-long. Hence Paul intending
to reform the gross abuses and prophanations of the Lords Supper in the Church
of Corinth calls them back to the first Institution thereof by Christ, from
which they had turned aside, 1 Cor. 11.23, etc.
For I have received of the Lord, that which also I delivered unto you, etc.
Therefore in thy Giving, or Receiving the Lords Supper, keep close to the
Institution: then thou walk safely.

1. The Elements which Christ used, were Bread and Wine. Make. 14.22.23.24, 25.
Mat. 26.27, 28.29.
Jesus took Bread. -- And he took the Cup, etc. of which Cup he said, -- I will
drink no more of the fruit of the Vine, until. -- The Lords Supper therefore
must not be dispensed with any other Elements then Bread and Wine. What sort of
Bread or Wine, is not prescribed particularly: but left to liberty. Papists
deal sacrilegiously, who deny the Cup to the people, giving them only Bread.

2. The Mysteries signified etc. by these Elements, according to Christ's
Institution, are Mat. 26.26, 27, 28.
Christ's Body and Blood immediately, His Death and all the benefits thereof
mediately. These and no other Mysteries we are to understand by the Elements.
We may not devise other significations, then those Christ instituted.

3. The Actions instituted, On Christ and his Ministers part dispensing the
Lords Supper were, Mat. 26.26, etc. Mark. 14.22, 23, Luke 22.19 20 1 Cor.
11.23, 24, 25.
Taking, Blessing, Breaking and Giving the Bread: Taking, Giving thanks, and
Giving the Cup. On the Communicants part Receiving the Lords Supper were,
Receiving Eating the Bread, and Drinking the Wine. These Sacramental Actions
are to be used, and no other: these alone being instituted. The Form or Manner
of Christ's Taking, Blessing, Tanksgiving, Breaking and Giving the Elements,
etc. is not particularly described. Doubtless they were all most suitable and
congruous to the Ordinance in hand, (Christ doing all things most exactly and
properly:) And such should ours be, most proper, pertinent and agreeable to the
Nature of the Lords Supper. Nor Breaking of Bread, nor any other Action, may be
omitted or changed. Nor may we super-adde new actions besides the^e, as
Sacramental and Significative; for that were to usurp upon Christ's Authority of
instituting: therefore to add (as some do,) The Pour^ng out of the Wine, for
the signification of the pouring out of Christ's blood, is not only needless,
but also unlawful. Needless in that Chri^ts shedding his blood for us, and the
actual separating of his blood from his body, is signified sufficiently
according to the institution, otherwise: viz. Partly in the Breaking of the
Bread, noting the breaking and wounding of his body, which could not be without
shedding of his blood: Partly in the actual and distinct separation of the Wine
from the Bread; both in Institution and Distribution. Unlawful, for when did
Christ institute this Action of Pouring out the Wine? Or where does he require
it at our hands?

4. Finally, the Circumstantials attending upon the institution of the Lords
Supper, (which were not merely accidental and occasional,) They also are fit to
be used by us, but not wit^ opinion of the like intrinsecal necessity, as the
essentials and integrals of the Lord Supper are to be u^ed. As 1. The u^e of a
Table is convenient, to ^et the elements decently and ^isib^y upon, and of
vessels to put the elements in. And the Apostle makes mention of 1 Cor. 10.21.
The Lords Table: And of the Cup of the Lord. 2. The ^itting of all the
Communicants at, or as near as con^eniently they can, round about the Lords
Tab^e that they may not on^y hear the words of the Institution recited and
exp^^ined, etc. but may also see the elements and actions: that their eyes may
more deeply affect their hearts with the mysteries in hand. Such sitting being
more agreeable to the Mat. ^6.20, etc. Mark. 14.18, 22. Luke 22.14 19. Joh. 13
12, 23. and 21.20.
example of Christ and his Apostles in the first ins^itution, (who sat, or sat
leaning,) than the gesture of kneeling: And being the gesture generally
received and used in all the Reformed Churches, and See The Directory for
public worship.
directed to be used in the Churches of England, Scotland, and Ireland. 3. The
closing up of the whole action with some suitable Psalm, is agreeable to the
Primitive pattern. Thus Christ and his Apostles shut up the Lords Supper in the
first Institution thereof; Mat. 26.30. Mark. 14.26.
And when they had sung an Hymn or Psalm, they went out into the Mount of
Olives. To sing Psalms therefore in the Act of administration of the elements,
is clearly unsuitable to the i^itable Practice of Christ and his Apostles at
the Institution; and also evidently repugnant to those General Rules for
Christian worship; 1 Cor. 14 40, 26.
That all things be don decently, in order, and to edification. This singing
Psalms in the action being un-decent and disorderly, whilst one part of the
Congregation is receiving, another part is singing, which makes a gross
confusion in the Church, and in the Religious exercises. And also unedifying,
yea against edification, whilst the Communicants thoughts are hereby
distracted, and drawn away from fruitful pondering and meditating upon the many
mysteries of the Lords Supper: and their graces are disturbed and hindered from
their free and lively actings toward Christ crucified, the benefits of his
death, his love therein to us, our reciprocal duties to him, etc. enough to
employ the quickest thoughts and graces throughout the whole action.

But as for those Circumstantials about the Lords Supper, that were merely
accidental and occasional; occasioned by the Paschal Supper, or otherwi^e
extrinsecally in respect of the Lords Supper; As, The time, in the evening, not
in the morning: The place, in a private chamber, an upper room, not in the
place of public worship: The quality of the Bread, unleavened, not leavened:
The number, sex, and office of the Communicants; They being but twelve; and
all these men, no women being amongst them; and all these Apostles and
Ministers of the Gospel, there being no private Christians amongst them: These
being merely accidental to the Lords Supper, and being occasioned by something
besides the Lords Supper, they do not tie us to the observation of them. Thus
manage the whole action of the Lords Supper according to Christ's Institution.

IV. Act and exercising lively, in Communicating, all those Sacramental
qualifications and graces forementioned, viz. Knowledge Faith, Repentance, New
Obed^ence, Love to Christ and to Christians, Thankfulness, and a Spiritual
Appetite. It Is not enough to have these, and bring them with us to the Lords
Supper, but we must use and improve them discreetly and carefully at the Lords
Supper. You have seen how necessary they are for a worthy Communicant. Stir
them up therefore, and awaken them in your selves in Communicating. He that is
to wrestle or run a race, must not only have strength and skill, but use them
if he mean to prevail. He that is cold must not only have fire raked up under
the ashes, but must blow it up, if he means to be warm: so he that means to
communicate worthily, must not content himself with the habit of Grace, but put
forth the Acts of Grace. Gods children may receive unworthily, by not using of
Grace: as wicked men receive unworthily by not having of Grace. Act and use
therefore every Grace pertinently and properly according to their several
natures respectively.

1. Act Knowledge, so as to have a right apprehension, Of that God, with whom
thou have to do in this Ordinance: Of thy self, that do Communicate, what
thy spiritual state is: Of Christ and his death, the chief mystery of this
Supper: Of the New Covenant and the tenor of it, which is sealed in this
Sacrament: And of this Sacrament it self, and the nature of it, which thou
take in hand. Rouse up therefore thy judgment and spiritual senses to eye
and discern these things truly, that so all thine other Graces may be helped
and quickened. Knowlede being the inlet, guide and enlivener of them all.

2. Act Faith, In discerning and tasting spiritually Christ's body and blood,
how sweet and precious nourishment they are: In assenting to the truth of the
New Covenant and all the promises thereof; to the truth of Christ's death and
all the benefits thereof; to the certainty of this Sacramental comfort, and
that to the worthy Communicant; The bread and wine are Christ's body and blood
indeed Sacramentally: especially in Applying the Covenant and Promi^es, Christ,
his love, death, and all the fruits of his death particularly to thine own
soul, as certainly and undoubtedly as the outward elements are applied to thy
body. Say with Thomas, ^^^ling Christ's wounds, John 20.28.
My Lord and my God. With Paul Gal. 2.20.
Christ loved me, and gave h^mself for me. Say, as certainly as this Bread and
this wine are mine: so the New Testament and all the Promises thereof are mine,
pardon of sin mine; Christ and his death, with all the advantages thereof are
mine, etc. Thus to act faith is to eat and drink indeed, to communicate indeed.

3. Act Repentance and godly Sorrow. When thou see the bread broken, and the
wine separated from the bread, think how Christ's body was Isa. 53.4, 5, 6.
wounded, and his blod shed and separated from his body, and this for thy sins.
Then Zech. 12.9, 10, 11.
look upon Christ by faith, whom thou have pierced, and be in bitterness for
him by godly sorrow, as one is in bitterness for his first borne, etc. Fill
thine heart with shame and confusion for those sins, and with hatred
iudignation and holy revenge against those sins of thine, that cost Christ so
dear, and would have cost thee damnation. And resolve for future to abominate
thy corruptions, as the thorns, scourges, nails, and spear, that did murder the
Lord of glory.

4. Act New Obedience. Say to thy self, O my soul, was Christ thus Phil. 2.8.
obedient to the death for thee, even to the death of the Cross? Did he count
it Joh. 4.34
meat and drink to do the will of him that sent him, and to finish his work?
Did he Psalm. 40.6 7, 8. with Heb. 10.51 to 11.
delight to do, yea and to suffer the Will of God, in being sacrificed for
thee? How obedient then should thou be to Christ! live not to the world, or
to sin, or to thy self, but to Christ, willingly do any thing he commands,
forbear any thing he forbids, and bear any thing he inflicts, that Christ in
all may be glorified.

5. Act Love sincerely to Christ and his Members. This Sacrament is Christ's
Love-token to his Church. A Memorial of his death for us, which was Gal. 2.20
Rev. 1.5. 1 John 3.16
his greatest expression of love to us. Behold how his love streamed forth to
sinners out of every stripe and wound of head, back, hands, feet, and heart!
Behold how he loved thee! wilt not thou love him again? warm thy frozen
affections at this fire of Christ's love, and melt them into reciprocal love to
Christ. Love him in his Person, Offices, Ordinances, and in his Image, in
whomsoever it appears.

6. Act Thankfulness. Christ crucified, represented here, is highest matter of
Thankfulness. Acknowledge this mercy of mercies, esteem it according to its
worth, and resolve to render again to Christ thy praises, service, affections,
sufferings, and thy self, both soul and body in way of Thankfulness. Say with
David, Psalm. 103.1, 2.
Bless the Lord, O my soul, -- And Ps. 116.12
What shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits toward me? etc.

7. Act, Finally, a true spiritual Appetite. Eagerly hunger and thirst after
this bread and drink indeed, the flesh and blood of Christ. These will so fully
satisfy the soul, that it shall never totally hunger or thirst more, but shall
live for evermore. And as the hungry stomach delightfully closes with corporal
food, extracting the nutritive juice out of it: so let thine hungring soul
contentingly close with Christ, drawing all hearty juice and nourishment from
him.

V. Improve thy corporal Senses, discerning the outside of the Lords Supper, to
help thy spiritual Senses and Graces to discern the inside of the Lords
Supper. As windows and casements let in the light, heat, and influence of the
Sun into an house: so these windows and casements of the outward senses, let in
the light, heat, and spiritual influence of Jesus Christ, the Sun of
righteousness into the heart and soul. As in the Word preached Christ enters
into the heart by the Sense of Hearing, the Organ of Discipline: so in the
Lords Supper Christ comes into the heart by the senses of Seeing, Touching, and
Tasting Does Christ make use of thy Senses to condescend to thee? do thou
improve thy Senses to ascend up unto him. Thomas John 20.25, 27, 28.
would not believe that Christ was alive, till he put his fingers into his
wounds after he revived, and then he cries out, My Lord, and my God: so thou
that doubtest of Christ's love to thee, and dying for thee, cast hither thine
eye to the bread broken, and wine severed from it; To the elements and actions,
and see the Lords dying for thee; reach hither thine hand, take and apply this
bread broken to thine own self, and as it were feel his wounded hands and feet
and heart; use here thy taste, and discern what nourishment Christ is; And Joh.
20.27.
be no longer faithless, but believing, O fix thy senses steadfastly upon the
Supper of the Lord, till thou have fixed thine heart firmly upon the Lord of
the Supper. Let thy senses be acted toward the bread and wine, till thy soul
be affected with the bread and water of life.

VI, Remember Jesus Christ, and him crucified, throughout the whole action.
This is Christ's command in the Institution, that we both eat the Bread and
drink the Cup in Luke 22.19. 1 Cor. 11.24, 25.
remembrance of him. And Paul explaining this remembrance of Christ, interprets
it especially in reference to 1 Cor. 11.26.
his Death, and the showing of it forth. The Lords Supper then was intended for
a solemn Memorial of Christ crucified, and as it were a Marble-Monument or
pillar upon Christ's Sepulcher, that Christ and his death might never be
forgotten; but that Christ dying might be everliving in his peoples hearts.
Therefore at the Lords Supper remember Christ, remember his love to thee,
remember his death for thee: think often, and meditate much upon these things.

Quest. But how shall I remember Christ crucified at the Lords Supper, for
greatest advantage and benefit to my soul? Answ. Remember Christ crucified
three ways, v^z. 1. Historically, remembering the History of Christ and his
death. 2. Mysteriously, remembering the spiritual mystery of Christ and his
death. 3. Energetically, so remembering both, as to imprint them with energy,
effect, and eff^cacy upon the soul. This will be remembering Christ crucified
indeed.

1. Historically; Remember the History of Christ and of his death, as it is
recorded in holy Scriptures, especially as it is delineated by the four
Evangelists. Read the History of Christ's passion in them before thou come to
the Lords Table: that the memory thereof may be fresh and lively in thy
thoughts at the Lords Table. Think with thy self how Christ's life was as it
were a continued Passion, and a daily dying. He was very meanly brought forth
into the world, borne in a stable, wrapped in swaddling clothes, and Luke 2.7.
laid in a Manger. He was no sooner born, but Matt. 2.1 to 19.
Herod seeks to murder him, murdering many poor Infants lest he should miss
him. He is no sooner Mat. 3.13, to the end, with 4^1, to 12.
baptized, but Satan assaults him, Tempting him to Despair, Self-murder and
worshipping of the Devil in person; but prevailed nothing. Is he in his public
Ministry? How is Joh. 7.5, 7. and 9.16 24. Matt. 12.24 Joh. 11.47, 48, 53. and
12.10, 11. and 18. and 19. throughout
he hated reviled, bla^phemed and persecuted by Scribes and Phari^es* by his
own people the Jew^, yea by his own kindred! And when he was nigh the period of
his Minis^ery, what torrent of sorrows and sufferings flowed in upon him!
Remember what he endured, in the Garden, in the High Priests Hall, and in Mount
Calvary: and then behold and consider if any sorrows were like his sorrows.

1. In the Garden; How was his soul surrounded with sorrows even to the Death!
How bitter was the Cup which he then began to drink, which set him into an
Agony, so that he Luke 22.41, 42, 43, 44. Matt. 26.42.
prayed thrice most earnestly to his Father to let that Cup pass from him, if
possible: and his sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the
ground, hereby his spirits being brought so low, that there appeared an Angel
from heaven strengthening him! (With this Agony probably Christ was so
weakened, that the next day he was not able to bear his Cross but Simon was
compelled to bear it after him) And immediately Luke 22.47, 48, etc compared
with Mat. Mark, and John.
after his Agony Judas betrays him to the multitude of the Jews with a kiss,
who apprehended him, bound him, and led him away to the High Priests House.
Thus as the first Adam sinned in a Garden, the second Adam suffered in a
Garden. Now then when thou art at the Lords Table, Remember Christ's
Garden-sufferings, think so lively of them as if thy self had been in the
Garden with the Disciples, imagine thou had heard him pray so earnestly
against his bitter Cup, thou had seen him sweat drops of clotted blood so
lamentably in his woeful Agony, that the earth was all besprinkled with his
blood, and that thou had looked on to see him betrayed so villainously by
Judas his own Apostle into the hands of his enemies.

2. In the High Priests Palace and the judgement-Hall; Luke 22.54, to the end;
and 23.1, to 33. comparded with the other three Evangelists
How was Christ denied by Peter! How was he mocked, ^mitten, blindfolded,
buffetted, spit upon, crowned with Thorns, having a Reed in his hand, being
scornfully bowed unto and derided with hail King of the Jews, cruelly
scourged, blasphemously entreated, falslely accused, causelessly exclaimed
against by the people, and unjustly condemned by Pilate, against his own
conscience! When thou art at the Lords Table, Remember those passions of thy
Savior. Imagine thou had stood by all the while, and sadly beheld all these
passages, his cheeks swollen with buffetting, his face defiled with spitting on,
his head wounded with thorns, his back torn with scourges, etc. Oh behold,
what a woeful spectacle!

3. In Mount Calvary, in that filthy Golgotha how woeful and tragical was his
Luke. 23 33, etc. See also the Hist. of Mat. Mark and John.
end! His body was stripped of his garments; His limbs were cruelly stretched
upon the Cross; His hands and feet pierced with rugged nails, and fastened to
the cursed tree; He was ranked betwixt two crucified thieves, as if he were the
Arch-malefactor; he hanged from the sixth till the ninth hour most painfully
upon the tender wounds of his hands and feet: He was forsaken by his disciples
and friends, derided by his enemies, and by the very thieves that were
crucified with him; and being a thirst in his pains, abused with gall and
vinegar given him to drink; And which was heaviest of all, he was in a sort
deserted of God, so that he bitterly cried out, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me, and so he yielded up the Ghost: after which, a soldier with a
spear piercing his side and heart; there gushed out water and blood. Now when
thou art at the Lords Supper, ^emember all those sad passages. Think thou had
stood with Mary and John under ^is Cross, and had seen and heard his
intolerable repro^ches, his bleeding wounds, his tortured body, his bitter
cries, his dying groans; think thou had his dead body, all besmeared in his
own blood, like Joseph of Arimathea, in thine arms.

Remember this story of Christ's death, and remember it seriously, pathetically.
Imagine The Sacrament-day, to be as Christ's Agony-day, His Condemning-day, His
Crucifying-day: The Lords Table to be as the Cross whereon he was crucified:
And the breaking of the bread as the breaking of his body with all these mortal
Sufferings. This is the first Act or degree of thy Remembering Christ crucified:
to remember him Historically.

2. Mysteriously; Remember the Mystery of Christ and of his Death. This is a
farther and an higher degree of remembering Christ crucified, at the Lords
Supper Christ's Death was not a common and ordinary Death full of miseries only:
but a special and extraordinary Death full of Mysteries also. Among other
Mysteries of Christ's death, The Causes and Effects of his death are singularly
mysterious. Remember them in communicating.

1. Causes of Christ's death were either, 1. meritorious, or 2. impulsive.

1. Meritorious procuring causes of Christ's death, were the sins of Gods Elect
imputed to him. Christ in himself was totally Heb. 4.15.
without sin; Isa. 53.8.
no guil was found in his mouth; He was 1 Pet. 1.19.
a Lamb without blemish, and without spot: He was Heb. 7.26
Holy, harmless, undefiled, and separate from sinners: Pilate his Judge cleared
him, saying, Joh. 18.28. and 19.4.6. Luke 23.4.14.
I find in him no fault at all; The condemned thief justified him, Luke 23.41.
We indeed justly but this man has done nothing amiss. But Christ becoming
Heb. 7.22.
Surety for sinners, even for all his Elect that were ruined by Adam's sin,
stood charged with their whole debt, which they were no way able to satisfy
for in the least degree. And so Isa. 53.6.
all their sins were at once imputed to him: and death the due wages of their
sins was inflicted upon him, that his Elect might be fully acquitted and
discharged. Hence those passages; 2 Cor. 5.21.
He has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him. -- Gal. 3.13
Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us.
Admirably the Evangelical Prophet, Isa. 53.4, 536.
Surely he has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows: yet we did esteem him
strieken, smitten of God and afflicted. But he was wounded for our
transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement of our
peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. All we like she^p have
gone astray: we have turned every man to his own way, and the Lord has laid on
him (Heb. has made to meet on him) the iniquity of us all. -- V^rs. 8.
For the transgression of my people was he stricken. -- Verse. 11.
By his knowledge shall my righteous Servant justify many, for he shall bear
their iniquities. -- Verse. 12.
And he was numbered with the transgressors, and he bare the sin of many. Thus
Christ who in himself had no sin, was crucified for the sins of his Elect who
had nothing but sin. The guiltless for the guilty, the innocent for the nocent,
the Pastor for the flock, the Master for the servant, the Captain for the
Soldier, the Physician for the Patient, the King for the people, the workman
for the work, and he that was God himself for man. Christ was betrayed, but our
sins the Judas that betrayed him: Christ was condemned but our sins the Pilate
that condemned him: Christ was crucified, but our sins the nails that fastened
him to the Cross: Christ had Gall and Vinegar given him to drink, but our sins
were the Vinegar and the Gall: Christ was pierced, but our sins were the Thorns
and Spear that pierced his head and heart. Remember these things; when thou
receivest the Sacrament of Christ's death, call to mind thy sins the procuring
causes of Christ's death. Say in thine own heart to Christ, as Augustine, Quid
commisisti, dulcissime puer, ut sic judicareris? quid comnnsifti, amantissime
juvenis, ut adeo tractareris? quod scelus tuum, quae noxatua, quae causa
mortis, quae occ^s^o tuae damnationis? Ego enim sum tui plag^ doloris, tuae cul
pa occisionis. Ego tuae mortis meritum, tuae vindictae flagitium. Ego tuae
passionis livor, tui cruciatus labor. O mirabilis censurae conditio: and
ineffabilis Mysterii dispositio: Peccat iniquus, and punitur justus: delinquit
reus, and vapulat innocens: offendit impius, and damnatur pius: quod meretur
malus, patitur bonus, quod perpetrat servus, exolvit Dominus, quod committ^t
homo, sustinet Deus: quonat^ dei, quo tua descendit humilitas; quo tua
flagravit charitas, etc. Aug. lib. Meditat. 67. p. 698. Tom. 9. Basil. 1569.
I am the stroke of thy grief, I am the fault of thy killing, I am the desert
of thy death, I am the offense of thy revenge, I am the grievousness of thy
passion, I am the toil of thy torment. O wonderful condition of censure, and
ineffaeble disposition of the mystery! The unjust sins, and the just is
punished, the guilty transgresses, and the guiltless is beaten: the impious
offends, and the pious is condemned: What the bad deserves, the good suffers:
what the servant perpetrates, the Lord pays: what man commits, ^od
undergoeth* Whither, O Son of God, whithe^ (...) humility? whither flamed thy
charity? whither proceeded thy piety? whither increased thy benignity? whethtr
reached thy love? whither came thy compassion? For I have done unjustly, thou
art punished: I have dealt heinously, thou art ^evengefully smitten: I have
committed the fault, thou art tortured: I have been proud, thou have been
humbled, etc. Thus remember that thy sins were the procuring causes of Christ's
sorrows.

2. Impulsive or inward moving causes of Christ's Death were only the free
grace, self-propension and love of God and Christ to sinners. The Soldiers had
never fast'ned Christ to the Cross, had not our sins first fast'ned him there:
our sins had never fixed him to the tree, if his Love had not first fixed him.
Love moved God to give his Son: Love moved Christ to give himself. Love brought
him down from Heaven r^frus; Love brought him upon the Cross fo^ous; Love made
him pray, and sweat, and bleed, and die for us. God so lo^ed us, as to give his
Son for us; Joh. 3.16
God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son: that whosoever
believes in him should not per^sh, but have everlasting life. -- 1 John 4.9,
10.
Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son
to be the propitiation for our sins. -- Romans 5.6, 7, 8.
But God commends his love toward us, in that while we were ^et sinners
Christ died for us. And Christ so love^ us, as to give himself to death for us;
Joh. 10.11.
I am the good Shepherd, The good Shepherd g^veth his life for the sheep. --
Verse. 18.
No man t^keth it from me, but I lay it down of my self. -- Joh. 15.13.1.
Greater love has no man then this, that a man lay down h^s life for his
friends. Ye are my friends, if you do whatsoever I command you. -- 1 John 3.16.
Hereby perceive we the love of God because he laid down h^s l^fe for us. --
Rev. 1.5
Unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in h^s own blood. Hence
Paul experimentally says, Gal. 2.20
The life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God,
who loved me and gave himself for me. In Communicating, remember this love of
God and Christ to thee: But for this love God had never died for thee.

2. Effects, fruits, and benefits of Christ's Death are manifold and most
excellent. In this memorial of Christ's Death, especially remember these fruits
of his death, viz.

1. Redemption. We by the first Adams fall, were utterly enslaved and
enthralled under sin, the curse of the Law, Death and all the powers of
darkness: By the second Adam's Death we are redeemed from them all. Heb. 9.12.
But Christ by his own blood entered in once into the holy place, having
obtained eternal Redemption for us. -- 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.
Ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your
vain conversation, etc. but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb
without blemish, and without spot. -- Gal. 3.3
Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us;
and Christ has Heb. ^.14 15. ^ol. 2.15 Luke 1.74, 75.
by his death triumphed over all our enemies, and deli^ered us from them. Hence
Christ is said to be 1 Cor. 1.30.
made of God to us, Redemption.

2. Reconciliation. By the first Adam's Apostasy we are not only enthralled
under sin, death, Satan and all our spiritual enemies: But we are become utter
Romans 5.10. Col. 1.21.
Enemies to God, and to all true spiritual goodness; yea the Romans 8.7, 8.
carnal mind is enmity against God, for it is not subject to the Law of God,
neither indeed can be. So then they that are in the flesh cannot please God.
And being at enmity with God we are consequently at enmity with all his
creatures, every thing is against us. But by the blood and death of Christ the
second Adam we are reconciled again to God. Romans 5.10. with Heb. 2.17.
For if when we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son:
much more being reconciled we shall be saved by his life. -- Col. 1.19 20, 21,
22.
It pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell. And (having made
peace through the blood of his Cross,) by him to reconcile all things unto
himself, by him I say, whether they be things in earth, or things in heaven.
And you that were sometimes alienated, and enemies in your mind by wicked
works, yet now has he reconciled in the body of his flesh through death, etc.
Hence God is said to 2 Cor. 5.1^.20.
be in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their
trespasses unto them: And the Gospel is called The word of Reconciliation. 3.
Justification, and Pardon of sin. By reason of our fall in Adam, we have lost
all our original righteousness, our persons are become sinners; our natures,
principles and actions unrighteous; and our selves are become guilty of death
before God. Now 1 Cor. 1.30.
Christ is made of God righteousness unto us. He is Jer. 23.8. and 33.16.
The Lord our righteousness. For God imputing Isa. ^3.6.
all our unrighteousness to Christ, and all Christ's righteousness active and
passive to us: through the merit of Christ's death and obedience, our sins are
freely remitted, our guilt removed, and our persons are accepted as righteous
before God. Christ was offered, Heb. 2.8
to bear the sins of many. -- Romans 5.8, 9.
While we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. Much more then being now
justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him. -- Verse. 19.
For as by one man's disobedience, many were made sinners: so by the obedience
of one shall many be made righteous. Hence Christ in the Institution of the
Supper, says, Mat. 26.28.
This is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many for the
remission of sins. Romans 8.33.
God justifies us efficiently* Romans 4.25.
Christ justifies us by his blood and obedience meritoriously, by his
Resurrection evidentially, evidencing the full virtue and victory of his death;
Romans 3.28.
Faith justifies us instrumentally, Jam. 2.14. to the end.
good works justify us declaratively in the sight of men, declaring our faith
to be lively and true, that brings forth good works.

4. Victory over our spiritual enemies. Naturally by the fall we are Act. 8.23
in the bond of iniquity; and Heb. 2.14, 15.
through fear of death all our lifetime subject to bondage: and 2 Timothy 2.25.
led captive by Satan at his will. Isreal's bondage and slavery in Egypt or
Babylon, no way comparable to this spiritual bondage. But Christ by his death
Rom 8.3
Has condemned sin in the flesh, Heb. 2.14 15. with Col. 2.14, 15.
Has overcome death, and destroyed him that had the power of death, the Devil;
having spo^led principalities and powers, and triumphed over them openly by his
Cross.

5. Finally, Entrance into Heaven. Though our sin had cast us out of Paradise,
and from all hope of Heaven: yet Christ by his death and blood, has opened to
us the gate of the heavenly Paradise. Heb. 10.19, 20.
We have boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, by a new and
liv^ng way, which he has consecrated for us, through the vail, that is to say,
his flesh.

The^e are some of the glorious fruits of Christ's death, Redemption,
Reconciliation, Justification, Victory over our spiritual enemies, and entrance
into the holiest of all. Remember the^e at the Lords Supper, that sweet
Memorial of Christ's death. Thus remember the Mystery of his death.

3. Energetically; Remember Christ and his death the History and Mystery of his
death, so as to work this remembrance with energy, force and efficacy upon
thine heart and spirit. Let this remembrance of Christ make some savory
practical impressions upon thy soul, which may dwell and fix there for thy
good. How may that be done? Answ. Thus,

1. Remember Christ and his death, so as to lay to heart the deep sinfulness
and misery, into which the first Adam plunged us by his fall. Judge of the
extremity of the malady, by the eminency of the remedy. No less then death,
then such a death, and that of such a person as Christ, who was God-man, could
ever have expiated that sinfulness, or have remo^ed that misery. If all the men
on earth, and all the Angels in heaven had died, and that eternally, they could
never have satisfied Gods justice for one sin. For Gods justice offended is
infinite, and all that mere creatures can do or endure, are as themselves mere
finite; but Christ's person being of infinite worth in respect of his Godhead,
satisfied to the full. Think not Adams sin to be small. It murdered himself and
all his posterity. It cost Christ his dearest hearts blood. And Adams first sin
was thy sin, for thou wast in his loins when he fell. Lay this to heart
proportionably.

2. Remember Christ and his death, so as to admire Gods infinite, 1. Wisdom. 2.
Justice, and 3. Love therein toward sinners. 1. Admire his wisdom, in
contriving this strange way for saving of sinners, which men and Angels could
not have contrived or imagined. That the eternal Son of God should become man,
personally uniting the humane nature to his divine person: That as man he might
suffer, as God he might satisfy for sinners. Here Is 1 Cor. 1.23, 24.
Christ crucified the wisdom of God indeed. 1 Cor. 2.7.
The wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden wisdom which God ordained
before the world unto our glory. Oh the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom
and knowledge of God! 2. Admire his justice. Christ his dear and only Son must
be sacrificed, that we his utter enemies might be spared. Christ his spotless
Son, who knew no sin must be condemned, that we sinners who knew nothing but
sin, might be cleared. Christ who was the life it self must die: that we who
were dead in sins might live. Vid. Salvian. de Gubern. Dei lib. 4.
Who would not count it an unrighteous Act: if any King should put to death his
own obedient Son, to save the life of a Traitor? or condemn the innocent
knowingly for the nocent? Oh then, how infinite is this Justice of God in
giving Christ the righteous to die for us unrighteous! It is such justice, as
seems to have a show of injustice, but that God is so righteous, that he can do
nothing unrighteously. 3. Finally, Admire his love, Joh. 3.16 Romans 5.6, 7, 8.
etc. and 8.7. Ephesians. 3.18.
God so loved us as to give his own Son, his only Son, his righteous Son, the
Son of his love, to die a painful, shameful and cursed death, for us worthless,
loveless sinners, dead in sins, enemies, enmity it self against God. O the
depth, and height, and length, and breadth of this love of God in Christ,
which passes knowledge: Say, be astonished, O my soul, at this love which
passed all love.

3. Remember Christ and his death, so as to lament and hate those sins for
which Christ thus suffered. When thou see the bread broken, think how Christ's
body was broken and wounded for thy sins. And then fill thine heart with grief
and indignation against those sins. Shall Christ's body be so broken, and his
heart pierced for thy sins: and shall not thy heart be pricked and broken for
thine own sins? Shall thy sins derive Gods wrath upon Christ: and shall not
thine hatred and wrathful indignation be kindled against thine own sins? Do
thou count those sins small, or light; which Christ found so heavy and heinous,
that he sweat great drops of blood falling down to the ground, and cried out,
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Do thou think much to shed a few
penitential tears, for those sins for which Christ shed all his hearts blood?
Can thou love or be reconciled to those corruptions, for which Christ was so
hated to the very death? Say to thy soul; O my soul, consider thy sins aright.
For those Christ bled, will thou not bleed for them? for those Christ died, and
will thou live in them ^ etc.

4. Remember Christ and his death, so as to resolve more effectually to conform
to Christ, and to his death. Then we aright remember Christ crucified, when we
resolve and endeavor to resemble Christ crucified. In this Supper so think
upon Christ dying, as to be willing to die with him. But how shall I die with
him, or be conform to Christ crucified? Answ. By dying to sin. By being
crucified to the world. And by suffering for Christ. 1. By dying unto sin.
Christ died for sin, that we who are dead in sin, might die unto sin. Whilst
we are dead in sin, we can do nothing else but sin; but when we die to sin, we
habitually live not any longer therein, nor thenceforth serve sin. Romans 6.2
How should we that are dead to sin, live any longer therein? Hence the Apostle
urges our death to sin from Christ's death: Romans 6.2 to 12. etc.
That as Christ died and rose again, so we should die to sin, and live to God.
And Peter says, 1 Pet. 4.1, 2.
Forasmuch then as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, arm your selves
likewise with the same mind: for he that has suffered in the flesh, has
ceased from sin, etc. Was Christ wounded for thy transgressions, and bruised
for thine iniquities: and will thou wound and bruise him afresh by these
iniquities? Had not Christ sorrows and sufferings enough for thy sins of old:
that by renewed offenses thou will tear open his wounds afresh, and crucify
him again? If thou know not what sin is; go to the Garden of Gethsemane, the
High Priests Palace, the Judgement-Hall, and to the Mount Calvary, and there
see what it cost Christ. Oh the Wormwood and the Gall! Kill those sins that
have killed thy soul: let not them live that would not let thy Savior live.
When thou art ready to commit sin, then imagine thou did meet thy crucified
Savior, all bathed in his own blood, and beseeching thee by all his wounds and
blood to forbear thy sin: and would not this dissuade thee? 2. By being
crucified to the world, Christ dying forsook this world, and went up in his
soul that day into Paradise. And Christ Cor. 11.23.
instituted this Supper when he was now the same night ready to be betrayed.
Let this Supper remember thee to be crucified with Christ to the world: As Paul
Gal. 6.14
gloried in the Cross of Christ, whereby the world was crucified to him, and
he unto the world. Let thy spirit mount up after Christ into Paradise; that
thou may live above this world, having thy conversation in Heaven. Let thine
heart be wholly in Heaven, whilst thou art at this heavenly Feast. 3. By
suffering with Christ, and for Christ, or at least being resolved and prepared
for suffering with him, thou becomest conformed to Christ crucified. In this
Supper, in the breaking of the bread for thee, thou have represented the
breaking and suffering of Christ for thee. Christ most worthy was broken for
thee most unworthie. Did Christ so willingly bear all his sorrows for thee, and
do thou grudge to bear any sufferings for him? was he so reproached for thy
sins: and do thou think much to be reproached for Christ's righteousness? Art
thou treacherously used by friends? Christ was betrayed by his own Apostle. Art
thou imprisoned? Christ was apprehended. Art thou in bonds? Christ was bound.
Art thou belied? Christ was falsely accused. Art thou unjustly censured? Christ
was more unjustly condemned. Art thou spoiled of thy good? Christ was stripped
of his very raiment, and they cast lots for his vesture. Art thou put to death?
Christ Jesus the Prince of life was put to death before thee. Grudge not to
pledge Christ in his bitter cup. 1 Pet. 2.22. etc.
He has suffered for thee, giving thee an example that thou should follow
his steps.

5. Remember Christ and his death, so as to inflame thine heart with love to
Christ dying for thee. Christ's death for thee is the highest expression
possible of his love unto thee, as was before evidenced. And this Sacrament is
Christ's Love-token to his Church, for perpetuating of the memory of Christ's
death, that high discovery of his love. When therefore thou come to the Lords
Supper; call to mind Christ's infinite love: and stir up thy self to love him
again. Love breeds love, as fire breeds fire. Shall Christ love thee so as to
die for thee, so as to Rev. 1.5.
wash thee from thy sins in his own blood: And wilt not thou love him with all
thine heart, and soul, and mind, and might? Was Ch^i^^ so fastened on the
Cross for thee? and shall he not be fastened in thine heart by thee? Shall thy
sins pierce his heart* and shall not his love pierce thine heart?

6. Remember Christ and his death, so as to comfort thy self in the sufficiency
of Christ's death, and thy propriety in it. As in this Supper is tendered a
sufficiency of bodily nourishment, both against hunger and thirst, here being
both bread and wine: So in Christ's Death hereby represented, there is a
sufficiency of spiritual nourishment, His Joh. 6.55, 56.
flesh being meat indeed, and his blood drink indeed, And he that eats his
flesh, and drinks his blood has eternal life. For Heb. 10.14.
by one offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified; and so
Heb. 7.25
is able to save to the utmost all that come unto God by him. And as the
sufficiency of Christ's death is set forth in the Lords Supper: so Christ
endeavors by this Ordinance to assure every worthy Communicant of his
particular interest, and propriety in Christ's death, as certainly as he eats*
this bread, and drinks this cup. Therefore at the Lords Supper thus think; How
all sufficient is Christ's death for my salvation! There Is more righteousness in
it, then unrighteousness in me. There Is more merit and pardon in it, then sin
and misery in me. There Is more Reconcilement, Redemption and Justification in
it, then enmity, slavery and condemnation in me; His person being an infinite
God, I being but a finite creature. And all this sufficiency is as surely mine,
as this bread and wine mine. Therefore why art thou cast down, O my soul, and
why art thou disquieted within me! Trust in Christ and his death, herein is
more for thy consolation, then in thy self or sins for thy disconsolation.

7. Remember Christ and his death at the Lords Supper, so as to provoke thy
self to all true thankfulness for Christ crucified. This Sacrament is called
the Eucharist, as was formerly noted. It is the Christians solemn
Thank-offering. Christ 1 Cor. 11.24. Luke 22.19
gave thanks in instituting it: and we should give thanks in celebrating it.
For what? for Christ, for his death, for all the fruits and benefits of his
death, Oh what great and manifold matter of thankfulness! Say with David, Ps.
103.1, 2, 3.
Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me bless his holy name.
Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits, who heals all
thy diseases, pardons all th^ne iniquit^es rede^meth thy soul from death,
etc. Psa. 116 12. etc.
What shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits toward me ^ I will take
the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord. -- I will pay my
vows unto the Lord etc.

Thus should we remember christ, and his death at the Lords Supper, and this
will be to communicate indeed.

VII. Finally, Carefully avoid all d^straction throughout the whole
Sacramental Administrat^on, From the beginning to the end keep thine heart and
thoughts closely fixed on the mysteries in hand. Let not thine eye wander, but
intentively behold the pledges and memorials of Christ crucified. Let not thy
thoughts rove, but be glued to these heavenly objects laid before thee. Here Is
enough in Christ crucified fully to take up thy utmost meditations at this
Feast. Think upon them from point to point, as the Sacrament ministers
occasion. In this and all duties we should attend upon the Lord without
distraction. Distractions will deprive us of all the sweetness of this
Ordinance. As the Genesis 15.11.
Fowls that fell upon Abraham's sacrifices, would have picked, torn and ^poi^ed
his Sacrifices, had he not driven them away: So will Distractions and wanderings
deface and spoil this spiritual Sacrifice; therefore dri^e them all away. Be
thou wholly with Christ crucified, whilst thou art at the Sacrament of Christ
crucified.

Hitherto of the right use of the Lords Supper in Communicating. In the last
place consider we of that Christian Course of life suitable to the Lords Supper
after we have Communicated.

III. Directions touching our Christian Conversation, suitable to the Lords
Supper, after we have Communicated.
When the Lords Supper is ended all the worthy Communi^ant's work is not ended.
Nay, he has stronger obligations upon him unto all Christian duties then
before. For the Lords Supper is not only on Christ's part a pledge and Seal of
his benefits to us: but also on our part a bond and obligation of our duties
toward him, It Is not enough, that we duly Prepare before: Worthily Act in:
but we must also Suitably walk, after Communicating.

How are we to converse and walk suitably to the Lords Supper after we have
Communicated? Answ. We should carefully order our conversation, as follows,
viz.

1. Rest not in the work done. Think not that Sacraments will work like
Physic: such a Receipt will have such an effect, whether we wake or sleep, etc.
The bare act of Receiving does not confirm or convey Grace: but the right
Receiving, with Gods blessing. Rest not therefore in the bare work done. Nay,
rest not in the work done, though done never so well: Applaud not, flatter not
thy self therein through a secret pang of spiritual pride. If thy heart be
lifted up hereby, take heed thou 2 John 8.
losest not all that thou have wrought, Luke 17.10.
When thou have done all say, I am an unprofitable servant, I have done no more
then was my duty: nay, I have come far short of duty. How many ways have I
failed before, and at the Lords Supper? O let not the Lord lay to my charge the
iniquity of my holy things. Oh I can no way answer him for all my Sacramentsins.

2. Ab^^ndon and crucify all sin more then ever. At the Lords Table thou have
beheld, as it were, Mat. 26.26, 27, 28.
Christ's body broken, and his blood shed for thy Sins. Return not therefore
after the Sacrament to thy sins and lusts afresh, to thy cursing, swearing,
Sabbath-breaking, adultery, uncleanness, injustice, drunkenness, etc. like
the dog to the vomit, or the Sow that was washed, to her wallowing in the mire.
But hate thy sins, for which Christ was hated: deny thy sins, for which Christ
was denied: crucify thy sins, for which Christ was crucified. Shall Christ
bleed and die for thy drunkenness, etc. and will thou wallow and live in thy
drunkenness, etc? Have thou received the Lords Supper as a Seal of the
remission of thy sins: and do thou after the Lords Supper fall afresh to the
commission of the same sins? Is not this to profane the blood of the Covenant
as an unholy thing? What? Is the Lords Supper a Protection or Toleration for
thy sins? Rather contrariwise, As it is a Memorial of Christ crucified: so let
it be a Remembrancer to thee for hating, abhorring and crucifying all thy
corruptions, and abstaining from all appearance of evil, for which Christ was
crucified.

3. Walk on in the strength of this Spiritual food continually, till thou
come to perfection. Grow stronger and stronger in all Grace, and exacter in
all gracious exercises. This is styled 1 Cor 11.20.
The Lords Supper, therefore a Feast able through the Lords blessing to
nourish, sustain, and strengthen the Lords people* both in habits and acts,
both in graces and duties, and with all might both in the inward man, and
outward life: That the weak may become as the house of David, and the house of
David, as the Angel of the Lord. Therefore, 1. Be strong in the Lord, and in
the power of his might, in the inward man. Labor after growth in every Grace
after this Sacrament: That Faith may be more strong and lively, Hope more full
of expectation, Love more ardent and affectionate, Patience, more able to
endure; Integrity, more upright; Humil^ty, more humble; and every Grace more
gracious. 2. Be more active and exact in all spiritual duties and performances.
As corporal food makes the body able and active for all corporal employments:
So should this Sacramental Spiritual food make the Soul strong and active for
all Spiritual exercises. After thou have been at the Lords Table, Hear the Word
more heedfully, Pray more fervently, Keep the Sabbaths more exactly, Watch over
thine own heart and ways more diligently, etc. In a word, show thy self more
holy and pious toward God, more just and righteous toward man, more sober,
and temperate in thy self. Improve thy times more profitably, employ thy
Talents more fruitfully, Give up thy self, soul and body more cheerfully unto
God as a living Sacrifice in all Christian obedience. Think nothing too dear
for him, that thought not the only Son of his love too dear for thee. But walk
worthy of Christ, of the Co^enant, of the Sacrament, of the Kingdom, Gospel and
Grace of God unto all well-pleasing.

4. Maintain and cherish Dear Communion with Christ crucified. In the Lords
Supper thou had 1 Cor. 10.10.
Communion with Christ crucified and all the blessed fruits of his Death
signified, sealed and exhibited to thee: Walk on in this Communion from day to
day. Endear thine heart and affections unto him more and more: and draw virtue
and benefits from him and his death more and more. He bare thy diseases: Take
thou his healing. He endured thy wounds: drink thou the Spiritual balsome that
sprang out of his wounds. He took upon him thy sins: clothe thou thy self with
his righteousness. He endured thy pains and torments: come thou to him, and
take his rest to thy soul. He embraced thy Curse and condemnation: do thou
embrace his blessing, justification and salvation. Let there be a reciprocal
communication of affairs betwixt Christ and thee. This Communion with Christ,
is the Saints Heaven on Earth. It Is good for thee to be here. Delight still to
be sitting under his shadow, still to be tasting his sweet fruits, still to be
eating hidden Mannah, still to be drinking the water of life from this Rock,
still to be solacing thy self in his banqueting house and Galleries of love,
and still to be lodging in his bosom of dearest love: If he hide his face by
desertions; rest not till thou find him: If thou find him, hold him fast,
let him not go, disturb him not out of thine heart by thy corruptions. Highly
prize his presence, deeply lament his absence* joyfully entertain his return,
and speedily open to him at every knock at the door of thine heart. He lives
like a worthy Communicant, that thus maintains Communion with Christ.

5. Delight thy self in spiritual fellowship with his members. The Lords Supper
is not only a Seal of the Saints fellowship with Christ, but also of their 1
Cor. 10.17.
Communion with one another. They are stones of the same building, branches of
the same vine, members of the same body, spiritual children of the same father.
Therefore they should mutually love one another: care for one another,
sympathize with one another in joys and sorrows; help, instruct, exhort,
admonish and comfort one another: that thus by mutual edification they may help
one another on unto salvation. Thus the Primitive Christians Act. 4.32. and
2.46, 47
were of one heart and soul, and worshipped the Lord with one accord. David
professes himself to be a Psalm. 119.63.
Companion to all them that fear God and keep his Commandments: And, that Psalm.
16.23.
n the Saints, the excellent ones on earth was all his Delight. I^al. 133.1,
etc.
Oh, how good and pleasant a thing it is for brethren to dwell together in
unity! etc. Now the Lords Supper seals up, strengthens and quickens this
fellowship of Saints; Enlinks their hearts to one another, and all to Christ.
Let thine affections therefore toward Gods people be incited by this feasting
together at the Lords Table. Shake off all carnal ungodly Society, and make the
liveliest Saints thy most intimate contenting companions. And upon all
occasions improve their fellowship (...) the best spiritual ad^antages.

6. Cheer up and comfort thy spirit against all thy discouragements,
temptations and corruptions, upon consideration of the Cordials applied in the
Lords Supper. Especially 1. Upon the pardon of sin in Christ's blood seated in
this Ordinance. Mat. 26.27, 28.
This is my blood of the New Testament shed for many for remission of sins.
Sins unpardoned are the heaviest burden upon the Conscience: Christ's blood
alone can procure Sins pardon: The Lords Supper most peculiarly and
particularly seals unto us Christ's blood and the virtue thereof, beyond all
outward Ordinances. Have thou duly received the Lords Supper? then thou have
spiritually received the Lords blood for washing away, and remission of, thy
sins. As the Red Sea overwhelmed all Isreal's enemies the Egyptians, so the
blood of Christ has overwhelmed and drowned all thy corruptions. Sit thou down
with Israel, and sing praises: Comfort, O Comfort thy soul in this Salvation.
What ever be thy miseries, this will be a Cordial reviving, when thou can
say, Yet my sins are pardoned. 2. Upon thine Interest in the New Testament
confirmed. In the Lords Supper the New Testament in Christ's blood is ratified
to thee, that thou have part and property in it, and in all the Privileges,
promises, Comforts and Benefits of it. Glorious advantages! The New Testament
is the Churches Great Charter for her happy state in this and the world to
come. The 2 Pet. 1.4.
Promises thereof are most great and precious. The benefits and privileges
thereof, are such 1 Cor. 2.9.
as carnal eye has not seen* ear heard, or heart of man conceived. And all
these are assured to thee as thine in the Lord Supper. Consider now why
walk thou dejectedly, uncomfortably in respect of sin, temptation or
tribulation? In the New Testament are plentiful Cordials for all thy faintings,
abundant remedies for all t^y maladies: thou can not have that sore, but
here is a salve for it. Be of good cheer therefore in this behalf. As truly as
the Sacrament, and the Blood of Christ is thine: so truly the New Testament
with all its Promises and Privileges are thine.

7. Finally, After the Lords Supper is done, long for new refreshments of thy
Spirit by renewed Sacraments. Has the Lord made bare his face to thee at his
Table: bidden the welcome fil^ed thy soul as with marrow and farne^s: staid
thee with fl^ggons, feed the with hidden Mannah. bread of life, and water of
life: assured thee of thy sins pardon in his blood: and ^olac'd thy soul with
Communion with him? Then let the^e tastes of his sweetness and pleasantness,
make thee pant after like opportunities. Think with thy ^elf, When will the
Lords Supper come? When shall I come and appear before the Lord? When shall I
see his power and glory? taste his love and grace, as sometimes in the
Sacrament? Lord evermore give me this bread. I think the time long betwixt
Sacrament and Sacrament. Oh that I might still be feasting my soul with the^e
heavenly dainties! Thus fill thine heart with longing desires after Sacraments
till they come; so shall thou make way for more satisfying delights therein
when they come, But e^pecially thirst and cry out for complete enjoyment of
Jesus Christ in heaven face to face, which is beyond all Sacraments and all
Ordinances. For if a little glimpse and taste of Christ in these darksome
Ordinances be so sweet: how sweet and ravishing will the full Vision and
immediate fruition of Christ be in the Highest heavens? Say therefore in thine
heart, Lord Jesus, thy word is sweet, thy Sacraments sweet, and all thine
Ordinances are sweet through thy sweetness, yet they satisfy not fully. Thou
art more sweet and soul-^atisfying then all. Therefore 2 Timothy 4.8.
I love th^ne appearing, I long for thy coming. Thou have said. Rev. 22.20, 2^.
Behold, I come quickly; And mine heart echo's, Even so come, Lord Jesus. Amen.

FINIS.
An Alphabetical TABLE, Directing to the Principal Matters contained in this
BOOK.
A.
ADam, how happy he was before the fall, and we in him, in nine particulars, p.
50 to 55. How miserable since the fall both by loss of Go^d, and Presence of
Evil both of Sin and Sorrow. p. 55. to 63. Appetite. How necessary a spiritual
Appetite is before Communicating, in two respects. p. 191, 192. A good
spiritual Appetite to the Lords Supper, may be tried and discovered by six
properties. p. 193. to 197 Attributes, of God. See God.
B.
Baptism, what it is. p. 94 95. Brotherly love. See Love to Christians.
C.
Christ. The Necessity of getting out of our Natural state into Christ in four
particulars. p. 63. to 66. The Duties to be performed by them that are in
Christ, in nine particulars. p. 66, 67. Privileges which we enjoy by Christ,
in seven respects. p. 68, 69. Points of Knowledge necessary touching Christ,
viz. That 1. There is but one true Christ. p. 70. 2. Jesus Son of the Virgin
Mary is this true Christ, showed three ways. p. 71, 72. 2. This Christ is
God-man, and why. p. 73, 74. 4. Christ has taken upon him the Office of
Mediatorship, and discharges it, as a Prophet two ways. p. 75, 76. As a
Priest two ways. p. 79. As a King seven ways. p. 76, 77. And all, in his
state of Humiliation, wherein chiefly five degrees. p* 77 78. And in his state
of Exaltation, wherein are observable five degrees also. p. 78, 79.80. 5. This
Mediato^r Jesus Christ is All-sufficient. p. 80, 81. 6. Christ save none but
those to whom he is actually applied, p. 81. 7. Christ is the Substance of all
Sacraments, etc. p. 81. Love to Christ. See Love. Considerations upon which
this Book was published. In Ep. Ded. Covenant. The Substance of the New
Covenant. p. 5. We may discover whether we are parties to the New Covenant, and
have inward interest in it. 1. By our New Covenant-Knowledge of the Lord,
evidenced three ways. p. 6, 7, 8. By the Inscription of Gods Law in our
Hearts, proved four ways. p. 8, 9.10, 3. By our Covenant Relation to God. p.
10, 11. 4. By the pardon of our sins, where, five Signs of that pardon. p. 11,
12, 13. 5. By the implantation of Gods fear in our hearts, p. 13,14. -- The New
Covenant differs four ways from Gods Covenant with Adam in innocence. p. 82,
83. How it agrees and differs from the Old Covenant. p. 84, 85, 86. Four grand
Privileges of it. p. 87, 88. The New Covenant-Priviledges none can actually
claim without the New Covenant-Grace. p. 89. Creation. What it is. p. 46. 4.
Excellencies in Gods Creation. p. 47, 48.
D.
DEcrees. What Gods Deerees are, more generally and specially considered. p.
42, 43. 6. Perfections of Gods Decrees. p. 44, 45, 46. How God Executes his
Decrees b^ Creation and Providence. p. 46, etc.
E.
EXamination before Communicating, is public and Private. p. 1, 2, Necessary
upon four grounds p. 2, 3. 1. We are to Examine Our Right, Need, and Actual
Fitness. p. 3. 1. Our Right to the Lords Supper, is Outward and Inward. p. 4,
5. Our Inward Right to the Lords Supper may be tried by our inward Right to,
and Interest in the New Covenant, and that five ways. p. 5. to 15. See Right
and New Covenant. 2. Our Need of the Lords Supper, is great, in five regards.
p. 15. to 29. See Supper of the Lord. 3. Our fitness of the Lords Supper,
consists in having and using Knowledge, Faith, Repentance, New Obedience, Love,
Thankfulness, and a Spiritual Appetite. p. 26, etc. See these heads severally.
F.
FAith. Five sorts of Faith, and which fits for the Lords Supper especially. p.
110, 111. Saving Faith is described and the description cleared by Scripture.
p. 111, 112. The necessity of this Faith to worthy Communicating in four
regards. p. 113. to 116. The Properties of Faith. 1. It softens the Heart, and
how. p. 116, 117. 2. It purifies the Heart, three ways. p. 118, 119. 3. It
makes sincerely obedient, and how, in four respects. p. 120, 121. 4. It loosens
the heart from the world. p. 121, 122. 5. It enliveueth a Christian. p. 122. 6.
It Is attended with three Companions. p. 123. 7. It overcomes the World, Flesh,
and Devil. p: 123, 124. 8. It upholds under troubles. p. 124. 9. It daily grows
and perseveres. p. 125. Fall of Adam. How happy he and we were before the fall,
in nine respects. p. 50. to 55. How miserable Adam and we are since the fall.
By privation of Good, nine ways. p. 55, 56. By position of Evil, both of Sin
and Sorrow. p. 56. to 63.
G.
GOD. Concerning God these things are cleared by Scripture. 1. That God is. 2.
That God is one 3. That this one God subsists in three distinct persons. p. 29,
30. 4. That God is a Spirit. p. 31. 5. That God has made himself known by his
Attributes and Works. p. 31. etc. His Attributes Incommunicable, Communicable,
and Resulting from both, seventeen in all are Ennumerated and cleared by
Scriptures. p. 31. to 42. His Works are his Decrees and the Execution thereof.
p. 42. What Gods Decrees are, more Generally, and more Specially Considered. p.
42, 43. 6. Excellencies or Perfections of Gods Decrees. p. 44, 45, 46. His
Execution of his Decrees is by Creation and Providence, p. 46. What Creation
is, and how Gods Freedom, Wisdom, Power, and Goodness shine forth therein. p.
46, 47, 48. What Providence is, generally considered, and the three Acts
thereof. p. 48, 49. Gods special Providence over man in his fourfold estate.
p. 39. Justification. p. 224. How God, Christ Faith, Good works justify. p.
225.
K.
KNnowledge. Three Characters of New Covenant-knowledge. p. 6, 7, 8. --
Knowledge is necessary to worthy Communicating in three respects. p. 26, 27.
Knowledge of God, our selves, Christ, New Covenant, and Lords Supper, why
necessary to worthy Communicating. p. 27, 28, 29. 1. What Knowledge of God is
requisite to worthy communicating. p. 29. ^o 49. 2. What Knowledge of our
selves, p. 49. to 69. 3. What Knowledge of Jesus Christ. p. 79. to 82. 4. What
Knowledge of the New Covenant. p. 82. to 90. 5. What Knowledge of the Lords
Supper. p. 90. to 99. True Sanctified Knowledge may be tried by eight
Properties of it. It is, 1. Experimental, p. 99, 100. 2. Soul-abasing. p. 101,
102. 4. Communicative for others Edification. p. 103. 4. Growing. p. 104. 5.
Heart-affecting. p. 105. 6. Spiritualized. p. 106, 107. 7. Pure. p. 107. 8.
Obedientiall, and that from four grounds, p. 108, 109.
L.
LAw. Four Signs of Gods Law written in the Heart. p. 8, 9, 10. Lords Supper.
See Supper of the Lord. Love to Christ. It is in two degrees necessary to fit
for worthy Commun^cating. p. 147. to 151. Our Love to Christ may betryed, 1. By
the grounds of it, viz. Christ's Loveliness, Faith in Christ, Experience of
Christ. p. 151. to 154. 2. By the Degrees of it, viz. Good Will to Christ,
Desire of Christ, and Acquiescence in Christ. p. 154. to 158. 3. By the
properties of it, viz. It is, Obedientiall, ^ranscendent, Breathing after more
Evidence of Christ's Love, Accepting Christ's Rebukes, Sincere, Constant. p. 158.
to 164. Love to Christians. How necessary it is to fit for worthy Communicating
in five regards. p. 164. to 170. How it may be tried by these Properties. It
is, 1. Arising from our Love to God. 2. Pure. 3. Spiritual. 4. Universal. 5.
Sincere, two ways. 9. Kindly-affectioned, three ways. 7. Contenting in
Society of the Brethren. 8. Fervent. 9. Constant. p. 170. to 178.
N.
NAture. The Necessity of getting out of our Natural condition into a
Supernatural state in Christ four ways evidenced. p. 63. to 66. New Covenant.
See Covenant. New Obedience. See Obedience.
O.
OBedience. New Obedience is necessary to Qualify for worthy Communicating, in
three regards. p. 139, 140. Properties of true Obedience. It is, 1.
Conscientious. p. 140. 2. Cordial, in three respects. p. 141, 142. 3.
Transforming. p. 142. 4. Resolved, in many regards* p. 143. to 146. 5.
Complete, two ways. p. 146. 6. Constant. p. 146.
P.
PArdon of Sins. Five Signs of it. page 11, 12, 13. Preparation before the
Lords Supper, consists ^n Examination. p. 1, 2. It is urged upon four weighty
grounds, viz. From the Author, Nature, Benefit of the Lords Supper, and Danger
of unworthy Communicating. p. 2, 3. See Examination. Providence. What it is,
generally considered. Thr^ grand Acts of Providence. p. 48, 49. Gods Special
Providence over man in his fourfold estate. p. 49.
R.
Remembering. How we are to Remembr Christ crucified at the Lords Supper. 1.
Histrically. p. 214. to 218. 2. Mysteriously. p. 218. to 2^6. 3. Energetically.
p. 226. to 234. Rendering again. See Thankfulness. Repentance. How necessary it
is to sit for worthy Communicating, in three regards. ^ 126, 127. Repentance is
described. and the description of it cleared by Scripture. p. 128. to 131.
Repentance Tried. 1. By Conviction and Sense of sin, two ways. p. 131, 132. 2.
By Contrition and sorrow for sin, three ways. p. 132, 133, 134. 3. By
Conversion of heart and life from Sin to God, diverse ways. p. 135. to 138.
Right to the Lords Supper, is Outward and Inward. p. 4, 5. May be tried by our
Right and Interest in the New Covenant. p. 5. etc. See Covenant.
S.
SAcraments. Men may partake them, and yet be displeasing to God, five ways.
-- Preface. God in all ages deals with his people by way of Sacraments, and
that for three Reasons. p. 90, 91. Sacraments are not Natural, but Instituted
worship. p. 92. All Sacraments since the fall Seals of the Covenant of Grace,
and Represen Christ as crucified. p. 93. Sorts of Sacraments. p. 94. 2. Parts
in Sacraments, and a Sacramental union. p. 95. ^5) Supper of the Lord. 3 Sorts
of Directions for right managing of it, viz. 1. By Preparation. 2. By Right
use. 3. By suitable Conversation. Preface. 1. Directions for due Preparation
before Communicating. p. 1. to 197. ^. For Right use of the Lords Supper in
Communicating. p. 197. to 235. 3. For suitable walking after Communicating. p.
235. to 243. See Preparation and Examination. Our Right to the Lords Supper
cleared. p. 4. to 1^. Our Need of it in five respects. p. 14. to 26. Our
F^tn^ss for the Lords Supper, Tried by 7. Qualifications. p. 26. to 197. --
What the Lords Supper is p. 95. The Author, Matter, Form and Ends of the Lords
Supper particularly described. p. 69. to 99. Four false Ends of the Lords
Supper to be avoided. p. 199. Six right Ends of the Lords Supper to be intended
by worthy Communicants. p. 200. to 203. The Institution opened. p. 204. to 209.
Sin original. 7. Names given it in Scripture. p. 58, 59. The Nature of it
consists in three things. p. 59, 60. our Aggravations of it. p. 60, 61. Sin
Actual. Our proneness to it. p. 62. Sins pardon. Five Signs that our sins are
pardoned. p. 11, 12, 13.
T.
THankfulness. How necessary it is to sit for worthy Receiving of the Lords
Supper, in three regards. p. 178. to 181. How it may be tried by three eminent
Acts or Degrees of it, viz. 1. Acknowledgement of mercies rec^ived. p. 181. 2.
Estimation of benefits acknowledged. p. 182. etc. Here, how we are to esteem
Christ in four regards. p. 183. to 185. Christ's Death in three regards. p. 185,
186. The Lords Supper in three regards. p. 187. 3. Retribution, or rendering
again for mercies esteemed. Here, of six things to be rendered again by way of
thankfulness. p. 187. to. 191.
W.
VVRiting Gods law in our hearts. See Law, Works of God. See God.
FINIS.
Books Printed, and are to be sold by G. Calvert.
CLavis Bibliorum, The Key of the Bible, unlocking the richest Treasury of the
holy Scripture, By Francis Roberts.

Believers Evidences for Eternal life, Taken out the first Epistle of St. John,
By the same Author.

Ius Divinum Regiminis Eccl^siastici: Or, the Divine Right of Church
Government, to prove the Presbyterian Government to be according to the Word of
God; By the London Ministers.

Sir Philip Sydnies Arcadia, the tenth Edition, with Additions, newly Printed.

Medulla Bibliorum, Or, The Marrow of the Bible. By Will. Ainsworth.


