A General EPISTLE Of Universal Love and Good Will
To all the Families of the Earth, who are seeking the Lord, and enquiring
after the Knowledge of him, whom to know is Eternal Life, whether they be in
Forms of Worship, or without, or suppose they have got above all Forms, etc.
WITH DIRECTIONS.
How, and by what means, the Saving Knowledge of God is again Restored, and
where he may be found; and how, from the Least to the Greatest, all may attain
to the Knowledge of Him, according to his Promise, by the Apostle.

Hebrews VIII. 8, 9, 10, 11. Behold the days come (says the Lord) when I will
make a New Covenant with the House of Israel, and with the House of Judah.

Not according to the Covenant that I made with their Fathers, in the day when
I took them by the hand to lead them out of the Land of Egypt; because they
continued not in my Covenant, and I regarded them not, says the Lord.

For this is the Covenant that I will make with the House of Israel after those
days, says the Lord; I will put my Laws into their Mind, and write them in
their Hearts: And I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a People.

And they shall not teach every Man his Neighbor, and every Man his Brother,
saying, Know the Lord: For all shall know me from the least to the greatest,
etc.


THis is the Gospel Covenant, where the Law is put in the Mind, and writ in the
Heart, by the Finger of God (here the outward Priests Lips are not to keep the
Peoples knowledge, as in the time of the Law, and First Covenant, but universal
Knowledge promised, by the Lip of Truth, to the least as well as the greatest)
which, who receives and embraces in our day, will no longer spend their
Money, nor their Labor, for that which will not profit them, Isa. 55. 1, 2, 3,
4, 5. being ever learning, and never able to come to the Knowledge of the
Truth, 2 Timothy 3. to verse 7.

But it has been the great Unhappiness of all Mankind in the Fall, thereby to
lose the Knowledge of God. And as the Serpent prevailed with Eve, to break
Covenant with God, and from her to Adam, whereby they were drove from the
Presence of God, which had been a Fountain of Life to them: Even so he has
prevailed with the Generality of Mankind, to slight and disregard that which
God has ordained to Restore them again to the true and saving Knowledge of the
true and living God: Though they are seeking him in diverse Forms and Manners of
Worship, and that with Zeal too; yet being Ignorant of that, in and by which
the Lord was always known and manifested: They Pray in vain, Preach in vain,
and seek the Face of God in vain.

For their sakes, chiefly, am I drawn forth, to discover openly what the Lord
has made known to me in secret, who have been upon the barren Mountains,
seeking the Living among the Dead, as well as others.

The first Promise that was made to Mankind (of Restoration out of this
miserable fallen State, Genesis 3. 15.) was in and by that Promised Seed, which
was to bruise the Serpent's Head; of which Seed all the righteous Generations,
from Adam, did partake; as Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and all
the Patriarchs and Prophets.

And to Abraham in his Seed was the Promise made to all the Families of the
Earth, Genesis 12. 3. of Blessing and Restoration, out of the Curse, which came on
Man in the Fall. And this Seed and Spirit of Life was the principal Instructor
and Leader of all the holy Men of God, in and before the First Covenant, in all
the Statutes and Judgments which the Lord set before them, which they were to
do and Live. By the opening of this Spirit of Life and Prophecy, Moses
prophesied of Christ, Deuteronomy. 18. 15, 16, 17, 18. And Abraham offered his Son,
Genesis 22. This instructed the Prophets in all their Prophesies, and led Israel,
who obeyed it, through the Wilderness, Nehem. 9. 19, 20. and was to them as a
Pillar of a Cloud by Day, and a Pillar of Fire by Night, Numb. 14. 14.

And by this Daniel expounded to King Belshazzar the Handwriting that was
against him, Dan. 5. 11. And the holy Prophets, unto Malachi, which had
Knowledge of the Coming of Christ, it was by this: Of this Seed came all the
Branches of Righteousness that ever grew up in any Generations of the World:
And unto this Seed (Christ, his Light and Spirit of Life) must all Nations of
the World come, that the Head of the Serpent may be bruised, and subdued with
it, in every Male and Female, if ever they be Restored to Life in Christ again,
and to the saving Knowledge of God; whose Kingdom is compared to the least of
all Seeds, in its first appearance; and therefore was likened to a Grain of
Mustard Seed, Mat. 13. 31. But if the Seed of the Kingdom grow up in Male and
Female, it will become the greatest, and its Branches will spread, and its
Fruit will be Righteousness; the effect of which is Peace and assurance for
ever.

And now to you all who are scattered upon the barren Mountains of empty
Profession, and are yet Strangers to this Seed and Spirit of Life: Know of a
Truth, that while ye remain such, you are without God in the World, feeding
upon the empty Husks among them, who (like Swine) wallow in the Mire of
Uncleanness, and Pollutions of the World.

Arise, arise, and shake off your Night Garments, for they will no longer Cover
your Nakedness, and lift up your Eyes, and behold the arising of the Morning
Star of Righteousness in your Hearts, which will lead you to the Son of the
Father's Love, whom he has now raised in order to Rule and Reign in the Hearts
of the Children of Men, till he has subdued all his Enemies, that he alone may
have the Government, whose Right it is: And all who will not that he should
thus Reign are his Enemies; he will slay them, let their Profession, and
Confession of him [in words] be what it will: For he is arising to search his
Jerusalem with Candles, and the flying Roll of his Wrath is entering into the
House of the Unclean, and him that works Iniquity, and shall consume it with
the Stones and Timber thereof.

Therefore sweep Iniquity and Uncleanness out of your Houses, if you intend
they shall be preserved; for your greatest Enemies are them within (in your own
Hearts) and while they remain there, they will Corrupt all your Sacrifices, as
David said, If I regard Iniquity in my Heart, the Lord will not hear my Prayer,
Psalm 66. 18. And your lost piece of Money in your own Houses, Luke 15. 8. (i.
e. your own Hearts) you will not find, till ye sweep them by the Besom of God's
Power, and purge out the old Leaven of Uncleanness there.

Oh therefore, Come home, come home, and look into the dark Corners of your
Hearts by the Candle of God's Word, and there you will find the Body of Sin and
Death, and the Root of Bitterness and Enmity to God, by the appearance of his
Beloved Son. Oh! Let the Ax of God's Power be laid to this Root; for the Day of
the Everlasting Gospel is dawned, and its Power known, which (as received,
owned and obeyed) shall Root up the Body of Sin, Death and Darkness, and
thereby shall bring Life and Immortality to Light, which the false Gospel could
not, nor can never do.

The great Master of the Vineyard is now come to look for Fruits, and every
Plant and Graft in his Vineyard, that brings not forth good Fruit, he will
hew down and cast into the Fire: For he is Just, as well as Merciful, and will
no longer be mocked with an empty Show of Holiness, and vain Profession of
Righteousness, while your Fruits gives your Profession the Lie: His Kingdom
stands in Righteousness, and without it, and the Works of it brought forth in
Life and Conversation, no Man shall see God to his Eternal Comfort, nor receive
an Inheritance among them who are sanctified, but as they are sanctified
thorough the Obedience of Faith, and Renewing of the Holy Ghost.

You have been long Coveting the Husk, and no Man would give it you, as the
poor Prodigal, Luke 15. 16. Return now to your Father's House, the Light in
which God dwells, 1 Timothy 6. 16. that he may meet you, and prepare a Feast of
fat things for you, for his love is the same, and his Rolling Bowels is not
lessened to all his Prodigal Children, who with unseigned Repentance return to
his House; the Light is his House for ever: And all Nations, Kindreds and
Tongues must come to this House, where his Honor remains and dwells; if ever
they Eat of his Dainties, and of the Fullness and Fatness of his Tabernacle;
Jacob dwelt in this House, and it was as a Fire; and also Joseph, and it was as
a Flame, and Esau who inhabited Mount Seir, his House was as Stubble, and no
remains thereof was, nor is to be left by the Word of the Lord, Obediah, 18.

And the Church is coming out of the Wilderness (where Esau dwells) leaning on
the breast of her beloved, who is embracing her in the Arms of Divine Love,
leading her through many Tribulations, in which he will purify her as Gold,
seven times tried in the Fire.

And now you who are seeking the Lord in what way of outward Worship soever,
behold and receive the Lamp of Righteousness, which God has lighted in you,
and consider the Parable, Luke 15. and return home and purge out the uncleaness
of your own Houses (i. e.) your Hearts (by the Right Hand of God's Power, which
he is daily stretching out to you) of all the Defilements and Corruptions,
which the Enemy of your Souls has filled them withal, then (and not till then)
shall ye find him to be the Redeemer of your Souls, the Knowledge of whom has
been lost in your own Houses, and covered out of your Sight under the
Corruptions of your own Hearts; and the Enemy of your eternal Peace has led
you out to seek him, among the Lo Here Is and Lo There Is, without, where he was
never found: And upon this Account, Christ said, Luke 13. 14. Many shall seek
to enter in and shall not be able.

For, whosoever seeks and strives to enter in, and not by Christ the Door, who
is the true Light, that lights every Man that comes into the World, by which
the Door is seen, and the Entrance known into Life Eternal, is a Thief and a
Robber: For the Corruption within must be cast out, and the strong Man armed
(who has long kept the Heart) dispossed, before ever Man can enter the Kingdom
of Righteousness, or Man and Woman be Born again of the Incorruptible Seed, by
the Word of God, which lives and abides for ever.

This Birth comes not by the Will of Man, nor in the Will of the Flesh, but by
the Will of God, and delights in his Law, Statutes and Judgments, crying Abba
Father, and seeks not his Face in vain, the Prayer of this Seed and Birth he
hears and answers; this seeks and finds, because Innocence is its
Garment, and Righteousness its Breast Plate.

This Birth, in whomsoever it appears, is hated of the World, and set at
naught by the hired Builders thereof, whose greatest Gain is their Godliness,
and thorough Covetousness, with feigned words, have they made Merchandise of
Thousands, whose Reward will be according to their Works.

O! Arise, arise, and come away, ye seeking and traveling Ones, in what Form,
or under what Name so ever: The great Master of the Feast is Inviting you to
Eat at his Table, make no Excuses of Oxen or Farms, Wives or Children, that
you be not Rejected, and them who are in the Highways and Hedges compelled and
received: For many are Called and Invited, but few Chosen and Received, because
they answer not his Call, nor regard his Invitation.

Therefore Gird up the Loins of your Minds, and cast off the Unfruitful Works
of Darkness, and put on the Armor of Light; for it is offered you: Even the
Spiritual Sword, by which you may overcome your Soul's Enemy, i. e. the World,
the Flesh, and the Devil; and this Word, or Sword of the Spirit, is nigh to
every one of you, even in your Hearts, Romans 10. 8. This Ingrafted Word is able
to save your Souls, if you Hear, Receive and Obey it, your Rock will be sure in
all Storms, and your Foundation unmovable, and you shall know the Truth, and
it shall make you free, from that Bondage of Corruption which the whole
Creation groans under: For a Deliverer is come, and now tendered to all
Mankind, that whosoever will Receive, Follow and Obey him, shall not abide in
Egypt's Darkness, nor House of Bondage, but shall receive the Light of Life.

Oh! Seek the Lord in the Light of his Beloved Son, while he is near; for he is
not far from every one of you, who in Sincerity are seeking him: And that, in
this your Day of Visitation, you may know the things that belong to your
Everlasting Peace, is the true Desire and Breathing of

Your True Friend, Who seeks not Yours, but You, Ambrose Rigge.
Reigate, the 8th day of the 8th Month, School.
FINIS.

