CONFIRMATION REVIVED. AND DOOM'S-DAY BOOKS OPENED.

In two SERMONS, The one Preached at Coventry before the Right Reverend Father
in God, JOHN, Lord Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry: Upon his first performance
of CONFIRMATION in that City, June 23. 1662.

The other Preached at Warwick before the Right Honorable the JUDGES of Assize
for that Circuit, upon the 2d. of July next following.

By John Riland, Archdeacon of Coventry, and sometime Fellow of St. Mary
Magdalen-College in Oxon.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Richard Royston, Bookseller to His sacred
Majesty, 1663.

To the READER.
THE World is bad enough already, but if reproved, becomes much Worse; That
which was of God ordained to work the Cure, now serving for little else, but to
Inflame the Disease. Every slight Sore, by a reproof is presently Angered into
an Incurable Ulcer; and, as if all our Patients had been formerly Disciples
trained up in the School of one Tyrannus, the Doctors must Suffer, not because
these cannot heal, but those will not be healed; whilst in lieu of a
Servastis, nothing is returned but -- me Occidistis amici.

If the Sea be not more merciful to S. Paul, than the Soldiers, for all his
faithfulness in Predicting, and care in Preserving, he may Act. 27. 42.
drown in his own Blood, and save the hazard of any other ship-wreck.

All Scripture is profitable for Correction, etc. 2 Timothy 3. 16.
But our strange Incorrigibleness seems to make that Scripture Unprofitable,
which says so. For as it is with Scythians, if they Breathe a Vein under the
Tongue; so is it with Christians, if we draw the least Blood from under the
Ear, it produces a Perpetual Barrenness.

Those that can Laugh and Grin, when they hear Others, will as certainly Gnash
upon the Preacher when they hear themselves reproved. Therefore was it of late
most Dean of Wells.
Seasonably observed, concerning that Solemn Protestation of the Apostle, viz.
I call God for a record upon my 2 Cor. 1. 23.
Soul, that to spare you, I came not as yet to Corinth.

The reason whereof was, because if he had come, he must have been constrained
to use Severities upon their Disorders; which if, Ineffectual, his coming had
Increased, not their Sins only, but their Judgments. Indeed, upon that very
account it was, that the Author of these Sermons (being Commanded to these
Public Services) made it his care to Fix upon the most Sparing and Merciful
Themes he could meet withal.

Two arrows he shot and sent abroad heretofore; what ever those did, these that
are now Sending after them are far enough over from hitting or hurting any.
Balms, if any here be, certainly they are such as will not break men's Heads.

When Moses could be no longer hid, look, what his Mother did by him, the same
is our Church put to do by her too-big-grown Children, Only to set some to
observe their Floatings, and Exodus 2. 3, 4.
see if any unexpected Hand of Providence, may yet pull them on shore.

Thus, thoughour Ship-men do still Abide in the Ship; yet are they forced to
let her Drive. And the Philistine Kine must be turned up, to 1 Samuel 6. 12.
see if of themselves, they will take the straight way to Beth-shemesh.

He, whose Power it was of old, to turn the hearts of the Fathers to the
Children, might it be his Work in our Days, to turn the hearts of the Children
to the Fathers; and at last persuade Japhet to dwell in the Tents of Shem:
which as it should be the endeavor of our Souls, so also, the chief desire of
our Eyes; and would be a spectacle full as Pleasing as S. Paul in the Pulpit,
but far more then Rome in her Flourishing; To the Hindering of the one
(according to our present measure) and the hastening of the other, nothing does
more contribute than these our divided dwellings.

Imprimatur,

Jan. 17. 1662/3. M. FRANCK S. T. P. To. in Christo Patri Dom. Episc. Land. a
Sacr. Dom.

CONFIRMATION REVIVED.
Psalm. 1. 3. And he shall be like a tree planted by the Rivers of Waters, which
brings forth his fruit in his Season.
THE Scripture, says a Father, is like unto a large complete City wherein are
many stately houses, and every house has it is several Door, and each Door it is
proper Key, which alone can open it, and give the Commer a free, and fair
Admission.

But what if all these Keys be clapped together in one cluster? then, out of the
whole Bunch to single, and find out Illam aptam, propriam, and congruam clavem,
Hilar. Prolo^ in Psalm. explan.
as the same Father has it, to hit upon the right Key; Maxima ignaro affertur
difficultas, it must needs be matter of very much puzzle and perplexity unto
the Ignorant, and unskilful Attempter.

Now, we all know this Book of Psalms to be one of the Goodliest Buildings in
all this great City of God; and our business at present lying in this first
Psalm, which is the Fore-gate, as it were, to the rest of this Harmonious
Range, amongst those many Bunches of Keys, which are brought by several
Interpreters, to unlock the door of this one Verse, we that are yet sadly
ignorant, God knows, and too much unacquainted with his Mysteries, (alas!) how
shall we be ever able to find out the Right Key, whereby we might un-erringly
follow the Recesses of God's Spirit in this Scripture, unless the Great
Key-Keeper of Scripture, He that has the Key of David, be pleased to put
David's own Key Rev. 3. 7.
into our hands, and open unto us?

Therefore it is good for us to draw nigh unto God; yea, that is certain; but
how shall we get near him? why, the best way is to stand at the Door and knock:
Though we have done it already, let us do it again; and having no Key of our
own, unless he please to lend us one, Let us earnestly beseech him, who is
within to open, and take us in, who are without; and (as the Spouse begs) to
Tell us where he makes his rest at Noon, i. e. whereabouts and in which sense
is his Can. 1. 7.
brightest abode, and what may be the fullest and cleerest importance of the
words now read unto you* And he shall be like a tree, etc.

The whole Psalm, as S. Hilary affirms, contains in it many Articles, and grand
points, of the Christian Faith; Sacramentum Dei corporati docet, etc. Hill. in
prolog.


It acquaints us with the mystery of Christ Incarnate, promises the ^^mmunion
of Saints in glory; affirms the Resurrection both of the Righteous, and of the
ungodly; and lastly, it assures a Reward to the one, and denounces an heavy
Judgment upon the other: and all this on purpose to persuade men to holiness of
life. Blessed is the man that has not walked in the Counsel, etc. without
which holiness (as it is there described in the Verse 1.
two first Verses) non shall see the Lord.

But we shall not need to fetch in any Foreign help from other parts of this
Psalm; the Text it self, I suppose, affording matter enough for this your
present task, and mine.

The Prophet sang unto his beloved a Song of his Isa. 5. 1.
Vineyard; we, changing the note a little, must now deliver you a discourse of
his Nursery, and Orchard; and why may not the Root and the Trunk, the sap and
the leaf, the Bark and the Branch, be as serviceable in the Christian Church,
as Ramm-skins, Badger-skins, Exodus 35. 6.
and Goat's Hayr, in the Jewish Tabernacle?

Thus the Lamps of the Temple were fed by that ^ec. 4. 12.
oil which issued from the Olive Trees, and emptied it self through Golden
Pipes for that purpose.

And had we but those Golden Pipes, and conveyances, no doubt, the Tree here in
the Text would afford Spiritual Juice in abundance, that might help to
Maintain, and keep alive, the Lamps of God's Sanctuary, so as their shinings
might serve in some measure to Lighten themselves and others.

For, as David professes of himself, I am like a Psalm. 52. 8.
Green-Olive tree in the house of God; the same we may say of the Psalms of
David, They are like unto Green-Olive trees in Gods house, and have Heavenly
Oil enough in them, for Light, Comfort, and Nourishment, to the Humble,
Constant, and growing Soul; provided, as it comes within, so it Keeps within
that House of God, where this Green Olive grows, and does not wickedly depart
from it.

And should we give further sufferance for this discourse, freely to run after
the resemblance here before us, and pursuing the several properties of trees,
show their serviceableness, and correspondency to Christians, in the
Application; I do not doubt, but this Tree of ours, like that which
Nebuchadnezzar dreamed of, would yield very much Fruit, and in it might be Meat
for all, Dan. 4. 12.

But our business is not the Planting of Groves, or ^an. 4. 12.
Setting of Orchards; but the Confirming of Christians. And indeed (as some
observe) a Grove, or the like, should not be planted too near a Temple, for
fear of too much Umbrage, and Darkishness: and should we ^ir Fr. B.
resolve still to follow, and make after this Metaphor, the discourse, I am
afraid, would be too chill and shadowy.

Our employment here at this time is a Preaching, not a Planting Employment,
unless so as S. Paul planted, and so as Apollos watered; and albeit our Savior
Cor. 3. 6.
Christ was once content to be Mistaken for a Gardener, [she supposing him to
be the Gardener;] John 20. 15. Yet who had not rather be counted an Indifferent
Divine, than a very good Engraffer? ^oh. 20. 15.


Therefore by a too minute pursuance of every particular in this sacred
similitude betwixt this Tree and David's Blessed man, that Divine Plant-animal,
lest our discourse of this Tree should blossom it self to death, or run out too
much into Leaves, and so quite forsake the Text, which tells us, that the Tree
must not only bring forth leaves, but Fruit in his Season; therefore I say,
lest it should be so, we will give over talking of Trees, and betake our selves to
discourse of men, so leading you forth from a silent Grove, into a Vocal
Forest; and that with some particular regard to the sacred business of this
days Solemnity; and only as we go, give observance to the simile, so far as
may be applicable thereunto.

And how far that is, will soon appear in these following Propositions, which
do naturally grow here upon David's Plantation: In speaking whereof, we will omit
the Bark and Bulk of the Letter, and move after the Sap and Juice of the
Spirit, according as we shall hear (as David did) any sound of Gods going in
the Tops of the Trees. 2 Samuel 5. 24. 2 Samuel 5. ^4.


First, the Proposition is, That a Right Plantation is a Prop. 1.
good Preparative for a fixed and steadfast Confirmation, in Spiritual matters.
As here this Tree of ours was not at first planted a Tree; but a young slip, or
a little Graff: yet if a Graff be well set, by Rivers of Waters, it may in time
grow up to be a Tree, arrive to a well-rooted and Confirmed steadiness in God's
Paradise; therefore, if we observe, it is not, He is like a tree; but, being
once well planted, He shall be like a tree, etc. that is the first.

Secondly, As a right Planting is a good Preparative Prop. 2.
to a Confirmed Standing; so this Confirmed standing is pre-requir'd unto, and
must needs be attended with a Spiritual Fruit-bearing. A good Graff is like to
make a good Tree, and a good Tree must bring forth good Fruit: If a Tree be
planted by Rivers of Waters, it is not enough, that the Root still lies sucking
and Bibbing below, while the Lazy Bulk stands Idle above, and yields nothing,
but becomes a mere Burden to the Earth that bears it. No; a Tree set to such
advantage, planted by the Rivers, it is expected it should be a Fruit-bearing
tree. He shall be like a tree that brings forth his fruit. That Is the second.

Thirdly, Christian Fruitfulness should always be Prop. 3.
duly manifested in it is proper Seasonableness. Every tree, for the putting
forth the fruit thereof, has it is peculiar Season. The Graff indeed must grow,
but it is the Tree that must yield fruit; and that, not before, but In it is own
Season. He shall be like a tree that brings forth his fruit in his Season.
That Is the third.

Fourthly, Spiritual Firmness, Fruitfulness, Seasonableness, Prop. 4.
all should be attended with an Undecaying Comeliness. This Tree should as well
be beautified with Leaves, as Burdened with fruit; as it is his own Fruit, so
also is it, His own Leaf, and that a never-withering one. His leaf also shall
not Wither. That Is the fourth.

Or else thus; we may take the words as they lie before us in the Text; where
First, we have a Right Implanting; and, sure, most of us have had That. He
shall be planted, etc. Secondly, A well established Confirming; and many, I
suppose, come now to receive that, He shall be like a tree planted. Thirdly, A
seasonable Fructifying; and of some it is high time now we should Expect it,
That brings forth his fruit in his Season. Lastly, here are the Persevering
Beauties, and ornaments of Holy living, shaded over with the leaves of this
Tree. For as all things must be Fruitful; so every thing is, or should be,
Beautiful in Eccl. 3. 11.
it is Season. Inward holiness must be attended with outward Comeliness: His
leaf also shall not wither.

From the first General, our Implanting, we shall consider: First, the
Supernaturalness of the thing. Secondly, the Earliness of the time. Thirdly,
the Advantage of the place; Planted by Rivers of Waters.

From the second General, our Confirming, we shall reflect upon, first, the
Antiquity; secondly, the Solemnity; thirdly, the great usefulness, and
expediency thereof; Bowing the Tree, here, still to the business in hand, and
that, I hope, without much violence; He shall be like a tree planted, etc.

From the third General, our Spiritual Fructifying, we shall take notice,
first, of the Proportion; secondly, of the Propriety; thirdly, of the
Tempestivity thereof. After all these plantings, and waterings, somewhat it
must yield, worthy the name of Fruit, and this his own fruit, and that in his
own Season.

Lastly, we should exhort all to those never-withering ornaments, and unfading
Flourishings, of a holy Christian Conversation, and so conclude.

We begin with the First, our Implanting; and there first, consider the
Supernaturalness of the thing.

'Twas the practice of Rufus, an old Philosopher, always Arrian. Epict.
to begin with some Apotrepticall discourses to his Scholars, still dissuading
them from Philosophy, using that as a (...) of the (...) and the (...), the
Ingenuous, and dis-ingenious, amongst them: The same method must we use, even
with our best-natur'd Disciples, though we need not much Dehort them from
Philosophy; yet from vanity, and folly, anger and pride, etc. from all those
sins, which have gotten the early possession of their Souls, we must dehort
them. For, as it was with Christ, at his coming in the Flesh; The Inn was full
of other Company: so is it still with his coming in the Spirit; he finds the
Soul full of Ignorance, full of averseness and perverseness; yea so full of all
manner of wickedness, that until he makes it himself, There is no Room for him
in the Inn. Luc 2. 7.


And this has so universal a vote in Antiquity, that concerning the
Preparatives for the first Reception of grace, Aquinas himself resolves it;
Nemo potest per Aquin. 1 a. 2 ae Iu. 109. a. 6.
Seipsum praeparari, etc. No one, without the help of grace, can of himself
prepare himself to receive grace.

Grace is a plant, that grows not on every ground; and where it does grow, it
grows not of it self; but must be Engraffed, and that by the Hand, the Right
Hand, of God Almighty. The Vineyard, which thy own Right hand has planted,
Psalm. 80. 15. So that, planted Psalm. 80. 15.
it must be; and this also, by the High hand of Heaven; else the Richest Soil
in nature will never yield it. Nature is productive of the man; but somewhat
else above nature must give the Fiat to the Christian. Therefore, in the office
of Baptism, our Church exhorts us to pray, that God would grant to these
Children that thing which by nature they cannot have. For, after nature's
planting, we must be transplanted into some Fresh Mould of Grace; else we can
never prosper to any perfection.

And so we have it, in Isa. 5. 1, 2. Though it be a choice vine, and a choice
plot of ground, A vineyard in a Isa. 5. 1.
very fruitful hill; yet the vine grows not of it self upon it. No, but first
God must Fence it, and pick it, and plant it too; then (and not till then) he
expects to receive some good Grapes from it, Verse 2.

Grace, indeed, may be engraffed upon the stock of Parentage, Advanced by
Education, and good examples; but it grows not naturally upon any the Best
stumps in nature.

For the Kernel of the best fruit, if from a Crab-stock, some say, brings forth
nothing but a Crab-tree, because the best stocks have still somewhat of a
Natural Crabbishness within them; and so it is with the best of men. It Is true,
we read (in the worlds beginning) of the Earth bringing forth Trees, and Trees
bringing forth fruit after their kind, before the Sun and Moon were in Being,
and so, without the Aid of any of those Prolifick Influences of Heaven: But
yet, we find an Almighty Dixit went before that fructifying, even that Word of
God, which was far more warming, and more working, than ten thousand Suns, or
Moons. And God said, Let the earth bring forth Grass, and fruit Trees, etc.
Genesis 1. 1^.


To this purpose it is, that the Church (i. e. every Gracious Soul) is
resembled to an Orchard, a Garden, an enclosed Garden: it is not the Lord's
wast-ground, Can. 4. 12, 13.
or a large Common, where Nature wildly sprouts up at her own pleasure. No;
though the Grass, Herbs and Trees of themselves grow out of the ground; yet
when Moses speaks of Paradise, a Type of the Church, he comes with another
distinct expression, and says, The Lord God Planted a Garden Eastward, Genesis 2.
8.
etc. which Garden, as beforesaid, was a peculiar Figure of the Church of
Christ.

And as it is with the fruits of the Earth, some she Nurses her self at home,
as those which come of Kernells, and such are good for nothing but stocks: and
stocks, if not Engraffed, are fit for little else, but the Flames. Others again
she Nurses not her self Immediately, but puts them forth to Nurse, as Graffs,
and the like; and yet the fruit, that comes of a Graff, is far more pleasant
than that which comes of a Kernel, Sir Fr. Bacon's Not. Hist.
for all natures care in Nursing it her self; because, as that Learned man
observes, the nourishment, which feeds the Graff, receives some little chewing,
and preparing from the stock; whereas the other comes altogether Crudely from
the cold Earth, and so must needs render the fruit more Raw, harsh, and unkind,
than the former.

So is it with all mankind, those (...) some Nature undertakes to Nurse her
self, as Heathens, etc. who know no other nourishment, but what flows
immediately from those Fontinels of Nature: Others again are set forth and sent
abroad to Nurse; such as are Engraffed into other stocks, and live at some
distance from the Bosom of their own Mother.

Such are all true Christians, whose Souls are as weaned Children, whose
nourishment comes not from Raw Earth, but from the Stock of the Cross, from
Scriptures, Sacraments, Faith in Christ's blood, and such other heavenly
conveyances, which God has appointed to purify, and prepare our feeding for us.

And therefore, whereas the Former are like the Prophets Naughty figs, so bad,
they cannot be Eaten: Jer. 24 2.
these Later are like the fruit of the Vine, which Glads the heart of God and
man, and has this one distinct property, the Earlier it is taken, the more
Tastfull, and Pleasant it is. Which brings us to the second thing proposed (i.
e.) the earliness of the Time, which now comes to be spoken of.

Secondly; He shall be planted (i. e.) tender and young, before it be too
deeply Rooted in that other Soil, wherein it grows by nature. For Christianity
is not a mere Implanting; but a kind of Transplanting, whereby the Soul is
taken out of Natures Nursery, and Removed into the Orchard, and Paradise of
Grace. Now we know (...), is past into a Proverb for its perilousness. There Is
no stirring of an Old Tree, if you do (as you shall have much ado) after all,
the stubborn sullen old Trunk dies in the removal. Isa. 60. 21.


Thus we find the Church is styled of God, not the full grown Tree, but the
Branch of my Planting; and to let us know, what kind of Branch it is, and how
it comes to Thrive so well, there he tells us in the 22 v. A little one shall
become a thousand, and a small one a strong nation, etc.

These thousands, and Ten thousands, this strong and mighty Nation of
Christians, all (sure we are most of all) arose from these small ones, these
little ones, these little little ones, or the least of small ones, as the
doubling of the words may, and their force in Hebr. does imply.

These are they, who in great multitudes, Follow the Rev. 14. 4.
Lamb, wherever he goes. These have Filled up the Companies of Saints; These
have Recruited, and Completed the Armies of Martyrs; ever since the first
footing of Christianity, most of the Churches Additions have been made up of
These Little ones, whereas your Great ones, those that choose the time of
full-grown Christians for their implanting have never since the time aforesaid,
come in any such considerable numbers: nor are they ever likely to do so.

For, if we look upon the present Face of that way, (though, it is confessed,
much washed of late, smoothed over, and made Fineish, in comparison of those
ugly Outlandish looks, which at first it began withal:) however they may seem
to have got the start of others, in some flashes of Zeal and Knowledge, with
some little shows of Outward Holiness; yet it may be feared, that Ambition and
Self-Love, Perverseness and Disobedience, Fierceness and Scornfulness,
Implacableness and Unpeaceableness, yea Robbing and Murdering of men, (rather
than fail) to make Sacrifice and Burnt-Offerings for God. I say all these, and
more such as these, if laid in the other Balance, I doubt, will weigh down
all those Light flashes and Insubstantial shows of a welpersonated Piety,
which seem to Stuff and Fill up the other Scale. But, if any still be
otherwise minded, God, I hope, will in his time, reveal this unto them.

To our business, a business of Religion, though sometimes necessarily folded
up in these Garden-figures, wherein whatever Improprieties have been, or may be
met withal, I beg your pardon, as being a professed stranger to those kind of
studies.

For the Earliness of our Admission, (the subject now in hand) let us consider,
our being Christians, is not only a Planting or Transplanting, both which
bespeak the young, and yielding Tenderness of the thing so planted, or
transplanted; but it also supposes a sacred kind of Engraffing: as our Church
teaches us to say of Baptized Children, They are Graffed into the body of
Christ's Congregation. Which Engraffing may be signified by the Hebr. (...)
here in the Text, as well as Implanting: yea, if that Rule be true, that your
choicest Fruit Trees are still Engraffed, the Psalmist here speaking of a
Fruit-bearing tree, and that of the best sort, it must needs presuppose this
Engraffing, and be thus resolved, viz. That this blessed big-grown Tree, in the
Text here before us, was at first but a little tender Twig, graffed into such a
Stock as was Planted by the Rivers of Waters, etc. And if so, then it must be a
little one indeed; for, I think, men don't usually Engraffe* your Thick
truncheon-Trees, or your Tall full-grown Branches, but your lesser younger
Springs of a span-long; according to that other Rule, which I am told of, that
the least Twig that grow's on the Trees top, and looks Easterly, and first sees
the Morning-Sun; such a one, qualified with all these combinations of Early
circumstances, is absolutely the best for that purpose: all which does secretly
insinuate the Earliness of our Spiritual Engraffing.

And as this Early-Engraffing was here thus prefigur'd by our Prophet: so was
it uninterruptedly practiced down along all the Primitive times. For this, even
that of Tertullian, Quid festinat innocens aetas, etc. His nice questioning,
why it should be so, contains a solid Proof, that indeed it was so.

I will say no more of the Earliness of the time: but, whereas the Lord has
spoken by the mouth of his servant David, -- Those that be planted in the house
of Psalm. 92. 13.
the Lord shall flourish in etc. Let us only turn that Promise into a Prayer,
and beg of God that those who have been thus planted in Gods House, may not
hereafter unroot, and dance after the Pipe of any Orpheus whatever, but still
flourish in the Courts of that same House where at first they were planted:
Which brings me to the third thing proposed, The Advantage of the place, in
these words, -- By the Rivers of Waters, -- He shall be like a Tree etc.

3. As for the Hebrew here (...) whether it be best rendered by Divisiones, as
some: Decursus, as others: or Rivos Aquarum, Rivers of Waters, as ours
translate it, we shall not Dive too Daringly, nor be Curious in the Enquiry,
but content our selves to be like the Tree we speak of, Secus non Intus, stand
by the Banks, not Plunge into the Bottom of these Waters. If Scriptures and
Sacraments, with the unwearied workings and strivings of Gods blessed Spirit,
if the former and later Rain of his preventing and assisting Graces, together
with the continual droppings of all his Ordinances: I say, if all these may
pass for Rivers of Waters, (as the Word of God does frequently so call them)
surely then our standing is so advantageous, and comfortable, that blessed be
God, we have not wanted any of those Waters. However we have been to God, he
has not been a Wilderness to us, Rivers of such waters Running through every
street.

Theophrastus cites it for an old saying, (...), ^ib. 8. de Plant.
it is the Season, not the Soil; the Heavens, not the Earth that produces
plenty, and abundance: as it is in the 65 Psalm. v. 9, 10. Thou enrichest the
earth, Thou providest for it, Thou waterest the Rigdes, Thou softenest and
settlest the Furrows; yet for all that, if the heavens Plow and do all for us,
it is not without the Earth's Heifer; using, and blessing the means; and a great
matter it is, when that Heifer is Tractable, and Towardly; I mean, when the
Earth is kind, and good-natured.

I will hear the Heaven, the Heaven shall hear the Earth, ^os. 2. 21.
etc. but then as the Heavens have an Ear to hear, so the Earth must have a
Tongue to speak; which if like David's, It cleaves to the Roof of the mouth and
be Parched and Dried up for want of Moisture, so that the Lord does not Water
it from his Chambers above, nor yet from his Cellars below; sure the Mower will
nere fill his hand with That Harvest, nor he that binds up the sheaves his
bosom.

To prevent which droughts and Barrennesses in spiritual concerns, the God of
heaven is never wanting, the Bottles of Heaven are never Empty, Scriptures and
Prayers, Sermons and Sacraments, an holy Discipline and decent Ceremonies,
Every lock of Christ is full of Can. 5. 1.
dew-drops, had we but the Hand of Faith, and due devotion, to Squeez and wring
them.

When Solomon had made him Gardens and Orchards, Eccles. 2. 5.
at the very next Verse, says he, I made me Pools of Water, etc. In like
manner our Savior Christ, in the 5th of Canticles, when he had styled the
Church, An enclosed Garden; and an Orchard of Pomegranats, at the 12 and 13
Verses: presently at the 15 Verse, He calls himself, A Fountain of Gardens, A
well of Living Waters; to intimate unto us, how that the One cannot be without
the Other; and that his (...). -- Pindar.
the Excellency and absolute necessity of Water holds good, not only in
Earthly but Heavenly plantations.

But some kind of Biting there is by a Mad beast, (...).
that presently causes the Bitten party to be a (...), he dares not come nigh
any water: And if any amongst us are yet afraid to come near the Public
Ordinances, our Sermons and Prayers, those wholesome stre^ms of Gods Church --
Alas poor souls! they have been Bitten and Breathed upon (it is doubt) by some
Venom-mouth'd creature, or other: hence it is, they are afraid where no fear
is, but where the only fear is, there alone they are confident.

What says the Prophet? -- Ho, every one that Isa. 55. 1.
thirsts, Come ye to the waters -- Blessed be God, that we may come, and having
hitherto Escaped those Bitings, -- Blessed be God, that we dare come. What with
a wholesome Catechism, to Water the Roots beneath, (and cherish the Foundations)
what with whole showers of Sermons, still dropping upon the Branches above, we
have had our share in these waters, and been like that Vineyard, of which God
says, I will water it ^a. 27. 3.
every moment. For, in the 68 Psalm. v. 9. what is there spoken of the Lords own
Inheritance, may be said of us, -- Thou, O God, did send a plentiful Rain --
Thou did confirm thine Inheritance when it was weary: so that besides this
Plentiful Rain, there must follow a Confirming, which brings us to the second
General, -- He shall be like a tree.

It Is said of that half-light, and half-dark man in the Gospel, that in the
first Peep-a-day, and dawning of his Eyesight, he looked up, and beheld men as
Trees. ^ar. 8. 23.
And blessed were the Eyes of a Blindish generation, whose eyes are yet but
half-shut, and halfway open, if our beginnings to see might be hansel'd with
such steady Objects, that with him we could behold men as Trees (not for their
Stiffeness and unyeilding sturdiness (too much of that, but) perfectly Fixed as
to the Concerns of Public peace, firmly settled in the sense of duty, and
obedience to Superiors, Rooted, and Grounded in all charity, and love
unfeigned, one toward another. This were a Good Tree indeed; but though every
Reverst tree is like a man; yet every Perverse man is not like this Tree; for
(the more's the pity) such Trees as this have not of late grown so kindly upon
our English ground, in which whole Forests of Natives, have only had this sad
resemblance of a Tree, that the Heels and Arms have Triumphed above, while the
poor Head lay grovelling below.

The business whereupon we now are is, that after all these Movings, and
Removings, we may at last become well-grounded, and Confirmed Christians. For
our furtherance wherein, that the Good Lord might not be wanting by any means
to Perfect that which concerns us, and our Salvation, and as (we hope) he has
begun a good work in us, so to Establish the same unto the Coming of the Lord
Jesus. Behold here this holy Apostolical Rite of Confirmation, (after a long
and sad Interruption (most justly due to our sins) now at last Restored into
its Ancient Channel, through which it had run down from the first and best
times (till of late) by an unbroken succession for many generations. For as
Aquinas says, Epistola quae a Notario scribitur, a Domino Signatur. A Clerk
may Write; but the Master himself must Seal the Letter. We are the Lord's
Epistle, however at first Written by the office of Presbytery; yet it is the
Bishops own hand, that renders us Complete and Authentic Christians, which is
no otherwise then what S. Cyprian long before had said, speaking of being
confirmed -- A praepositis, Ecclesiae S. Cyprian Ep. 73.
Dom. signacula consummantur.

It is one of the admired Excellencies of Christ's Government, that -- Those
that dwell in the Wilderness Psalm. 7^. 9.
shall bow before him. Though the Wilderness to some may seem a Paradise; yet
the most, I suppose, will say, that for this 20 Years long we have dwelt in a
Wilderness, where we have not lived as Men, by, but as Wild-beasts upon one
another. For such to come and bow before him, and be obedient to that
Government, he has set over us, -- This would be the Lords doing, and
Marvailous in our Eyes.

And however, when Gods Eye is good, the Eyes of some will be Evil: Yet I tell
you of a truth, Many good Souls (and O that my Soul were where they are!) many
good Souls, I say, have desired to see one of these days, and have not seen
them; which I speak the rather, that none should despise the day of small
things.

For the Solemnity whereof, (though I have not met with any, that write exactly
of it) yet you may take a guess of it, by this description, viz. That it is an
Ancient rite of the Church, whereby Baptized Persons of good Life, sound Faith,
and competent Knowledge, when come to Years of discretion, are brought unto the
Bishop, before whom or others* deputed by him, after some satisfactory
Discoveries of their knowledge, life, and belief, they make a Solemn and
credible profession of their Faith; acknowledge, and renew their Baptismal Vow;
take upon themselves (through Gods help) the performance of the same; and so,
by prayer and Imposition of hands, Spiritual strength is implored, and the said
persons so admitted unto a Fuller Capacity of the Lords Supper, and whatever
privileges belong to full-grown Christians: For as * that Learned man affirms
-- Sub his tantum auspiciis, ad mensam Domini Dr. Hammond
aspiramus -- This alone gives us a right Conduct, and the most safe admission,
to the Lord's Table.

In speaking whereof, I promised to say somewhat of these three things: its
Antiquity, its Sacred Solemnity, and its great Usefulness and Expediency: which
must be done very briefly.

First its Antiquity; for that, we may say of it, as Saint Paul of Timothy, --
Let none despise thy youth -- we meet with it often in the Acts of the
Apostles, -- Confirming the Souls of the Disciples, etc. Philip ^ct. 14. 22.
etc* ^ct. 8. 15, 17.
Baptizes, and the Apostles came after and Confirmed. And in that 6th Chap. to
the Hebr. ver. 1, 2. there treating of the principles of Christ's doctrine,
amongst the rest, presently after Baptism, we find mention of the laying on of
hands: whereby it is not to be doubted but this Solemnity was signified; as
Anselme upon this place -- Laying on of hands, that is, says he -- Episcoporum
in Confirmatione Neophytorum. Ansel. in Ep. ^ Hebr.


S. Cyprian his testimony you have heard already; hear him also who was before
him, and whom he calls his Master, Tertullian, as he is worthily styled -- That
great Depositary of Church-Antiquities. Caro manus Tertullian. Lib. de Resur.
impositione adumbratur, ut anima Spiritu Illuminetur: Imposition of hands,
says he, shades the Body, that the Descent of the Spirit may Enlighten the
Soul.

Which Solemnity (as is judged) was also received by our Savior himself; the
Divine feet of the holy Dove descending, and standing on his head, being in
Lieu of the Laying* on of John Baptists hands, or what other Creature he might
have advanced to that honor.

Secondly, It Is Sacredness, and Solemnity. Confirmation, in the Primitive style
is known by the name of (...) and (...), the complete Consummation of a
Christian. Indeed for the esse of a Christian (as Schoolmen speak) we were
Complete by Baptism; but for the Been esse, the Bettering of that being, it was
ever thought that Confirmation was very requisite. In reference whereunto it
had the name of (...), that which made, and Perfected other Christian mysteries.

In short, so Sacred, and Solemn a Rite, this was ever held, that, so far as I
can find, the Christian was not accounted perfectly Consummated without it, if
he might have it -- But most desperate was the condition of all despisers.

Thirdly, for the great Expediency hereof, First if any Christian should have
received a vain, or improper name, at the Font, I think the Bishop has power to
take Cognizance thereof, and, as he sees good to change it into one that is
fitter, and of a more Christian significancy.

Besides this, hereby trial is made, how Children, and the younger sort, have
improved their time, and what progress they have made in knowledge and practice
of that doctrine, which is according to godliness. And therein also we take a
view of the Care of the Natural, and the Conscience of the Spiritual Parents,
in the discharge of their duties: And in many other respects, (if duly
performed and received) it cannot suddenly be said, of what advantage it would
be to the truth and power of Religion.

In particular, how would it stop the mouths of Anabaptists, that fatal
affliction of these Western Churches? Insomuch as that Great Ornament of the
English Church affirms, -- Ad perenne Christi obsequium, ^r. Hammond.
etc. Nothing in the world, if well performed, does more strictly, and strongly
Oblige a Soul to the perpetual Service of Christ Jesus; but if miserably
neglected, or slightingly received, -- Hinc magna, and pernitiosa pietatis
dispendia, etc. Hence, says He, arise those great, and undoing Decays in
Christian Religion; which have so far provoked Gods judgments upon us, that no
wonder it is to have such turnings, and Over-turnings, amongst us, when
Confirmation it self could not stand.

I should now in method proceed to the third general Branch of this Tree, i.
e. the Fruitfulness thereof, and therein consider it is Proportion, Propriety,
and Tempestivity.

But what might grow upon this Branch, the small allowance of time remaining,
has made it a kind of a Forbidden Fruit; yet so, that whereas Adam and Eve
Tasted, and the Eyes of them both were opened, Genesis 3. 7. If you that have
Freely Eaten of the Former, should but Taste what grow's upon this Branch, your
Eyes might be shut and your Ears closed. For as through an unavoidable
longsomness (in reference to my self) -- The Daughters of music would be
brought low, so I doubt, Those that look out at your windows would be darkened,
and the Doors shut in the streets.

Therefore our Subject being a Fruit-bearing Tree, lest the Immoderate
Droppings thereof (by a too tedious discourse) should of Fruitfulness cause
Barrenness (as they say it will) I shall here take leave of my former Road, and
make a short Turn toward you in a few words of Application; wherein, amongst
other things, I may speak somewhat of Fruitfulness in general, and so conclude.

Some we read have been persuaded to become Beasts: that is nothing; any Circean
Sensuality can do that; yea many Souls can with too much easiness, persuade
themselves into such a Brutish Transformation. God forbid, I should attempt any
such Metamorphosis, as to Solicit men to turn Bruits; yet pray pardon me, if
I persuade men to turn Trees, such Blessed ones, as this Text yields, Trees of
Gods own planting.

In particular, I beseech you all, emulate Trees in these four properties --
their Straightness, Firmness, Unitedness, and Fruitfulness.

First Straightness, God never Plants but he Guards and Fences his young Plant
from foreign violence. For that, we may observe here our Tree is planted by the
Waterside; not by the way-side; for then it would be apt to be wrencht and
writhed by every Passenger; And such is the Condition of our ordinary Hedge,
and Highway Christians, that cannot endure any Retirement to the Rivers, to --
Sit down and weep there (as they did) but presently cast themselves into any
Company, ^sal 137.
mixed with any multitude, and so carelessly expose themselves to the violent
wrestings, and distortings of every temptation; whereby they lose their
straightness, and come for ever to be Crooked Souls.

The which quality, as it has a natural, but much more a Spiritual deformity:
so on the contrary, the Straightness we now speak of, is so Graceful and
Becoming to a Christian, that Christ himself is willing to be compared to an
Arrow -- He has made me a polished shaft -- A shaft, for his Smoothness, as
well as Swiftness, ^sa. 49. 2.
and (as there it is) for his Politeness, no less than his Piercingness; Not
only as swift, but as straight as an Arrow.

And as was the second, so was also the first Adam, at his first making. Though
the Rows of Eden, stood all upright, and even, Not one Bow-backt plant in all
Gods Orchard: yet at first, Adam himself was the Straightest Tree in all
Paradise, His Soul, and body both pointed directly toward heaven, according to
that of Solomon, -- God made man upright, but they have Eceles. 7. ^9.
sought out many Inventions.

Him that Overcomes, will I make a Pillar in the Rev. 3. 12.
Temple of my God. We know Pillars are upright and proper for Houses, as there
the Temple is God*s house; though any Bowed, or Crooked Timber may happily
serve in a Ship or Sea-vessel, which will not serve at all in the Supporting of
a house; and those Rumpled pieces, which will not be useful for Pillars (for
those must be straight) may yet be put into Plow-timber, and such low kind of
Implements: In like manner, we doubt not, but God knows how to make use of the
Warping Infirmities of his Saints, and the Downright Deformities of Sinners;
Those Crooked pieces may serve in an Arch, or Vault, which will not do well in
an Upright building; yea the most Crooked Logs that are, will be useful to
Burn, and bad Timber (they say) may yet make good Fuel.

Though some have wished to be no higher than Door-keepers, and well if some
others were so high as Door-sills, in God's House: yet for all that, every
Christian should Reach at Christ's promise, and strive to be a Pillar in the
House of God; whose straight Top, as it Exactly Points upward from Earth to
Heaven, so should our Eyes and Hearts be ever toward the Lord, from whom comes
our Salvation.

It Is observed by the Philosopher-de animalibus, that whereas all Beasts in the
closing of their eyes begin with the letting down of the upper eyelid, and so
first lose the sight of heaven, and all objects above; But on the contrary,
Birds begin first to draw up the lower-lid; and so by degrees grow dark to the
Earth, while the Upper part of the Eye has still some little Glimpses of Heaven.

For our parts, let us be rather like the Birds of Heaven, than the Beasts of
Earth, those beasts that perish. Let us begin to Draw up the nether-lid,
provided the upper part of the Souls Eye be still uncovered, and Fixed above; no
matter though we grow dim, and dark unto all these dirty concernments here
below.

Straight is the gate, (says Christ) and narrow is the way, that leads unto
life: You may walk at large in Iat. 7. 13.
a Wide way, and a broad Gate will admit* of broad shoulders. But we must
strive to enter in at the strait Gate, where none can enter but straight Souls,
nor they neither without striving.

The Hill of God is an High hill. -- No Coming thither without Climing, only
here is the difference, Men too often make use of Crooked ways, and winding
Circles, as to Climb Hills, so by degrees to Clamber up to Riches and Honors,
those Mountains of this world, whereas none but the upright Walker comes, none
but the straight Walk brings directly, to Gods Holy Mountain. Let Us all Labor
to be Straight and Upright Christians; that is the First.

2. For the Second. Having dispatched the Straightness, I have therein Impli'd
also the Strongness of this Tree, which was the second Commendable property
proposed unto you. For as it is in nature, the upright posture is the strongest
posture: And so in Art, which imitates nature, your straightest Tower stands
the surest; whereas on the other side -- Bowing and Tottering go both together,
Psalm. 62. 3. God has joynd them, who can sever them? And this we often see in
your leaning buildings; their own weight Confederates with the wind to their
Downfall.

The same rule also, viz. that the uprightest is the surest posture, holds good
in Divinity.

He that walks uprightly, walks surely: and so in Philosophy -- Linea Recta
est Firmissima; your Prove. 10 9.
Firmest bodies are made up of Direct lines: insomuch that you would wonder
what a load (they say) will lie upon a straight Needle: whereas the least
warping, or bending, presently betrays it to the mercy of its burden.

To this purpose it is, when the Prophet would set forth the Firm footing of
God's servants, in this or in the other life: He thus expresses it, -- We are
Risen, Psalm. 20. 8.
and stand upright -- whereas the wicked, whose Souls grow Crooked by their
Carnal pursuits and reliances, set forth in those words -- Some put their trust
in Chariots, Verse. 7.
etc. (such trusts bring as it were the leaning and bowing of this Spiritual
building) what fallows but this -- There are they brought down and fallen. For
further illustration of this, we need not stir beyond the Root of this Tree
here before, us concerning which it is said, that in a strong Tree the Root
must look directly downward: for if there be any Crooked up-turnings
considerable, the Tree will prove weak and improsperous: The like we may say of
many amongst our selves, whereas we have (perhaps) a little loftily turned
upward, in some new toys and Notions, had we grown downward, directly
downward, in all lowliness and humble mindedness, sure we should not have had
so many ill-grounded and slight -Rooted Christians, as it is at this day
amongst us. -- Let Us all labor to be Luke 13. 6.
strong Christians; that is the second.

Third Property is an united Compactedness. In a Vineyard where all should be
Vines, what makes the Fig Tree there? -- No wonder it is a barren one: consider,
Luc. 13. 6.
says Christ, the Fowls of the Air -- and the Lillies Mat. 6. 26, etc*
of the Field, etc. As Christ send's us to Birds, and flowers, to learn an holy
Carelessness: so he may send us to Stocks, and Trees, to take out a Lesson of
Union, and Compactedness.

As in the Tree, there is the same ground, the same root, the same stock, the
same Sap, Body, Bark and all: so for us Christians, do we not grow upon the
same Ground of Faith? Are we not Rooted in the same Brotherly Love and Charity?
Graffed into the same stock of Christianity, nourisht with the same Sap of
Scriptures, and Sacraments? One body of wholesome Doctrines, that contains all
the necessary juice of a Christian Soul? One Bark of a Religious worship, and
Service, through which the said juice is conveid, to the supply and nourishment
of every the meanest member?

For as it is said in the Art of Engraffing, you must not Ruffle, nor raise the
Bark, but the young Graff must be perfectly joined to the Old stock: So the
prudence of our Superiors (in order to this perfect Juncture, and Closure with
the Church,) has thought fit, that even in these Externalls of Gods worship,
there should be an uniforme and complete accordance amongst us. For, if but the
Bark be once Raised, the Tree will hardly ever Thrive and prosper. Therefore
God grant we may all be United and Compacted Christians. That Is the third.

Fourth, Is Fruitfulness. -- Who plant's Vineyard ^ Cor. 9. 7.
and does not eat of the fruit thereof? The Church has been at so great pains
in Planting, I have been at some small pains in Watering, You I am sure have
been at much Patience in attending; Fit it is we should now Taste, what Fruit
may grow, upon this our new plantation. -- Come my Beloved -- Lets get up Early
to Can. 7. 11, 12.
the Vineyards -- See if the Vine flourish, etc.

Trees if they be not good for Fruit, they may be for Timber; if not for
Timber, they may serve for shade, and some are good for nothing else but shade,
and yet even those (as I told you) may be as good as any for the Fire; so that
the worst, you see, are good for something; though, better it were, that such
who are only good in that way, were nothing.

How many of us have been set it a Rich Soil, and yet have hitherto afforded
little else but a Fruitless shade, and so only Cumbred the very ground that
bears us?

What says S. Bernard -- Securis and ignis debetur, etc. S. Bernard.
nothing but the Axe and the Fire is that sad Debentur due to such unfruitful
Trees. In that parable God was coming and going Three years seeking Fruit of
that Luke 13. 7.
Fig Tree, and found none. He comes in our Childhood, there is nothing but
Folly: he comes in our youth, there is nothing but vanity: he comes in our
manhood (that is his -- Tertio jam venit) and there is little else but Greg. in
loc.
Villainy: what has he found by these three years coming, Hos. 6. 7.
but that now at last, we can Transgress like Men?

Or however otherwise we Reckon those three years, Certain it is that to some
amongst us, he has come year after year now for these many three years, and has
not found so much as leaves upon us. Now since it cannot be said for us, as it
was said for that Tree, The Mar. 11. 13.
time of Figs was not yet, What can we expect but the doom of that unhappy
Tree, that at Christ's coming was Laden with nothing but Leaves -- Let no fruit
Mat. 21. 19.
grow on thee henceforward for ever.

For as the Thirst of a lovesick Soul must be stayed with Full Flagons, not
empty pots, so the hunger of a lovesick Savior must be Refresht with Apples,
not deluded with Leaves. Stay me with Flagons, comfort Can. 2. 5.
me with Apples.

Besides we observe, Christ's travail had got him an early appetite, -- He was
hungry betimes in the Morning Mat. 21. 18.
when he came for food to that False, Deceitful Tree: suppose we, he had come
to many of us in the morning of our days; Alas! How sorrily had we treated
him? unless he could make a meal of a few Green leaves, our childhood and youth
has nothing else to entertain him. If he please to come, and take a short
Supper with us, when we are old, and have little else to do, perhaps we may
think of Receiving him, at least so far as a Lord have mercy, or a few good
words and 1 Samuel 2. 10.
wishes will go, then if -- Deus judicabit extrema terrae, Aug Civ. Dei, ^^. 7.
c. 4.
be only -- Extrema hominis, (as St. Augustine would have it) we may do well:
But to come and take us in the morning of our age, and think as it were to find
a Breakfast, and satisfy those his early hungerings upon us, alas! we should
utterly disappoint him; unless, like John Baptist, he can feed upon Locusts,
and that Wild honey, which only grows upon those our greener years.

Although we are not of their mind that say Confirmation necessarily carry's an
Indeleble character along with it; yet sure now it is high time by some mark or
other to be known whose servants we are, and to whom we belong. If any Baal
whatever be our God, then serve him, says the Prophet; but if the Lord be our
God, let him alone have our service.

For as the Tree is known (not by its Leaves nor its Blossoms, but) by its
Fruit, of what sort soever it is: so the true Christian is not discernible
only by pious professions, fair shows, or the like, (these are mere leaves and
blossoms) but by a life full of Obedience, Humility, Charity, and Purity, etc.
These are those Distinguishing Fruits; not such as only drop from the lips,
but grow upon the hands of a Christian.

Therefore when I read of that Tree in Ludolphus, whose leaves resembled a man's
hand, it presently minded me of a Christian indeed, all whose words, promises
and professions (which are in themselves but light and leafy-things) should be
constantly referred to holy practices.

Leaves like the tongue of a Man, we see enough upon any tree: but every leaf
of this tree must be like the hand of a Man, and not so only, but the Hand of a
Christian.

We have been all, I presume, Baptized into Christ, Conclusion
and what he said to Saint Peter about His washing, -- What I do, thou know
not now, but shall know hereafter: the same may be said concerning Ours, though
John 13. 7.
we knew not then, what was done, yet now I hope we do know; and yet, as if
that Baptismal vow had been only wrote upon the Baptismal water, too many make
a sad shift easily to forget themselves, and their Savior.

You have now been Christ's Probationers a long time, and have had many years of
trial: If you cannot away with this, or have found out some better service;
say so, and be gone to it. If not, then let your Renouncement in Baptism be
this day renewed, bid a considerate and fresh Defiance to the Devil, etc. and
take upon you the yoke of Christ Jesus.

When you were Infants, others took it for you: now you come to take it from
off their Necks, and put it on your own, and to say to your Godfathers and
Godmothers, as they did to the Woman of Samaria -- Now we believe, not because
of thy saying, for we have John 4. 42.
heard him our selves.

This day thou do avouch the Lord to be thy God, Deuteronomy. 26. 17.
etc. and to let the world know thou do not repent of that Blessed bargain
made for thee in thy minority: behold thou art here ready by Gods help to make
good those undertakements of others. As said the blind man's parents, so say
yours -- He is of age, ask him, let him John 9. 21.
now speak for himself.

Only be well advised what you speak, or have spoken: for as the Psalmist says
of his Tongue -- It is as the pen of a writer -- so should yours be -- Nil agat
incompositum, tanquam amus scritis, etc. ar. in loc.
etc. Do nothing, speak nothing but with great deliberation and composedness,
as the same Father has it. You are now upon building a Tower, whose Top will
reach heaven: sit down first, and consider what it will ^^ke 14. 28.
cost you to be a Christian, and that you will have by and by.

Those that are to be numbered, must be from twenty years ^^m. 1. 3.
old and upward; provided, they are able to go forth to war in
Israel-whereupon Origin observes, All Women, Children, slaves, old Men; that
is, all womanish, Childish, Slavish and decrepit Souls -- such as were below
the heathen Agones, they are -- Divinis Calculis prorsus indigni-unworthy ^^e^.
super ^^m.
to be Reckoned up by Gods Counters. So that such as those, like Gideon's
Supernumeraries, may be spared, and sent every man to his own place. ^dg* 7. 7.


For our business here this day is about a Spiritual warfare, such as are able
for war in Israel; our Meeting a kind of Mustering. Behold here (pardon the
expression) the Infantry of the Lord of Hosts. For as the Kings S^m. 11. 1.
^ebr.
of the Earth -- Go forth to Battle in the Spring -- So also do those
Princes of Darkness: Not that they are Idle all the Autumn and Winter of our
years, but now in the Spring, and Prime of our days; now is the chief time,
wherein they choose to Lead forth their Armies against us.

The Unclean Spirit finds no rest in Dry places -- ^at. 12. 43.
such was Christ: the Prince of this world comes, and has nothing in me: But
when the Breasts are full of ^ohn 4 30.
Milk and the Bones of Marrow, there he comes and finds forage, sits down, and
lays siege to the Soul.

And now, what shall we do? Per Baptismum regeneramur in vitam, post Bapt.
Confirmamur in pugnam: now is the time, we are making ready to Battle. If
others use Crosses, Chrismes, Balsams, and I know not what mixtures -- Nobis
sufficit quod Spiritu inungimur; with us, the Spiritual Ointment is Preparative
enough for a Spiritual Combat.

And so, though we have no Anointing with Oil, yet if we have the Anointing
with the Spirit, it is enough.

Here is no Chrism indeed, but yet a Ghostly Combat and a Good Christ to
Conduct us through it.

No sweet-breathed Balsams, but Fragrant prayers, and Devotions. No other
Indelible Character we own, but that of Love. No Oily mark upon the Head, or
Forehead; but yet a Deep impression upon the Heart: a New life we hope, though
not a New garment.

Let those of Rome, like Martha, Cumber themselves with those many things,
while we, with Mary, choose the Better part, and so sit down at the Feet of
JESUS.

It was an ancient Canon -- Ad Confirmationem non Cara^za de Council.
nisi Jejuni accederent -- Fasting should accompany Confirming: however we do
by the Literal, pray God we all come with a Spiritual fast to this holy
Ordinance -- If happily you have taken food into your Stomachs; yet I hope no
rancor, nor malice, into your minds, and then though you have not Fasting
bodies, yet if truly Hungring souls, I doubt not but we shall Conform to the
Intent of that Canon.

-- Thou tookst me out of my Mothers Bowels, says the Psalm. 71. 6.
Psalmist. You that are yet Unconfirm'd Christians, if you consider the
Churches care, and mercy, in providing for you sufficient Sureties (when you
could not provide for your selves:) where have you been all this while, but in
the Bowels of a Tender Mother? But now God is taking you out of the Bowels, and
allowing you to Hang upon the Breasts of your Mother -- Those Breasts of
Consolation, there fully and freely to Suck the Sweetness of the Word, and both
her Sacraments.

In regard whereof, we should all be Infants of Days, ^sa 65 2^.
even as Newborn Babes all our Days, still desiring that sincere Milk, still
drawing like a Child, feeding like a Child, and when we are Men, yet we
should never put away this Childish thing.

Many, like Nero, have ripp'd up their Mothers Bowels; yet with a purpose
contrary to His, viz: Never more to see that place, where once they lay; but
rather to Curse the Womb that bare them, and the Paps that gave them suck.

Thus if the Great ones have gone astray, like lost sheep, it concerns the
Churches care to gather the Lambs into her bosom. Indeed, what with those
nipping Northerly winds, many of our old Fruit-bearing Trees have been so
blasted, and Inrecoverably shattered, from that cold Corner, that now our
greatest hopes are in the Succesful Growings up of Gods Nursery.

Ye are Gods Nursery, and the Growing hopes of the Church, and however some of
you may be but Children in understanding; yet I trust you are not men in
malice, men in mischeife, nor I hope ever will be.

Ye have Born the yoke of Christ, in your youth; it is well; But yet, whereas
David beseeches God -- O cast me not off, when I am old -- forsake me not, when
I am Gray Headed; Let me beg of you, -- O cast not God ^sal* 71. 9.
off in the time of your old age -- and y^u that are Green proselytes, beware
you prove not Gray Headed Apostatates.

THE END.
Doom's-day Books OPENED. A SERMON PREACHED Before the Honorable JUDGES, the
last Assizes at Warwick, July the 2d. 1662.

BY John Riland, Archdeacon of Coventry, and heretofore Fellow of St. Mary
Magdalen-College in Oxon.

Psalm. 96. 13. -- For He Comes, for He Comes to Judge the Earth -- LONDON,
Printed by I. G. for Richard Royston, Bookseller to His sacred Majesty, 1663.

DOOM'S-DAY BOOKS OPENED.
Rev. 20. 12. And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God, and the
books were opened.
BEing resolved (what in me lies) to decline all particular reflections, I made
choice of this Subject, which is of equal concern to all; for that all must
dye, all must rise, all must appear, and stand before God, and those
bosome-Books of ours, which are now fast shut, all must be opened. That Day
will discover all. (...), 1 Cor. 3. 13.


The Text represents us with one Judge, and a Great Many Prisoners; the
behavior on this side, the manner of Proceedings on that, together with the
clear and undoubted evidence of the whole matter.

The Judge is God -- before God; the Prisoners are all mankind -- the dead
small and great; Their Behavior submissive and such as becomes Prisoners, they
stood; the manner of Proceedings upon them -- the Books were opened; Lastly,
the Evidence made good, by a Divine and Infallible Affaedavit, S. John saw it
-- I saw the dead, etc.

And now, were I so Fit for this Text, as this Text you see might be Fitted for
this time, perhaps somewhat would be done upon it. But my encumbrances have of
late been very many, and the going off of one beckoned the coming on of this
other Service.

Many that are here this day, cannot but know that Public Engagement, to the
which, but a few days since, I was elsewere commanded, and that upon a *
Subject (not to speak of it is Novelty, or Difficulty) A Sermon upon
Confirmation in ^oventry.
every way remote from the present occasion.

And although the Womb of one Cloud* may at once be big with Dark Waters and
Bright flashes, Thunders and Lightnings, Hailestones and Coals of fire -- and
contain them all at one and the same time; ^s. 18. 11, 12
yet I must needs acknowledge my Narrowness, not at all Receptive at once of
such Contrarieties.

Whatever that Fruitful Creature may Perform, or the more Fruitful Fancy of
Pliny be allowd to Imagine, I am sure I never could hope, with any the least
Pregnancy, to receive a Later, till fairly rid of a Former Burden.

Beside, I have been strangely cut short of the expected allowance for time, --
The Judges stood at our door, when we did not think them gotten over their own
Threshold.

And indeed the unexpected suddainness of this Assize has much disabled me from
Discoursing (as I ought) of that other here before us. So that I see plainly, I
must of necessity take my leave of the Judge upon his Throne; and the Prisoners
at the Bar: the Deportment of the one; and the Proceedings of the other, with
the like passages of that fair road, into which the words did at first spread
themselves; (the exact following whereof I confess is a business above my power
at present) and so (without any more Prefacing) betake my self wholly to that
other matter the Text affords us.

The which, being very Plain and Serious, I hope it will not be expected, the
discourse should come forth in any other habit; but be suffered to go Plain,
and every way suitable to the Subject it treats of, which is Death, the
Resurrection, and Judgment.

It were too much Pharisaical to Paint a Sepulcre, why should we trouble our
selves to make a Coffin of Wrought Carved work? It Is but lost labor
(methinks) to stick, and dress a Dead Corpse with Rosebudds, and throw Flowers
into a Grave.

Who would be at the cost to Enamell and Gild a Death-head, or overlay a
Charnel-house with Gold?

And as Death can well spare all kind of Pomp, as Superfluous; so in regard of
the Resurrection or Judgment, it is not all requisite.

It is not the merry Dulcimer, the VVarbling Harp, or the Lute; but the shrill
and doleful Trump, that bidds us Rise at the last day, when we shall behold
Christ Jesus come down, not in a Sunbeam, but on a Cloud, to Judgment. All
which things seem to bespeak our greatest Seriousness in the Subject now before
us. Concerning which, what we have to say, is wrapped up in these three
propositions.

The First presents us with the Worlds Funeral (I ^rop. 1.
wish the Sermon might be clad in a Suit of Mourning, fit for it) thus -- That
we, and all that were before us (except Two or Three) and all that shall come
after us, (except those that shall be found alive at Christ's coming, For they
shall not sleep at all, but be changed) Cor. 15. 51.
all I say, in the eye of Prophecy are but a company of dead men -- I saw the
dead, etc.

Secondly, These dead men shall live, with their ^rop. 2.
Dead bodies shall they Arise again at the last day; which is expressly set down
elsewhere; -- and here also Implied, ^. 16. 19.
in that, though they were Dead, and are so styled, yet they are seen standing
before God, which supposes they were Alive, and Risen again -- I saw the dead
-- stand before God.

Thirdly, As there is an appointed time for all men, ^rop. 3.
once to Dye, and for all those same men, once to Rise again; So it is most
certain, that after those Appointed times are come, then comes the Judgment;
as here, no sooner did the Dead Arise and stand before God, but presently --
the Books were opened.

Concerning which Judgment (being most proper, and agreeable to the present
occasion) I shall enlarge upon these following Considerations, as they lie
before us in the Text.

First, We shall consider the Generality of this Judgment -- The dead -- that
is, All at one time, All in one place, All were presented at once, to the View
of S. John, That Divine Eagle; who, Soaring a loft upon the Wings of an
Extaticall Spirit, beheld a whole World of Carcasses underneath him -- He saw
the dead, etc.

Secondly, The Impartiality of this Judgment; High and Low, Rich and Poor, the
Mean man and the Mighty man, one with another, one as well as another; All must
come and stand before the same Judge, all must abide the Doom of the same
Books, all must equally pass through the Severities of the same Trial -- The
dead, both small and Great.

Thirdly, The Overruling Authority of this Judgment, here intimated in that
High and Low; Poor and Rich, the Mighty as well as the Mean man; all appear in
the self same Humble deportment, in such a posture as becomes Prisoners, --
they all stood before God.

Fourthly, The deliberate and convincing Legality in all the Proceedings of
this Judgment; matters were not transacted and huddled over in the Dark; but
all must be done above-board: No arbitrary Power, nor extravagant Humor, no
adventurous Rashness nor supine Negligence, must carry businesses without-Book;
but as all must go by the Book, so those Books shall be opened, that every one
may read his own Endictment; -- the Books were opened.

Lastly, the Certainty and Importance of the whole: the Certainty, the highest
that may be, no less then ocular Demonstration, attested by no meaner a person
then S. John, whom we have here, though in a Higher Place, yet still in the old
Posture, Leaning upon Iesu's Bosom, thence drawing and declaring all these
secrets unto us -- I saw -- thus for the Certainty.

As for the Importance; It seems of no small concernement to us, for whom (and
not for himself alone) he saw, whatever things he did see; the which it is
apparent, he saw, so as you and I, and all the Christian World, might both
hear and see, (as we do this day) and, if possible, become better thereby.

Thus we have laid our Foundation (large enough be sure) but how we shall be
able to Finish God knows. I much fear my Lot may lie, in that Verse of the
second Lesson for this Morning Prayer, even now read unto us, -- This man began
to Build, and was not able to Finish. Luc. 14. 30.


The disciples said -- Whence should we have bread Mat. 15. 33.
in the Wilderness to Fill so great a Multitude? I may well say, on the
contrary, whence should I have matter amongst Crowdes and Throngs, so as to
satisfy the just and natural Cravings of these several Parts and Propositions.

However, every Mouth must have its Meat, and God who has made the One, I trust
will provide the other; Not to answer those Lustful expectations, that look
for Quails: yet if we can be furnished with Bread, (we must not talk of
Philip's 100 or 200 pennyworths, but) with some few Pennyworths of wholsorne
Bread, though it be but small Dole at the Worlds Joh. 6.
Great Funeral, -- Every one must be content to take a Little. ^b. v 7.


And that our Distribution, though but Mean, may yet be Methodical, I begin
with the First Proposition, viz. That however in our own Dim-sightedness we may
seem to Live, Move, etc. yet in the view of this Prop. 1.
Eagle-Ey'd Prophet, we are all but a Company of Carcasses, a multitude of dead
men -- I saw the dead, etc.

The Dead he saw, and no doubt all us, that are here Alive, yea and himself too
in the number, all helping to make up that great Congregation of the dead, then
before him. Although there went abroad this saying among the brethren, that
this Disciple should not dye -- ^o. 21. 23.
yet he professes, whom it most concerned to know the truth thereof) -- that
Jesus said not to him, that he should not dye, but, if I will, that he tarry
till I come, Ibid.
what is that to thee?

Indeed Christ was near about Forty years a Coming, (i. e.) when He Came along
with Titus, and the Roman Army, to the final Ruin of Jerusalem; Christ, I
say, was Forty years in so Coming, and S. John was as long a waiting and
tarrying for that Coming: yet at last, Christ he is Come, and S. John he is
Gone, and that the same way as Joshua, and all went before him, -- Even Jos.
23. 14.
the Way of all the Earth.

Notwithstanding, Others could not Destroy him: for it is said, such was the
Icie chastness of the Soul and Body of this Beloved Disciple -- That he
Quenched the Violence of the Fire, Chilled and Allayed the Scaldings of the
Liquor, so that it could not hurt him.

But albeit (as I said before) they could not Take away his Life; yet when Old
Age comes, he can Lay it down; and when Others cannot Kill him, at last This
Long-lived Eagle, himself makes a shift to Dye.

The Vivacity of whose Quills (they say) had quite Consumed all the Other
Feather-bunch of his Twelve Brethren, and not so much as left behind him the
Pen of One surviving Apostle to Write his Epitaph: But as Love (S. John's Dear
and Darling Virtue) Outlives 1 Cor. 13. ^
all her Sister-Graces: so the great Preacher of Love, the Loving and most
Beloved Disciple, outlives all his Brother-Apostles.

Howbeit a long life is but a long Forbearance; and the (...); Arr. Epict. ^
Stoic Laughs at those our self-contradicting desires, whereby we would have
our friends Live long, and yet not see death, when that is the surest way to it.

The Principal is still owing, besides the use-money of Sicknesses and Sorrows;
and though nature delays the Peremptory demanding thereof, and so the Debt is
sometimes a long while ere it be Discharged; yet at last a full and entire
Payment must be made. As it was here with this Apostle, whom the slow, but sure
hand of Death did at Length retrieve from the furthest Banishment of his Life.

It Is the opinion of an Ancient Father, that it pleased ^ctan.
God to shorten man's life on purpose after the Flood, lest by the former
allowance of a longer time the sin of man might again rise up, and call for a
second deluge. For no wonder the Waters of God swell above the highest
Mountains, when the sin of man stretches to the highest Heavens.

And whereas the Psalmist says -- Thou have made my days as a span long; and
now such are the sins of ^^a. 39. 5.
men, that the Good Old Span is shrunk and contracted to an Inch long, and that
Inch too often Snapt asunder in the midst by an untimely death due to sin: yet
for all that we are grown such huge Husbands, with these our Inches, that we
can drive as great a Trade of Impiety, as they could do with their Larger spans,
and so sin our selves into a capacity of a second deluge, and bid as frankly
for it under Fourscore, as others could do at two hundred years.

Therefore, as our days are Evil, (that is of man's making) so it is well they
are short and contracted, that is of God's good contriving.

We shall not only dye hereafter, but now we dye presently, and within a few
years -- What the Egyptians said hastily, we may say soberly -- We be all dead
men. ^^od. 12 33.


Old men are called Tripodes, and sometimes Quadrupedes: because, counting
their Crutches, they have Three or Four Feet to Carry them to their Graves.

But it is not for Every man to Live so long, as to Run with three or four Legs
to his Long Home.

Though in Searching for the Silver Cup, Ioseph's Steward began at the Eldest,
and left off at the youngest: Genesis 44. 1^.
yet when Angels come to Rifle, and make Search for a Precious Soul, they
Observe no such Order; but on the Contrary, oft-times begin at the Youngest,
and leave off at the Eldest.

For as S. John -- came first to the Sepulcher, but Joh. 20. 4. and^
S. Peter Went in before him: so, albeit your Old man comes first to the
Grave's Mouth, and there stands a long while lingering, and waiting, by a weary
painful life, and with his Crutches is continually Rapping at the Gates of
death: yet many times the Young man, that comes after him, makes a shift to go
in before him.

However, first or last, In we must all of us; as S. John (you see there)
enters the Sepulcher, as well (though not so soon) as S. Peter.

Death (they say) keeps no Calendar. Many years with him are but as one day,
and one day as many years. If some do not live out Half their time -- Half
Psalm. 55. 23.
a day to others may be their whole time.

Every Soul must not think to dwell in such a Ripe slip-shel'd Body, as this
old Apostle had; Nor are Gray hayres (those Church-yard-Flowers) designed to
grow upon the turf of every Green head.

The holy Templar call's them the harbingers of death (That King of Terrors)
sent aforehand (as it were) Mr. Herbert.
to Mark and Score his lodgings; yet how often have we seen King Death, with
all his black retinue, March in before any of those his Messengers? Our
Clay-houses, always stand open to death, who too frequently (like that Evil
Spirit) comes in with confidence, without any Knocking, or notice giving. As
Elisha hears the ^ King. 6. 32.
Sound of the Masters feet, before the Messenger came nigh to give him warning.

Some few Souls indeed, like full-fledg'd Birds, when they take Wing and be
gone, leave an old Body, like a tottered rumpled Nest, behind them, whereas
Christ arose Early in the Morning, and left his Sepulcher whole and unbroken.
So the best (if not the most) like good Travelers are going betimes -- they
take the Wings of the Morning -- fly away and be at rest -- Surguntque cadavere
Toto, they spring out of an entire and Un-battered body, while the Breasts are
full of Milk, and the Bones of Marrow. Go but into the Churchyard, measure,
and see how many shorter graves there be of those, who never lived to attain
our age nor Stature.

And now we are speaking of Churchyards, what need we trouble Scripture, or
other Arguments, to make further proof of our Mortality; For the fuller
evidencing (if need be) and determining whereof, instead of Fathers, and
Councils, we may repair to Churchyards and Charnel-houses, which are
therefore called the common dormitories of the dead, the general seed-plots of
mankind; because, though we lie and sleep there awhile, yet the time will come,
when we shall all be awakened: and being sown there (rather then buried) at
the last day we shall be sure to Spring up, and rise again.

Which brings me to the Second Proposition, containing the Universal
Resurrection, implied here in the word, stand -- I saw the dead, etc. -- Stand
before God.

That a Resurrection (if it be) must be in order to Prop. 2.
the fuil attainment of man's Final happiness, is generally agreed upon by all
parties.

But that there is any such thing at all, as a Resurrection of the body, is
denied by some, upon these grounds (whose Falsehood and Weakness an Indifferent
Eye may easily See through.)

1. That man's Happiness is attainable in This, and therefore what Need is there
of Another Life? or of the Bodies Rising, in order thereunto? thus Epicurus,
and the rest of that Herd. There the Antecedent is false.

2. If there be another Life, and Happiness must be had there, and there Only,
then it Concern's the Soul alone, and so to what purpose should the body be
Disturbed, which is so far from Going Halfs with the Soul's Happiness, that
it Hinders It? according to that Rule amongst them, viz. That all Corporeity is
an Enemy to Perfect felicity. Thus Porphyrius, and those of his way. But here
we say the Consequence is false, and the Proof thereof, from that Position of
Porphyrie, very infirm.

3. That as all Spiritual things are of God, so all Bodily things are from the
Devil, or such like Evil Principle, and so cannot by a Resurrection be United
to God, that only Good Principle. Thus Manicheus, and his Followers. So that
the Body is still Kept under, and Held down on all hands; all jointly denying
its Rising, but upon Foundations (you see) full of Weakness, Falsehood, or
Blasphemy.

Again, as Those Deny the Resurrection, Others Affirm and Prove it: 1. From the
Rising again of Christ our Head. 2. From the Natural tendency in Separted Souls
toward a Reunion with the Body; which must not be to no purpose. 3. In that
our Gain by Christ is greater than our Loss by Adam: and therefore, if -- In
Adam all dye, much more in CHRIST shall all Cor. 15. 22.
be made alive.

By these and other Arguments of the Resurrection, Some Affirm, and Prove it;
We Affirm, and Believe it: yet if we would go about to Prove it, Arguments
Come up as Thick as Grass-Spills in the Spring. Demonstrations naturally Grow
and Hang upon every Green Hedge; yea -- Day unto Day utters Speech, viz. of the
Resurrection, which clearly discovers it self, in ^sal. 19. 2.
the Successive Dawnings thereof, and most apparently Dwells upon the Eyelids
of Every Morning.

And as Day unto Day utters this Speech: so Night unto Night shows this
Knowledge. He that Lies down, has Slept out his Eyes and Senses, who does not
behold ^bid.
It Standing by his Bedside, when Ever he Arises.

So that, although we do Believe it, yet as for that -- Credibile quia
Impossible, i. e. it is merely Credible, because Impossible; we need not Take
Refuge in any such Unhallowed Sanctuary, or Seek out so Shameful a Covert for
an Article of our Creed.

Concerning the Instantaneousness, or Successiveness, of This our Rising; the
Terminus A Quo, and Ad Quem therein, what is the Efficiency of GOD, and wherein
lies the Instrumentality and Subserviency of ANGELS.

And because GOD said to Adam -- Dust thou art, and to Dust thou shall Return.
No doubt, He has had time enough for That Returning; (yet) whether or no Genesis
3. 19.
He then Said so to All the Sons of Adam, and that Every Body (as well as His)
must Suffer a Perfect Pulverization; yea, that very Body, which was Buried but
a Day, or an Hour, before the General Resurrection, whether or no (according to
the aforesaid Sentence) That must be Returned into Entire Earth, and so Arise
out of as Complete a Bed of Dust, as if it had layn as long as Adam a mouldring
-- These and many other Niceties I purposely pretermit.

We must needs dye, that is Certain; but, that we are as Water Spilt on the
ground, which cannot be Gathered 2 Samuel 4. 14*
up again, etc. there Ioab's Wise Widow speaks like one of Job's Foolish Women:
For when we shall be Poured out by the Hands of Death, and have Layn Soaking in
the Earth never so many Centuryes; yet God will assuredly Recover again, and
Gather up every Drop of This Water: in which regard (perhaps) it was that they
called Death -- A gathering unto their people. Genesis 49. 33.


This I verily believe (however some may think otherwise) that all those
scattered parcels of the same body, that lie sleeping in several Parishes,
perhaps in several parts of the World: As for example, Suppose a Soldier has
Lost a Leg in Asia, an Arm in Europe, a Finger is Burnt in the Fire, a Toe is
Cut off and thrown into the Water,

-- (Quid mirum toto si spargitur Orb? M^rtial* Ep.
why may nor the dead dust be a kind of (...), free of the whole World, as well
as a Living body?)

This I say, that all those limbs, and parts of the Dispersion aforesaid, shall
not only return -- Bone to its own Bone, etc. but every the least Grain of dust
to that very Place it had in the body, before its dissolution.

This I humbly conceive may most set forth the Wisdom and Power of God in that
day, which being styled a day of Restitution, the way of Particular restoring,
(which now we speak of) methinks conduces most to the fullness and exactness
thereof.

For, as the Loadstone can, out of a common Heap of Dust, Extract all the
little Fylings of Steel, or the like: Much more is God Almighty able, by His
Magnetic skill, out of the common Rubbish, to Single forth the Minutest
Fylings (as it were) of these our Mortal bodies, and Restore them all again to
their proper places.

An Army I have heard of, whose Soldiers had every one such peculiar Marks,
and Characters upon their Polyb.
Shields, that by help thereof their Commander could at any time easily recover
them out of the greatest Disorder and Confusion. The Lord knows them that are
His; and not so only, but, All that is Theirs: notwithstanding, 2 Timothy ^1. 9.
we are put to the greatest Rout and Disorder by Death; yet such are Those
privy Marks of God's wisdom upon us, that in the Resurrection He will
completely Ralley again all these Ruins of Mankind.

-- Then though the Worms destroy this body, yet in Job. 19. 26. Eccles. 12. 3.
my Flesh -- and with these my Eyes shall I see God. Though the Arms (those
sorry Housekeepers --) have not kept themselves, nor their House neither, but
the Fingers are strayed from that Hand, into which they were Engrafted, and the
Hands dropped from those Arms, by which they were supported.

Though the Strong Men have bowed themselves, so as to be trod upon by Base
Vermin; and the legs are run one from another; yea, though the Grinders
themselves should be Grinded to pieces, and They that formerly Looked out at
the Windows, are now Leaped out through those Windows, and those Two great
Luminaries, which GOD had set up to give Light to this Lesser World, have not
only Consumed themselves, but their Sockets.

Yet in That Day of the Restitution of all things, when the Great KING shall
disperse and send abroad his Writs, to Call that Last and General Convention of
Mankind, and say to the Sea, -- Give back, and to the Winds, Restore -- though
the Summoned Members lie Scattered in several Shires and Countries; yet Bone
(as was said) shall return to it is Fellow-bone; each Vein shall Glide along
the Old Channel. The right Foot shall not Miss its way, and Run to the Left;
the Right Eye shall not mistake its own place, but be Lighted the Way to the
Right Socket.

In a word, not an Hair of our head shall be Lost, or Misplaced; but when God
shall Renew the Face of This Earth, and Set forth a Second Edition of Mankind,
all our Limbs, those Loose and Dispersed Leaves, shall be Carefully sought out,
and Bound up together; so that we shall Come forth the same Volume, though in a
much Exacter Print and Clearer Letter.

The Glory of the Second Temple shall be far greater than the Glory of the
First, provided it prove indeed to be Such; a Fair Temple, and not a Filthy
Prison, which the following Judgment shall soon determine.

And so I pass on to the Third Proposition, viz. That Prop. 3.
after the Death, and Rising again of all men, then comes the Judgment, implied
in these words -- And the Books were Opened. --

Wherein, according to the method proposed, we are first to consider, the
Universality of this Judgment, -- He saw the Dead (i. e.) All the dead, stand
before God, etc.

Here I shall Endeavor not to be so Impertinent, as to trouble you with those
Intricate enquiries, concerning the Time and Place of Judgment, the Form and
habit of the Judge, the manner of Citation, the Method 1 Forma illa it Judex,
qua tit sub Ju^ce; Illa Iu ^cabit quae Iu cata est. Aug.
of particular Trials, the Execution of the General Sentence, etc. These things
(and what else of the like nature) I shall either wholly omit; or else if it
fall in my way, to make some little reflections upon any of them, I shall do
it very sparingly, and tread as Lightly as he does, that passes over an unsound
piece of Earth, that shakes and trembles under him.

Thus much I take for granted, that although some say, it was the occasion of
Cain's, and Abel's quarrel, whether there were such a thing as a Judgment to
come, or no; yet that shall be no matter of Dispute among us; but without
further stay to prove That, I may freely proceed to the Universality of the
said Judgment, which now we are to consider.

If the Judges have past Sentence upon Socrates, Nature has past Sentence upon
those Judges, and in that Circum^^ance.
respect, we are all a company of condemned Creatures, as well as Socrates --
We must all appear before the Cor. 5. 10.
Judgment seat of Christ, etc. and then as God said to Abraham (when he had
brought him abroad) -- Look now toward Heaven, and tell the Stars, etc.

I may say to you (since God has also brought you Abroad) -- Look ye now toward
the Earth, tell the Grass that is ready for the Sithe, or the Corn ye have
seen almost ripe for the Sickle, and consider ye of the worlds great Harvest.

What? All that have been? All that now are? All that ever shall be? must all,
and every one Appear? O what Throne will be able to hold that Judge. What
Benches will be enough for those Assessors, even even those infinite numbers of
Saints and Angels, which he brings along with him? what Dungeon is deep enough
to contain the already condemned Devils? or what Bar will be big enough to hold
the (now) Arraigned Prisoners?

Some speak of the Valley of Iehoshaphat, as the most convenient place, being
near unto Mount Olivet, where Christ Ascended, and whereabouts, it is expected,
he should also descend again, according to the Collection, they make from that
passage -- This same Jesus -- Act. 1. 11.
shall so come, in like manner, as ye have seen him go into heaven.

But for that, supposing (as some think) the better sort shall be caught up in
the clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air, and so not at all trouble that
Valley; yet as to the Wicked alone and their numbers, what was spoken of
Samaria, may likewise be said of this Valley, -- Surely the dust thereof will
not suffice, for every self-condemned Soul, to take an handful, and stop his
own 1 King. 20. 1
Mouth withal, when he appears in a guilty silence before his Judge.

No wonder, -- An heaven of heavens cannot contain an 1 King. 8. 2
infinitely Blessed God, when a Hell of Hells is little enough to hold a
company of his accursed Creatures; and if the Gaol be so well filled, the Bar
must be sadly Thronged.

For however many Angels (they say) may rest in one Point, as that Legion in
one man; yet raised Bodies sure shall not lose their former Dimensions, so as
one of them may be Unconfinedly in any place, or many of them crowded
uncircumscribedly, into one Place.

Then reckoning from the First Adam, to the last Son of Adam, could we but
consider, what those Slaughter-Weapons of War, Famine, Plagues and Pestilential
diseases, have done, and shall yet do; (not to speak of the daily work of
common Mortality, still kept a going) did we but cast up what Hecatombs have
been offered up to Earthquakes, Fires and Floods, viz. an entire Country
swallowed at one morsel by an Earthquake, many Lebanons have not been
sufficient for one of these burnt Sacrifices, whole Mountains of men suddenly
carried into the Depths of the Sea, and there drowned forever.

Beside those many other Besoms of Destruction, all mankind (but Eight persons)
was at once we know Swept off the Common stage by one deluge.

And if the Flames have often Practiced upon Lesser Parcells, and thereby given
us some cast (as it were) of their consuming-skill aforehand against the great
burning at the last day: neither have the Waters been wanting, by frequent and
violent Inundations, to let us know, they have not quite forgotten their Former
over-flowings.

So for all those that are already Come and Gone in these Ways: all those that
are now a Going, and Every One, that is yet for to Come and Go; for All these
at once to Appear in the Same Place, and fall under One and the Same Prospect,
we must needs say S. John here was mightily assisted with Those Divine Optics.
The Lesser could not Shroud themselves under the Greater, so as to Escape him;
the Greater cannot Over-shadow the Lesser, so as to Hinder him.

-- Habes Tu literas meas, Ego Tuas -- ante Tribunal ^ypr. Ep. 69
Christi, Utraeque recitabuntur: the True Catholic, and the Perverse
Schismatic, the Church-Governour, and the Church-Despiser, shall both stand
before Christ's Tribunal: where it will be Impartially sifted, what Letters
either of them have Brought in their Bosoms. Which leads me to the Second
Circumstance considerable in this Judgment, viz. the Impartiality thereof,
contained in those words -- Small and Great. -- I saw the Dead, Small and
Great, Stand, etc.

The Great, as well as the Small, it seems, they all 2 Circumstance.
must Stand before God. And if S. John sees them all here in the same posture
of poor and wretched Prisoners, GOD (no doubt) beholds them all with the same
Eye of a Just and Impartial Judge. There is not a Chair afforded for the Ease
of a Prisoner of quality, while the Poor man (his Fellow-Prisoner) bears upon
his Legs, till he grows to the ground he stands on: No, they all stand before
God.

The Athenians had a liberty to question their chiefest Magistrates, though not
in, yet after their Office: And the Egyptians, they sat upon the Carcases of
Diod. Sic.
their greatest Commanders. Here, the Books were all Indifferently Opened, and
the Volume-Accounts of the Greatest were read and duly Stated, as well as the
Smaller Papers of the Meanest person were produced.

Books, they say, are the Uprightest Judges, and the most Faithful
Counselors, which (whatever men may do) understand nothing of any Personal
Distinctions, or Favorable Indulgencies unto any; in which regard the Text
here makes use of them in the setting forth of this Judgment.

The Great man's Charge (wrote in Court-hand, or Characters) is not charily
folded up, with a Seal of Favor clapped upon it, or a clasp of Gold, while the
lesser bills of a mean person, drawn at length, are laid open to public View,
so that he that runs may read them; No; but the Books of all, as they were
equally viewed by the same Eye, so were they exactly Wrote, and Impartially
opened, by the same hand of Justice.

I have heard of one, who was content to have his Picture drawn, on condition
he might hold his Finger over the Wart he had upon his face, while it was a
drawing.

Too many such Imperfect* Pieces we meet withal, even from those Pencils,
which should draw Justice to the Life, while the Soft Finger of affection is
suffered to cover the deformities of the Foulest matters; But, when God once
(to shame our deficiencies) undertakes to give us this exact draught of
Judgment, he will put by the Kindness of the Finger; The narrow covering
thereof must be removed in that day, and Blemishes as well as Beauties, all
must be naked before him, with whom we have (then) to do.

If (as some are of opinion) the renewed Heavens, ^ixa ^run^ om^ia quae nunc
^^ventur ad ^^rvitium ho^inum. Ansel.
and all the luminaries thereof, shall then leave off their rolling and be
still. It may give us somewhat to conceive of that unmoved stillness there will
be in the Lord of Heaven, and steadiness in the Father of those Lights, even in
the Unchangeable God, who shall not suffer the least sway of Affection, or
shadow of Turning.

Look not on his Countenance, nor the Height of his Sam 16. 7.
stature, for I have refused him, says the Lord, concerning Eliab; where also
we have the reason of that refusal -- For the Lord sees not, as man sees,
etc. ^bid.


On the other side, when God had said -- By me Princes rule (as doubtless they
do) and Nobles, and all ^rov. 8. 16. ^. 17.
Judges of the Earth -- it follows at the 17th verse. I love them, that love me.
It Is not, provided they be Nobles, or Judges, or the like, before spoken of,
but them indifferently, who ere they are -- I love them, that love me.

Justice may well be allowed to Wear, when in some regards she is a pair of
Balances: he that weighs with them indeed, distinguishes of the worth; but the
Balances themselves make no Difference in the weight of Gold or Lead.

And as it is in Weights, so is it in Measures, the same, I think, may serve as
well for Silks as Sackcloths: In both which we have the Resemblance of an
Evenhanded and Unbyassed Justice.

Thus God himself sets an Equal Rate upon the Atonement of all Souls -- The
Rich shall not give more, the Exodus 30. 15.
Poor shall not give less than half a Shekell. For as the Heavens keep an
Equi-distance from the Earth; however they seem, yet they do not stoop to Kiss
the Tops of the Loftiest Mountains, nor do they quite Disdain, and look aloof
off from the Lower Valleys.

So it is with the GOD of Heaven -- He is no Respecter of persons, but in every
nation, (and of every Act. 10. 34*
Condition) He that fears him, is accepted of Him. If he does draw nigh to the
humble, it is the Grace, and not the Man, that bows him and Inclines him: If He
does behold the proud afar off, it is the Sin, and not the Psalm. 138. 6.
Soul, that estranges Him.

Whatever Others may think, I do not believe we shall all Rise in the same
stature; but Rise we must, and the Lofty-siz'd man jutt's no nearer to Him, nor
do those of Lower Measures sink at all the further from Him. The Sunbeams can
as soon reach the depths of the most Depressed Hollows, as the heights of the
most Exalted Mountains.

Nil apud Deum Magnum est, quod vel a Minimo dari S. Anselm.
nequeat, the greatest Present to God may be offered by the meanest Hand. In
the acceptance whereof He looks not at the Fine Glove, the Rich Perfume, or the
Gold Ring upon the Finger, but only -- The Cleanness of the Hand in His
Eyesight. Psalm. 18. 24.


Pharaoh's Butler and Baker, the Heads of Both are Lifted up, though to a
Several kind of Advancement: Genesis 40. 20.
yet not for the Diversity of their Dreams, (the Gayest and Best things in this
World are little better) but according to the Difference of their demerits.

Joseph and Agag must both be brought out of Prison, but for several purposes
and designations. Joseph shaves and shifts himself, but Agag appears in
delicate apparel. Genesis 41. 14.
Both come forth with their Raiment changed, yet the One to be Advanced to the
Throne, the Other to be Hewn in pieces. Now, as the Eye of Pharaoh did not at
all respect the shaved Face, or the change of Raiment, in the Promotion of
Joseph: neither did the Sword of Samuel give any regard to those delicacyes of
Habit in the Execution of Agag.

So shall it fare with all mankind in that Day: Joseph's and Agags, Slaves and
Princes, the exalted Butler and the condemned Baker, rising men and declining
men, we are all Deaths Captives, and at the Last day must all be brought forth
of our several Prisons, and change our Garments, though in order to designs and
purposes very far distant one from another.

Some (like Joseph) to be Exalted unto Thrones in Heaven: Others (like Agag) to
be Cut in pieces for those Infernal Cauldrons. Some with the Baker, to be made
meat for those Hellish Fowls to Feed upon: while Others are Preferred to be
Cup-bearers to the Great King: To taste again of the pure Blood of the Genesis ^0.
19.
Grape, and -- Drink it anew with Christ in his kingdom. Matthew. 26. ^


And all this not according to Honor, Wealth, Wit, or any outward Wearing, but
according to their outward and Inward Working; as here it follows in the Text
-- The dead were Judged according to their works.

Indeed, during the Night of this Life, one may chance to stumble, and Dash
against the Tombstone of a great Man; and those Graves, that are worth a
Coffin, we see for a time how they swell above their Fellows, while the Poor
bare Winding Sheet is quickly made Level with the Earth, and sooner sinks into
a Total dis-appearance.

But, in the Daylight of the next Life it shall be far otherwise; whatever
difference there may seem in Graves, those Prison-houses here, there shall be
no such distinction betwixt the Prisoners hereafter.

The Pharisee may Paint his Sepulcher to please Men, but (without the sad
colors of a true repentant Sorrow) he can never paint his Soul, so as to
please God.

Yea however, in the respect aforesaid, there may be some Inequality amongst
Tombs, yet none at all amongst the Bones therein contained; and therefore
death is called -- A land of Darkness -- and without any Job. 10. 2^
order. Could we go down into those Chambers of death, look amongst that
Rubbish of mortality, and there behold those Pitiful Remains of man's ruin:
Alas! the Head of an Emperor retains not the Print of the Imperial Diadem
upon it: we can see no Character at all, no not of one of the three Crowns
upon a dead Popes skull; no sign of these formidable and Majestique Robes upon
the bone of a Judges shoulder. The renowned Ribband leaves no mark upon the
back or Breast of Knights or Nobles; Nor does the Honorable Garter make any
Lasting Impression, upon that shin-bone which used to wear it, and be adorned
with it.

Which Impartial and undistinguishing Indifferency in the next World, is
further implied in that, as we are Sentenced by The Book, so shall we be
Summoned by The Trumpet: Both which contain in them some Secret significations
of this Impartiality. The former I have already touched upon.

For the Trumpet, Aquinas observes a Threefold use thereof amongst the Jews:
-- Congregabantur ad Concilium, ^p. 3 aep. q. 76. ^2.
commovebantur ad Praelium, vocabantur ad Festum, They were Summoned therewith
in Council, Incited in Set Battles, Invited to Solemn Festivals.

To which we may add a Threefold use of it among Christians, viz. At Ordinary
Meals, as in some Colleges and at your Sheriffs Tables; At Church Assemblies,
as in some Countries; at your General Assizes, as in this, and most other
places; all is done by the sound of the Trumpet.

We have all these met together in the Text before us. Here is the Grand
Council of the Kingdom to be kept, * Christ's last Battle to be Fought; the
Festival of ^ene dicitur ^a Dei; quia ^pugnam cum ^m^cis decre^am, venit ^^s.
Lud. de ^a Christi. ^b. 12. 23.
all Saints and Angels to be Solemnized; The great Supper of the Lamb to be
celebrated; the general assembly and Church of the Firstborn to be
congregated, and the worlds great Assizes to be held, by Christ the Judge of
those Assizes. And it is not without cause, that all is transacted by the
Trumpet: For as God is gone up with the sound of the Trumpet, we doubt not but
^^l. 47. 5.
he will come down again in the same manner.

Now we know the Jews had not one kind of Note, for the poor Pesant, and
another peculiar strain, for the Princes of Israel; but all were summoned by
the same note of the Trumpet.

Nor with us Christians is there one kind of call for the Governor, Another
for the Servitour: no, but Tutor and Scholar to their Colledge-meales, Master
and Servant to Church-meetings, the Commander and common Soldier to
Field-Services, the great Counselor and the poorest Client to the general
Assizes, all must listen to the same sound, and Summons of the Trumpet.

How much more, at the blowing up of the last Trump (by an impartial
Severeness, and all Personal Irrespectiveness) will God be sure to maintain the
Uniform, and undistinguishing usage thereof, when by the same blast of an
Archangel, Judges and Justices, Counselors and Clients, Jurors and Prisoners,
Priest and People, all shall be summoned to the same Trial, all brought to the
same Bar, all Commanded to the same Posture.

Which invites me to the third Circumstance considerable in this Judgment,
viz. The Overruling Authority thereof, here signified, in that they all stood
before God.

And so on to the fourth considerable, viz. The deliberate, and convincing
Legality of this Judgment -- The Books were opened, and thence to the
certainty and Importance of all these passages -- I saw, etc.

Indeed when I first began to consider of this Subject, my main designs were
set upon these last Observations, and had thought to have practically reduced
all to the present occasion.

Especially my Eye was much upon the opening of these Books, in one whereof was
wrote -- Quaecunque fecimus, What we have done; In the other, -- Quaecunque
fecisse debemus, What we should have done. And in them I saw was contained
matter of most Pertinency to the business now before us.

First, I should have enquired, what is meant by these Books; and for that, I
had willingly sat down at the Feet of S. Austin, Thomas Aquinas, and our Pious
and most learned Champion of the Church of England, Dr. Hammond.

All which do unanimously agree, that by these Books here are signified the
Court-rolls of Conscience, those bosom-records of all our thoughts, words and
actions, there carefully reserved, and then fully and faithfully to be Produced
in that day.

Secondly, I had observed, that all things whatever are exactly Book'd down; we
neither think, speak, nor act any thing without Book: If we can make a shift
for Matter to fill those Books, God will be sure to be Furnished with Books to
hold that Matter whatever it be. Which One thing, if but duly considered, as
Judah said concerning Benjamin, -- How shall I go up to my Father, and the Lad
be not with me! We may say ^en. 44. 34.
concerning CHRIST, -- How shall we dare to Go up, and stand before Our
Father, if The Holy Child JESUS be not with us?

Lastly, That although these Books, in many secure Souls, are kept close shut,
until that Day (Their opening now implies, they were shut till now) yet then
they shall be suddenly, perfectly and entirely opened -- Mira mentis
celeritate, etc. says S. Augustine. All shall be clearly seen, by one quick
Glance of an Enlightened Soul. Conscience being that Divining-Cup, ^id. 2.
which God (as it were) has crammed within us, at our First making; and will,
one day, as certainly discover our Thieveries, as our own proper goods and
Treasures: whatever has been Bagg'd up in these our Mortal bodies, this
Treacherous Cup Betrays all.

And yet as Benjamin's Sack cannot thoroughly be searched till the Beast be
unladed, no more can these full Ibid. 11.
discoveries be made within us till by death we have all laid down this Load
and Luggage of Mortality.

But, you see I could not fairly come to this but by making a rude and
immethodical climbing over those other Heads; and time will not allow of that
just discourse due unto all.

Therefore since we now cannot come so far as the opening of these Books, and
a most dangerous thing it is to go away and leave them shut: Let us heartily
beseech God to open them unto us in mercy here, before He opens them to all the
world in judgment hereafter.

Concerning which Judgment, I have some few words of Application, as to this
days business, and so I shall conclude.

We have spoken all this while of a Judgment to come, but what is that, may some
say, to this present day of judgment?

I answer thus, We all profess to believe, That Christ shall come again to
Judge both the Quick and the Dead, etc. yet did we indeed really believe those,
there would not be so much need of these Assizes.

Truth is, they are for the most part, a sort of Infidel (certainly, more than
half-Heathen) Christians, that put our Honorable Judges to all this trouble.

Well; but if those General Assizes must be in that Day, as surely as These of
ours are at this Day; of what mutual concernment are they one to another?
Briefly thus!

These should mind us of Those, Those should guide us in These; the Present
should serve as a Prospect of the Future; the Future should serve as a Pattern
of the Present Judgment.

Thus, as Deep Calls unto Deep, and One Doleful Creature Cries unto Another:
-- such Correspondency ^sa. 34. 14.
there might be betwixt This, and That Judgment to come, that by a good
improvement, -- The Lesser may be Blessed of the Greater.

For the First, viz. that These should mind us of Those. Who can hear mention
of a Public Jail-deliver, and the Judges approach for that purpose, and not
think of the Resurrection in the One, and the Coming of the Day of Judgment in
the Other?

Who can hear the Triumphant Sounding of the Sheriffs Trumpets, or the Sad
Clinking of the Prisoners Fetters, but must needs make some reflections upon
The Trump of God in the One; and the Clattering of Those Everlasting Chains in
the Other?

Who can be by at the Arraigning of the Prisoners, and the Reading of their
Indictments, and not Contemplate what S. John here saw, viz. The Dead Stand
before God, and the Books Opened?

In a word, How can any one Stand and Observe the Witnesses Evidence, the
Prisoners Plea, etc. at This day, without some apprehensions of Those our
Thoughts Accusing or Excusing one another in That day? ^om 2. 15.
Or, is it possible one should be present in Body at Man's Pronouncing of
Judgment upon Condemned Prisoners, and at the same time not be present in
Spirit at Gods Final Sentence upon Damned Sinners, -- Go ye Cursed, etc?

Whoever he be that has the Advantage of the One, and yet receives no Benefit
by the Other, is nothing more than a mere Idol that has Staring Eyes, but Sees
not; wide Gaping Ears, but Hears not: and which is yet more, an Immortal Soul,
but Understands not.

For the Second, viz. that Those should Guide us in These: To keep then to our
Pattern here before us --

First, Let Judgment be done Universally.

Solomon denies not the doing of Justice to Harlots; 1 King. 3. 16
nor does God refuse to hear the pleadings of the Devil. Job 1. 10.


It Is not well, that Judgment should drop down like the Rain in Amos -- One
piece was rained upon, and the Amos 4. 7.
piece whereon it rained not, withered.

And yet as one of our reverend Bishops observes, (considering those infinite
numbers of evil thoughts, plots, and purposes, etc. which go unpunisht) of
those many hundreds of sins, that cry daily unto God, scarce one, or two are
condemned by man.

Let our Judges make as clean work, as they can, it is certain God and his
Angels will find somewhat to Glean after their sickles, else what need there
Another Judgment, if this were altogether exact, and perfect?

But yet as the House of that Roman Magistrate, stood continually open, for
all that came for Justice; so should there ever be, in the Frame, and purpose
of your Wills, a readiness to Justice, a Willingness to Mercy, and in those
regards, the doors of your hearts should still stand open to receive all
Comers. That Is for the Generality.

Secondly, Let it be done Impartially.

Of the Levites, it is said -- Nec dextram, nec sinistram cognoverunt Levitae,
Utinam nec Iuristae!

It were well if Lawyer, Levite, and all were unconcerned in this Right and
Left hand Knowledge.

In works of Charity, the Left must not know Mat 6. 3.
what the Right hand does; but in Works of Justice, there should be neither
right hand nor left; and therefore with them of old, the statue of a Judge was
(...) (i. e.) a mere handless statue; for what reason it is not hard to
conjecture. This we are sure of, Better Herodot.
is it for us to Enter handless into Heaven, then having two hands (full of
Corruption) to be cast into Hell fire. That Is the second Circumstance -- Let
all be done Impartially.

Thirdly, Let all be done Authoritatively.

I magnify mine office, says S. Paul; As he did his Apostolical, 'twere well,
if all would magnify their Judicial Romans 11. 13.
Proceedings; Nothing but sin can Vilify them. Facinus quos Inquinat, aequat --
Sin is the greatest Lucan.
Leveller in the world; It brings down the Bench and lays it even and level
with the Lowest Bar.

If the giving of a Testimony may fetch down a Justice and set him amongst the
Witnesses, the Committing of Iniquity hales him yet lower, and claps him up
among the Prisoners, Conscience Impleading the One, all the while the Law
Arraigns the Other. That Is the third Circumstance.

Fourthly, Let all be done Deliberately, and with a convincing Legality,
(together with what other merciful and holy considerations, may be taken in by
the opening of these Books) there we have them both in one Psalm. 36. 6.
Verse -- Thy Righteousness is like the Great Mountains; Thy Judgments are a
great deep, (i. e.) In all Gods proceedings there is a leisurable stilness,
like the great deep; yet withal a Solid and Apparent Legalness like the great
Mountains. I Will only speak of the First.

Do but observe here, the Throne is prepared, the Judge is come, the Benches
set, the Boards filled, the Bars made ready, witnesses, prisoners and all
brought forth, yet no further proceedings, till the Books be opened. -- He that
believes makes not haste; nor does a Isa. 28. 16.
Wise man make too much haste in believing, much less does a good man, in
condemning. He dares not give credit, much less Sentence, without Book.

And in this the Judges sword may learn of the Mowers Sithe; which however (as
you come along) you may hear them Whetting, and Whetting again, yet not a blow
is struck, but where it is fully ripe for Execution; and then, as we tear not
off a Nail, no nor Pluck up an Hair, without Pain: no more should the Vilest
Excrement of a Kingdom, the most wretched Miscreant that is, perish without
Pity.

After the flood, GOD can smell a sweet Savor, Genesis 8. 21.
amidst a World of carcasses, that were spread like Dung upon the face of the
Earth; but yet, that Savor Arises not from the Reaking of the Bodies, but the
burning of the Altar; And should the sword of Justice be never so much bathed
in Blood, yet it is not the Carcasses Ibid. 20.
of the dead, which smell well with God, but the holy burnings of the Living;
such as always warmed S. Paul's bosom -- who is (not to say destroyed, but)
offended and 2 Cor. 11. 2
I burn not?

If the Heavens will not, the Earth must weep, because they will not; the Tears
of a compassionate Judge, may (in a sacred manner) (...). Dr. Hammond out of
Basil.
shame the dry Eyes of Heaven; so that God cannot choose but make them Then there
had been a long time o^ Drou* 1^.
Weep with them that Weep, and melt in showers, with them that melt in Tears.

-- Ita feri, non ut se, sed ut te sentiat mori; so to strike that he may feel
his own death, that is the part of cruel Tyrants: but so to strike, as if we our
selves felt it, that is the part of good Judges; who as you came with, so we
hope you come like, the * Yesterday's Thunder-Showre, Thunder and ^ain at the
^udges in^^ming.
not without a mixture of Majesty, and Mercy.

But I see my self irrecoverably lost in this one leaf of Mercy; what then will
become of you, your great Patience at present, and your weighty Affairs now
following? all I doubt would be lost, should we adventure upon the Turning over
of the other leaves of these Books; which in regard I perceive them of
themselves most willingly opening at a Psalm of Mercy, I shall here Fold down
the Leaf, for your more ready Finding, and so at last close up the Books, where
First I found them open. So much for the Text.

An Address to the JVDGES.
WE have done Preaching, and now must betake our selves to downright Begging:
Indeed it falls out at such times as These, that the Poor CLERGY have this
Advantage afforded them, to become Public Beggars.

And although our Honorable PARLIAMENT, in their pious Care and Wisdom, have
Hedged up our Way with Thorns, from all kind of Tumultuous Petitions; yet here
They have left us a Gap open, and a fair passage, to Touch the Top of The
Royal Scepter, by our humble Approaches to You (My Lords) by whom That Scepter
is so Truly Represented.

Therefore Your patience, and the Preacher, having been Wrestling now This
Hour: We cannot yet let You Go, unless You Bless us, with the grant of these
particulars, which so much concern the Honor of That Scepter.

In order whereunto, the First thing we beg, and the Last we would be denied,
is, that the Lord's Day may be more Religiously Observed, and His Public
Worship more Devoutly Frequented.

It Is sad to think, that those who should always be Ready for CHRIST'S Coming
(You know the Motto, GALLUS SUPER TUBAM) should never be more Unready, then
when we are chiefly to expect him, as we should do on that day. Heretofore
Abuses of this nature were like the Pestilence, that Walks in darkness Psalm.
91. 6.
(Betimes in the Morning, or Late in the Evening) but now Carts and Wagons,
etc. are become daemonia Meridiana, Destructions that Waste and reproach our
Religion at Noonday. That condemnation must needs be grievous, when Rebels
shall rise up in Judgment against good Subjects.

Next we pray that all Perjuries, Frauds, Subornations, etc. (which should not
be named amongst Christian men) may not be Impenally practiced in Christian
Courts.

That nothing be done through Strife or Revenge, etc. and that all lingering and
Vexatious Suits be effectually prevented.

That the Poor be not oppressed in his Cause, nor the face of any accepted
against what is right.

That the sober and peaceable, Learned and Loyal Clergy may still be
Encouraged.

That the People (those yet unsettled Souls) be no longer poisoned: for our *
Sea Monsters ^ Lam. 4. 3. ^uid lamias ^si Hereticos ^^p^llat huma^am faciem,
sed ^eluina corda ^stantes? qui ^nc Mammam ^udant, cum ^rorem libere ^aedicant.
^reg. in loc.
still Draw out their Breasts, and in secret Suckle their Young ones; but the
best Milk they can give is poison.

Lastly, that all Sedition, with the close Seminaries thereof, may (if
possible) be Repressed: Love, Peace, Order, with all that is true Godliness, be
heartily Promoted; that so the God of Love, Peace, and Order, in all things may
be Magnified, through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with the Father and the
blessed Spirit, etc.

THE END.

