ELIAS the Second HIS Coming to RESTORE ALL THINGS: OR Gods way of Reforming by
Restoring.

AND MOSES the PEACEMAKER his Offers to make One of Two contending Brethren.

IN TWO SERMONS:

The Former preached in WARWICK, at the General Assize there, held August 19.
1661.

The Other in COVENTRY, at the Annual Solemnity of the Maior's Feast there, on
All Saints day following.

Both Published at the importunity of diverse of the Auditors, being Eminent
persons of Quality in that County.

By JOHN RILAND, Archdeacon of COVENTRY, and sometimes Fellow of St M:
Magdalene Coll: in Oxon:

Ea nunc sunt tempora, in quibus nec Vitia, nec Remedia pati possumus. Live.
Thus says the Lord, in Returning, and Rest shall ye be saved, in Quietness,
and Confidence shall be your Strength, but ye would not. Isa. 30. 15. OXFORD,
Printed by HEN: HALL, Printer to the University, 1662.

To the most highly Honored THE NOBILITY, THE KNIGHTS, ESQVIRES, and GENTRY of
WARVVICK-SHIRE: The Author heartily wishing all Blessings Spiritual, and
Temporal, Humbly Dedicates the following SERMONS.

To the READER.
IN the Delivery of these Sermons, it was none of my least Encouragements (even
then when I am sure I most wanted them) to think, that I neither begged, nor
forced my way into either of those Pulpits; which indeed, to me (who never in
my life had any clambring fancy to be aspiring above a private Audience) I
confess, were matter of very much Fear and Aversation.

But those things are over now, and I can securely look upon my former
Confusions, as so many Egyptian Carcases, driven down the stream of Time.

Yet although One Woe is past, behold, two more are coming, I mean, the
Printing, and Publishing of those Sermons.

In reference whereunto, the usual prefacing concerning the Commands of some,
and the Requests of others, I suppose, in me may be wholly superfluous, who
cannot be so fond as to imagine, that such sorry things as these, should ever
travel much further then those warm Hands, which at first received them;
whose Justice to me now, if in any measure, such as was their Kindness then,
must needs fully certify for me herein, and save me that labor. But if they
should chance to straggle further, and so fall under some severer Fingers
(which can easily pinch through such slight and thin Discourses) then I entreat
all those to Consider, viz. I was a Man (beyond the common condition of men)
born to troubles in this World; which (crowding in upon me through some
inevitable Misfortunes) for this twenty years, have found me somewhat else to
do, then to meddle much with Books, unless they were Debt-books, and such like
sad old Manuscripts; the Crossing of which, rather then the Marking any other,
has been the greatest part of my Employment. For this I bless the God of
Heaven, who by an invisible hand has held me up, and brought me hitherte.

But besides that, the constant task of Preaching for many years, might well
exhaust a greater stock of Reading, then ever I could be guilty of, having had
so short a time, (I am sure I find it so) to gather in the University, and so
long a time to scatter in the Country.

But beyond all this; when a party of Soldiers from Warwick An order for
Sequestration.
Castle, coming with Swords in one hand, and Gilbert Millington in the other
brake in upon me, threw me out of my Living, (too near the hard walls of that
Castle,) and there settled a Jersey* Kember in my stead, which force remains
unremoved to this day. Much about the same time, (those times of Dispersion) as
my Parsonage house was broken in the Country, my Study (or rather my Self) was
broken in Oxford, where I lost all my Books, (except two or three of the most
inconsiderable,) and (that which most undid me) all my Papers, so that thereby
I was perfectly reduced to his condition,

-- Qui totum perdidit Id Nil. Pers. Sat.
Comparing which losses (and some other Misfortunes, which afterward befell me)
with the abundance of Blessings I had formerly there received, I may say of
that Weeping eye, (whose very Name is precious, and will ever be honorable S.
M. Magd. Col. Oxon.
with me) the same Fountain sent forth the sweetest, and some of the bitterest
Waters that ever I tasted of. Not that I think any misusage of mine worthy of
the Worlds notice, so as to sound a Trumpet to my Sufferings; but only this, I
humbly beg, that in those several respects aforesaid, I may be borne
withal, whatever Defects, Mistakes, or other like Frailties, shall be found
upon the ensuing Sermons. Wherein (however some have counted me too sharp, and
I wish others do not count me too Dull) God is my Record, my Desire and Meaning
in the main, is nothing but (the same, which at this time was sung by a Quire
of Angels,) Glory to God on high, On Earth peace, Good will toward Men:
especially Honor and Obedience to his Sacred Majesty, and all in Authority
under him, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all Godliness and
Honesty, for which cause I bow my Knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus, that
now at last we may all live as Subjects, love as Brethren, that so the God of
Love and Peace may be with us.

Amen. December. 26. 1661. I. R.

ELIAS the Second HIS Coming to RESTORE ALL THINGS: OR GOD'S WAY OF REFORMING
by Restoring.

Set forth in a Sermon preached in Warwick: at the General Assize held there
Aug. 19. 1661

At the Request of the Honorable Sr EDWARD BOUGHTON Baronet; His MAJESTY'S
First High Sheriff for County, after his most happy Restoration.

Dum volumus esse meliores veteribus, sumus forsan dissimiles. Quintil. Behold,
thou art made whole; sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee. Joh. 5.
14. OXFORD. Printed by HEN: HALL, Printer to the University. 1662.

ELIAS THE SECOND His Coming to restore all things, OR, God's way of Reforming
by Restoring.
Isa: 1. 26. And I will restore thy Judges as at first, and thy Counselors as
at the beginning: afterward thou shall be called the City of Righteousness,
etc.
THE World was never so forlornly wicked, that God left himself or them
altogether without Act. 14. 17.
witness. No, He sent not only Fruitful Seasons, but Faithful Prophets
amongst the most Faithless and Unfruitful Souls: yea, when by suffering all
Nations to walk in their own ways he seemed to wink hardest, even then he was
not without his Seers among them.

In some of the darkest and most midnight times with the Jews, Isaiah the Son
of Amos had his Visions, who as in many passages he gives testimony of Christ,
so in one passage Christ gives a special testimony of him, more Math. 15. 7.
then of any the other Prophets: (...), well did Isaiah prophecy of you, etc.

Indeed such a one this people wanted. For as the stinging of some Serpents
(they say) produces a raging kind of pain, which cannot be cured but by
Music: so here this was such a Serpent-bitten people, the Head was Isa. 1. 5.
sick, the Heart was faint, the whole Body full of Burnings and Swellings, and
therefore God is pleased to send This (as is said) Blood Royal Prophet with his
Eloquent and lofty strains, to try if that Heavenly Music can recover them.

At this time certain matters were much out of Order among the Jews; who unto
those several other evil Spirits wherewith they seemed now possessed, had
taken in two more worse then any of the former, i. e. a Deaf and a Dumb Spirit:
a deaf Spirit of Incorrigibleness, and a dumb Spirit of Unthankfulness.

Of both which the Prophet attempts the Cure in the beginning of this Chapter:
conjuring them with such strange and Powerful Exorcismes, as (if possible) to
make the Deaf to hear, and the Dumb to speak.

For the former he turns himself from them, and calls to the Heavens above, and
the Earth below, that so the necessary Lowdnesse of that Figure, which must
awaken such Creatures as those at such a distance, and make them give ear and
listen, might happily reach the Ear, and rowze the Attention of that hitherro
Deaf and Uncharmable People: who for shame must say, Those that have Ears to
hear, let them hear, when others are called upon that have none. Hear, O
Heavens, and give ear, O Earth, at the 2d verse.

For the latter, he seems to make use of the Lowings of the Ox, and the
Brayings of the Ass to convince them, whose Dumb Ingratitude had cast them
quite beneath the Stall of the One, or the Cribb of the Other. The Ox knows
his Owner, and the Ass his Masters Cribb, but Israel does not know etc. at the
3d. verse.

Sure the Distempers of that People are very great, which call for such strange
and unusual Applications. Heaven and Earth must be appealed unto for proper
Remedies, and yet still as the family of Judah heretofore, so the malady of
Judah now, grows stronger and stronger, till God is pleased here to take the
Cure in his own Hand, saying in the verse foregoing the Text, I will turn my
hand upon thee, etc. and here in the Text, I will restore thy v. 25.
Judges, etc.

Many are those remarkable things, which willingly offer themselves from these
words, viz.

1. The best Government in the World may be apt to degenerate, and suffer some
kind of Embasement by the Sins of Men: which is plainly implied here and more
fully expressed above, Silver may run into Dross, and v. 22.
Wine loose it self and languish into Water.

2. In Degenerating times men love to be shifting, and starting from God's own
primitive Constitution: As here, what need God restore them as at First,
unless they had been much removed from it.

3. No Shifts or Removes whatever can rightly Settle a People without this
Restoring.

4. Every Restoring will not serve: It Is not a Logge in lieu of a Stork, as
formerly; nor an Image in the room of David: but they must be such as at the
first, Moses, Samuel, etc. good, and of God's own Restoring: I will Restore,
etc.

5. Such a Restoring as this will serve turn, without any farther Changing or
Destroying.

6. As the taking away of Judges and Counselors (by whom we understand
Magistrates and Governors, whether supreme or subordinate; for Counselors
here mentioned after Judges may imply a Subordination) I say, as the taking
away of such is a very great Judgment of God, and is intended as a Punishment
upon a Kingdom; so the Return of such is a very great Mercy of God, and is
designed for the Reforming and Amendment of a Kingdom. For their Restoring
here we see begins the Repair, as probably their Removal of Old began the Ruin
of this People: I will restore thy Judges. -- Afterward thou shall be called
the City of righteousness etc.

7. Notwithstanding God does his part (if we may so speak) in Restoring: yet
such reluctance there is from Man's corruption, that reforming and amending
go's on very slowly. After ward, here, having in the Hebrew, a (...) Compound
doubled Expression, to intimate, as one conjectures, not Suddenly, but some
while After ward, thou shall be called the city of righteousness, etc.

8. When our Amendment goes on to any purpose, it must begin with Great ones:
Judges and Counselors must be Restored to Themselves, as well as to their
Places; to their ancient and primitive Integrity, as well as their former
Authority; else the Bellows are burnt, the Founder melts Jer. 6. 29.
in vain, all is to no purpose.

These several Observables, with some more, a considering eye, and careful
hand might gather from these words; to each whereof if any tolerable price of
Justice were performed in the prosecution, this one verse would easily swell
into a volumn.

But you see the Children are come to the Birth, 2 King. 19. 3.
and there wants strength to bring forth. A World of matter would require a
World of strength to deliver it, and another World of patience and leisure to
receive it; and as you want Room for the one; I am sure I want Abilities for
the other. Therefore passing by the rest, we pitch upon this only Proposition.

That when God restores good Governors, Judges, and Counselors, and others of
public employment, it is a most effectual means to make a good people.

Where of I shall speak thus. 1. That God is the great Giver and Restorer of
Government in general- 2. That good Judges and Counselors are very proper
Instruments to make a good people, and why. 3. We shall gather up some
Inferences of more practical concernment from the whole, and so conclude.

For the First, God himself has stamped such ancient and indelible Characters
of Government upon man, that had there been no Transgression, yet however there
must have been some kind of Subordination. I have read of those, that have made
a shift to pick an universal Empire out of the very letters of Adam's name,
which they say are, to signify the four quarters of the World. A for '(...), D
for (...), etc. so implying, that Adam was to be of East, West, etc. the
sovereign Lord and Commander. But to omit that, when Man was upon making, let
us consider that Prerogative Royal, he brought with him into the World: Let us
make man, and let him have Dominion over the Fish of the Sea, and over Genesis 1.
26.
the Fowl os the Air, etc.

First over the fish and sowl, then over the rest, to show the fullness and
comprehensiveness of which Dominion, the very first Branch there of (as I said)
reaches to the deepest Seas, and incloseth the Fish, a Creature of all things
most Plin. de Animalib.
untameable, says the Naturalist; insomuch (as it is thought) they were not
brought with the Genesis 2.20. For they are not there mentioned.
rest to receive their names from Adam, and therewithal a Token of his
Sovereignty over them. And as the first branch of this Dominion, reaches to
the deepest Seas, and incloseth the Fish; so the second mounts up to the
lostiest Firmament, and takes in the Fowl: to let the other know, that if
Fowls and Fishes, those Creatures of other Elements, and (as it were) people
of another world, if those must come in and submit, sure the Cattle, and
Creeping things, that tread upon the same Level with Man, they must not once
think to stand out, or be exempted.

If the long-arme of Adam can reach the hugest Whale, that tumbles in the
Northern Ocean; sure then his Foot may securely spurn that Dog that lies
under the table. If the quickness of his Commands can overtake the long-wing'd
Hawk, that vanishes away through the Air, sure he can easily arrest the
Creepings of the slow-paced Snail, and what ever else moves upon the face of
the Earth. Thus God lays the yoke first upon those Aliens, that so the other
homebred Creatures (Whence was most danger of Rebellion) might yield the more
cheerful Obedience and when the Fish and Wild soul prove Adam's good subjects,
the Sheep of his Pasture might be ashamed to turn Rebels.

It Was a sign of the Royalty in Judah, that the posterity of lacob, took not the
name of lacobites, but Jews, after the name of Judah. In like manner the
Sovereignty of Adam was signified as before was intimated,) and he called of
God to the Regal exercise thereof, when he gave names to the Creatures. God, to
signify his supremacy over Man, names him; and Man likewise to show his
supremacy over other Creatures, he names them. At which solemnity, says Philo,
there was De creatione Mundi.
such a dazzling brightness of Adams Soul, shining in and through the Majesty of
his Body, (that of his Countenance especially) that had not God brought the
Creatures (as it is said expressly he Genesis 2. 19.
did) there held them too, they had not been able to endure the sacred
Dreadfulness of that Ceremony, but been content to run away with their Natures
only, without any Names at all to demonstrate them.

And as the Characters of Government were thus deeply engraven in Man at the
making of the World, the like we may see also at the restoring of the World,
after the Flood had destroyed it. For the Arc, as to the use of it, it
resembled the Church, and its Ordinances: (the like Figure Whereunto even
Baptism now saves us:) so as 1 Pet. 3. 22
to the Frame and Composure of it, it typify'd the World, and the Government
thereof. Which Frame was (says St. Austin) bi-camerata and tricamerata, that
is, probably, (though the Commentator Aug. civ. 1, 10. c. 26.
there has a different conceit) three stories high, and two partitions in each
story, which also is more agreeable to the Scripture-model, With lowermost,
second, and third stories shall Genesis 6. 16.
thou make it. In the lowermost was one Partion for the Food, another for the
Excrements of the Beasts. In the second, one for the wild, another for the
tamer sort of Creatures. But the uppermost of all was reserved for Noah and his
Necessaries, thereby mystically denoting (says a learned Author) Man's
Supremacy, and dominion.

But yet though Noah was lifted up one Story above the Beases, he sat but at
the same height, and dwelt upon the same Floor with his Sons and Daughters.
Therefore as we have made the Man to be Rex Brutorum, so we must make him Rex
Hominum too, else we do nothing.

For this, it was neither brag nor lie in Cyrus, Ezra 1. 2.
when he said, The Lord God of Heaven has given me all the Kingdoms of the
Earth. And in that Psalm we read, The Shields of the Earth belong to the Lord.
Which if compared with that of Hoseah, Ps. 47. 9. (...) Hos. 4. 18.
your Rulers with shame do love, give ye: that is, in the Hebrew, your
Shields. It Is plain, by Shields, are mean Rulers and Governors: They are
indeed those Shields of the Earth which belong to the Lord, the sole maker and
maintainer of them. Only this must be granted, that if Man had not sinned,
Dominion then had not been Despotical, but merely Paternal. There must have
been Duty, yet without any Slavery, or reluctance; the yoke of Government
weighing no more then do the Feathers upon the back of a Bird. Yet doubtless
there had been still Ten Commandments, and the fisth no less in force than the
first, and extendable as well to Governors, as to Fathers and Mothers; but yet
the yoke that was to be derived from that Command had been so soft and silken,
that it had no more oppressed us, then the Wedding-ring weighs down a man's
finger: no more then the Oar and Sails encumber the Barge, or the Spokes and
wheels are a Clog to the Chariot, or the Scale and Finnes are a Burden to
that Fish, who with them cuts her way through the Ocean.

However it is a Chain, though made of Gold, and may bind as firmly as another
that is made of Iron. The sweet influence of the Pleiades and the Job. 38. 3^.
bands of Orion are Bands still, and who can loose them? and a man may be held
as fast by a twist of Silk, as a thong of Leather.

This Dominion, we are now discoursing of, was to be enstated in the Elder
Brother over the Younger, and in the Father over the whole family. This some
conclude from God's saying to Cain, His desire shall be to thee, and thou shall
rule Genesis 4. 7.
over him. Others think that to be spoken of Cains power over Sin; but then it
should be thus, thou shall rule over it, which the Gender in the Hebr: will not
bear. And therefore it must be meant of Abel, whose Offering though God accepts
of, yet all the fat of his Sacrifices shall not excuse him from Subjection: no,
it seems neither the goodness Genesis 4. 4.
of Abel can exempt him, nor the wickedness of Cain deprive him, of that
prerogative royal which he had by birth over his younger Brother.

If any yet scruple God's being the only giver and restorer of Government, let
them go to Aesop's Frogs, who petition above and look upward for the coming of
their King; not expecting he should arise out of the mud, but come down from
lupiter. Thus, though it be in the hoarse notes of a Fable, the voice of Nature
speaks clearly, how that Government comes from above, the uppermost link
whereof (they said of Old, and so do we still) is fastened to God's throne in
Heaven, and thence let down by several underlinks, Judges, and Counselors,
etc. and all for the good of us Mortals.

Which offers me a fair passage to the second thing proposed, viz. How that
good Magistrates, Judges, and Counselors etc. are very proper Instruments to
make a good people. And here 1 might speak of their Power in rewarding and
punishing, a weing and obliging the people, together with many other
advantages, which are more peculiarly annexed both to their Persons and Places.
But I have wasted so much of my allowance in the first part, that I doubt I
cannot be so much as indifferently just to the second, without being extremely
unjust to the third part: the which being of most Practical concernment, and
because I perceive also that much of the Second will without any violence flow
into that Channel, I hasten thither to meet it, and so shall spend the rest of
my time in recommending unto you those Inferences that may arise from the whole
matter, which was the third thing proposed.

1. Since God, we see, has that great Hand in Government, that he says here I
will restore thy Judges etc. then it may not be unseasonable here 1. Inference.
First of all to enter our Caveat against the People. It Is not they, but God (as
the Text informs us) who is the giver and restorer, and indeed the only (...)
in the economy of Dominion. Why then do the People imagine a vain thing? why
should they trouble themselves (and others) in things too high and too hard for
them? Let the 1 Samuel 6. 13.
men of Bethshemesh follow their reaping: why should they forsake their own, to
thrust their sickles into God's Harvest; and with their sweaty palms handle his
Mysteries?

I would to God that some of those that now pretend to so much study of the
Scriptures, would not overlook that one line in S. Paul, but Study to be quiet,
and do their own business. 1 These. 4. 11.


It Is confessed, matters in Government may chance to be somewhat unhinged and
disordered; but then are these men of skill and authority to set things right
again? If any thing be amiss in the instrument, must every rude and boisterous
hand, (that can only increase the distempers of it) be trying and tampering
with it? What? must that venerable image, Order and Government, which (as has
been showed) fell down from Heaven, upon the least crack or bruise, be only
hammered out by a company of Ephesian silver-smiths?

No, let the people know, it is not their common Shop-oyle, but the Oil of the
Sanctuary, that is used in the Fiat of Government. Besides let them but view
this Text again, and there they will meet with Counselors, Judges and in them
Kings, like Angels ascending and descending, and God himself standing at the
uppermost round of this Ladder. All these are betwixt them and the honest power
of restoring and reforming. So that unless they overturn this Ladder, which
will be hard so long as God stands at the top of it; or unless they resolve to
rush on and ride over the heads of their Superiors, 'twill be a great while ere
it fairly comes to their turn, to have to do in these grand matters of
Government.

The Arc I told you was a Type of Authority, what State-Carpenters soever
might have an hand in the hewing and erecting it, we know not; but this we are
sure of, 'twas God only that put Noah into it, and gave him the full possession
of it, by that usual ceremony of shutting Genesis 7. 16.
him within it, as there it is expressed, they went in male and female, -- and
the Lord shut him in; which unless the Lord himself had done, shut the door
fast upon him, and closed up all the chinks, and little crevises in the outside
thereof, (which none of them within could possibly do) the waters you know
might soon have soakt through, and endangered all. So for this great bottom of
Government, unless the Lord take the Governor, and shut him in, and then
perfectly close up every crany with his own hand, it cannot be, but the waters
of Strife, Sedition, and Rebellion will soak through the sides thereof, and in
time hazard the drowning of all.

That Is the first Inference: it is God and not the People.

I will restore etc. Then how contrary are 2. Inference
those unto God Almighty, who are altogether for changing or destroying, when
God is wholly for restoring, yet not as of Late, but as at the Beginning.

First for Changing: Some there be so strongly enamored with any strange face
of Affairs, that fresh and new Deformities please them better then accustomed
Beauties. So the Scenes be new, and often shifted, the Play will be applauded,
be it never so bloody and Tragical.

I was well, and would be better; I took Physic, and dyed, says that foreign
Proverb: and how far our late troubles may put it into better English, I submit
to any indifferent Judgment. Certainly this Turba Medicorum had well nigh made
an end ofus, and cured the Disease, (as one observes many do) by destroying the
Patient.

And yet how rife and frequent are those amongst us, that would willingly part
with their present Gold and Silver (Peace and Safety) for a little more of the
former Iron and Steel again?

When the jews passed through the red. Sea, every Orig. sup. Exodus hom. 5.
Tribe, says a Father, had its peculiar channel, for their safe conveyance to
the Shore. Was it not so with us, when on this side, and that side, the Waters
stood upon huge threatening heaps, we were so in love with Ruin, we were not
content to be saved the same way, but among those many Divisions of ours, every
Tribe must be allowed a several and safe passage through its own Channel. And
yet now that we are so newly gotten upon these Banks of Justice and Peace,
whereon (God be blessed) we yet stand; what numbers have we, who would be glad
to plunge themselves (and others) back again into the bottom of that red Sea of
blood and confusion; and this chiefly, if not merely, from a fond love after
Changes. If there be, as some hold, such Circulations in Nature, that in seven
years time, men may be said to have other Flesh and Blood, and so other Bodies:
certainly such men as these may have twenty other Minds in half that space.

Not that he who (without tumult) fairly motions a change in lesser matters,
should always do it (as their Custom was) with a rope about Plutarch.
his neck. Nor that it should be present death to offer to wind up or slacken
the least string in the circumstantials of Policy: no, but if Archimedes thinks
he can unhinge the Earth, he must have some firm foundation for the foot of
his Engine to rest upon. So if the great globe of Government should be stirred
(which God forbid) though some can spy not only Motes, but Beams in the Worlds
bright eye, the Sun: and though the Goddess be well drawn, yet 'twill go hard,
but some Hypercriticks will find fault with her slipper: however, I say, (if
they will be moving) our modern Archimede's should chose some more probable
supporters whereon to fix their new Engines, then the various and floating
humors of the People; who if they are, like Genesis 49. 3, 4.
Reuben, the beginning or chief of our strength, yet like him also they are
unstable as water.

I am the more earnest herein, because I perceive in diverse no great mind
after changes in themselves, but only the People love to have it so, and they
love to humor those People, But it Nullam vestem bis induit. Sueton; de Ne^one.
was costly following his Fashions, who was never seen twice in the same
Garment: and certain it is we have found this novellizing of Ours, none of the
cheapest for Imitation. As when we behold a full Moon, we think it a glorious
Body, yet 'twould make but an uncertain Standard to go by. Such are the minds
of this kind of People, and if we should chip and chop all our Measures
according to that Standard, we might do like that Statuary, who thought the
piece never fine enough, till at last by overmuch he wing and polishing, he had
scrapt away all into an heap of Dust in stead of a Statue.

2. And as this kind of wanton changing, so any 2. Destroying.
kind of destroying is contrary to this restoring. This has so little of
Jacob, that it has both Esau's hands, and Esaus voice too, and so is plain
down right Edom, who said, Down with it, down with it even to the ground. Good
and Bad, Corn and Tares, all must be bound up in the same Bundles. As if
Absalom's way to burn Ioabs field had been the best course to cleanse and weed
it; 2 Samuel 14. 30.
and if the House be grown a little dusty, presently to bring the Besome of
Destruction to reform it. Certainly that Besome has no relation to Christ's
fan, wherewith he has promisd to purg Luc. 3. 17.
his floor.

If either the Church-clock, or State^arum should be at a stand, sure a little
oil, and a gentle rubbing would do better, then to come with axes, and
hammers, to set it going.

Indeed time has been, when those Clergymen were hung by as useless Harps,
whose mad Music could not enrage our late Alexanders, and Dion.
make them presently draw their swords, and runie either City or Country. I
desire to bless God, I never knew how to beat a March upon these sacred
Boards, nor had I ever the least skill to sound a Charge from the Pulpit; but
have often wondered to see, how any could rejoice in, or at the work of
Destruction; especially, because it looks so like the Devil, who took one of
his chiefest titles from thence, and is called the Destroyer: and God Almighty
Keeep us all from the paths of Ps. 17. 4.
that Destroyer. When two strings of Music (says Cum ista sonitum reddit,
illa quae in eodem cantu temperata est, tremit. Greg. M. 1. c. 5.
that Father) are equally stretched to both the same note, touch but the one,
the other (though at some distance) will shiver, and tremble by Sympathy.

I would to God, that all Christians were sensible of these sympathizing kinds
of Shiverings, though we are at a distance in some other respects, yet we all
agree in that common key of Christian: and why should not those many great
things wherein we do accord, hold us faster together, then that those few
little things wherein we differ, should be able to shatter us asunder?

O let us often read and ponder upon that of the Prophet, Destroy it not, there
is a Blessing in it. Isa. 65. 8.
I would be understood of those vulnera non immedicabilia, such as are not past
our help (those that be so, we leave to higher, and better Judgments) and I
could wish we might hear no more of those dismal Dirges, at least that they
might be all taken out of some of David's Al-taschiths; provided, that a Psalm
of Mercy (...)
and Compassion to one, prove not a Song of Lamentation to many. Then for God's
sake, Destroy not: for as it was said before, there is (at least there may be) a
blessing in it. And so 'twere well we were all of God's mind there, or here in
the Text, rather to seek the Restoring, then the Ruin of a Sinner.

And as this Destroying is contrary to this Restoring here, (and so contrary to
that great Restorer) in respect of private persons, much more in respect of
Judges and Counselors, and such like public persons. Our King is worth ten 2.
Sam. 18. 3.
thousands of us: one of his Judges or his Counselors are worth many hundreds
of us, and his Government it self worth us all: for indeed we were all less
worth then nothing without it.

Yet time was, we would adventure, and be trying, how it was to be without it,
and therefore God sent Locusts amongst us, such as those in the Revelations,
they had faces men, and Rev. 9. 7, 8 etc.
Hair like Women, yet withal they had Tails like Scorpions, and Teeth like
Lions; nor would the seeming sweetness of their looks, cure the stinging of
the one or the bitting of the other. I say, the Lord sent Locusts amongst us.
Now as Agur observes, The Locusts have no King, yet they go Prove. 30. 27.
forth all of them by Bands, and so did we, who a long time had none of the
former, but God knows enough and too much of the latter. These I say that,
have no King, God sent amongst us, that would have none, that so our Punishment
might be our Fescue to point out our Sin.

But their ways were not God's ways, and it is well for us they were not; for
they, like true Locusts, are all for devouring and destroying, when God is all
for restoring. He, and all his, I am persuaded, are for peace, though the other
make them ready for battle. When I consider the perpetual Desolation, even all
that the Enemy has done evil in the Sanctuary, I cannot but admire Ps. 74. 3.
in the name of God, out of what bottomless pit has arisen that Spirit, which
is all for ruining, and nothing at all for restoring. What is his name, Prove.
30. 4.
or what is his Sons name, who can tell, faith the Scripture? We know God, of
whom that is spoken, his Name is, The only Potentate, The Mighty King, The
Indge Eternal; and his Sons name is, Wonderful, Couns^llor, Prince of Peace,
Everlasting Father; all names of Order and Government: But for this Spirit
(whereof we now are speaking) what is his, and his sons name? I Will tell you,
his Name is Legion, and (it may be feared) a Roman one; and his Sons name is
Confusion and Destruction.

Oye foolish Christians, who has bewitched you with these principles of
Destroying? What, though Corah and his company abused their Censers?(which
real abuses are of an higher nature, then any petty personal ones whatever,)
yet even those Censers may serve for broad plates for the Number. 16. 38.
Altar. What is Belshashar's heathen lips defile Dan. 5.
the Bowls of the Temple? yet if they be well washed again, what were those
Jews the worse, who afterward might drink their full draughts out of them.
Act. 17. 23. St. Paul sees an Heathen Altar, and Superscription: what does he
straightway offer to demolish the one, or deface the other? No, but by the
advantage of that opportunity preaches a good Sermon from a bad Text.

Thus the stones of Ramah (with a little hewing) 1 King 15. 22.
may help to build Gebah and Mizpeh; and blessed are those, who are such
Building, without destroying. For if it be Felony (as I have heard some Lawyers
affirm) to burn the bare frame of an House, what is it then (in the laws of
God) for one faulty pin (perhaps,) or two, to set on fire the compleatest and
goodliest structure of Government under the Sun?

This would not Abraham do: he ( if but for Tens sake) would not have a
Sodom destroyed. No, neither will the God of Abraham do so: for though he
here tells them plainly, at 10. v. they were Rulers of Sodom, and a People of
Gomorrah, Isa. 1. 10.
yet what follows? Does he presently say, I will deal with thee, as with
thy sister Sodom, I will rain down fire, and brimestone upon thee, and consume
thee? no, but at the 25 v. I will purely purge away all thy Dross, and take
away all thy Tin; and here in the Text, he says not, I will ruin, but I will
restore thee thy Judges as at first, etc.

So much for Changing and Destroying, which was the second Inference.

In as much, that when God has restored 3. Inference.
their Judges etc. he says, Afterward thou shall be called the City of
Righteousness, then of how great importance is it, that Judges and
Counselors, and all such public persons, should be good men, and such who in
all likelihood may begin the reforming of a bad people. As here we see God
restores them merely in order thereunto: Good Judges and Counselors being the
very first foundation stones of this new intended Building.

This does highly concern them in many respects.

First, in respect of God: that those who newly (as it were) came forth of Gods
fingers, may still retain some touches and lively impressions of that Divine
hand, which has so lately restored them Just as it was with the new-made
World, that when God comes to review his Workmanship, saying, Come let us see
what I have made? what have I restored? the answer may be, Behold is very good.
For if God made not the smallest seed, nor sand, nor the least spill of Grass,
nor that next to Nothing-creature that crawles upon the face of the Earth, but
he reviewes and searches it round, to see how he likes it: how then shall
Judges and Counselors, those most eminent pieces of God's power and
providence, I say, how shall they think to escape the severe review of those
Eyes, whose Sharpness pierces them, whose Brightness will confound them,
when he makes that amazing search within them.

When God had made a Sea, it is said, He made Leviathan to play therein: and many
think, if Ps. 104. 26.
they be but once restored, they are made, and that is enough; then they may
securely wallow (like the Leviathan) in the wide Sea of their own humors. But
there is more ado then so; when God has done his work (he has Restored) he
looks that men should also perfomre theirs; they must be the better for that
restoring. For here we have not only a plain single Making, (though that, as
was said before, calls for an exact reviewing) but this Restoring is a
redoubled Making, and as it were- Coelorumcura secunda, Heavens second (if I
may so speak) and most accurate Thoughts.

O how careful then should such be, so to approve themselves in their Places
to which they are restored, as God may not hereafter be ashamed to own them, or
the Restoring of them, as sometimes we read he has been so ashamed. The People
which thou (Moses) have brought out of Exodus 33. 1.
Egypt: why, pray you, did not God himself bring them out of Egypt? And so
in this Chapter, The Sabbaths and the Assemblies, your New 13. and 14 v.
Moons, and your appointed Feasts etc. What, were they not God's Sabbaths, and
God's Assemblies? were they not his New Moons, and his Appointed Feasts? O'tis
a sad thing, when our Sins cause such a Shynesse and Estrangednesse in God,
that he is figuratively ashamed of what he has done, and will not
acknovvledge the work of his own hands. As if we hereafter should in the
behalf of you our Judges, and our Counselors, plead to God this Act of his
Restoring them to us, and so hope that he will also continue them amongst us;
he should then turn away his face, and say, Depart, I know not you, nor them
neither; they are your Judges, and your Counselors; you longed, you begged, you
prayed for them, and you would have them; they are yours, but they are none of
my Restoring.

So that it behooves them to be good in respect of God: that is the First.

2. And as in reference to God, so also secondly in regard of Themselves.
Judges and Counselors, and such great men, should be upright and good men.

Sins in our Savior's language are called debts, Math. 6. 12 Anselm. in Mat.
c. 6.
(and so says Anselm, -- Debitores sunt, and qui debent pecuniam, and qui
fecerunt injuriam. He that Ex insoluto debito Officii, debitum supplicii
contrahitur. D. Episc. Linc. in Praelect. Oxon.
does an Injury is a Debtor, as well as he that borrows money:) because, in the
commission of evil (says a Father) a man takes his pen (as it were) and writes
an Obligation with his own hand against himself before God, and firmly binds
himself to incurse such a penalty; the greatness of which Sum is according to
the greatness of the Sin, and the greatness of the Sin is according to the
greatness of the Person so offending. And indeed your great persons can hardly
commit little sins, or be guilty of small offenses.

And not only by their Sins, but by their very Pleces Great men enter into
greater obligations to God Almighty, then any of the meaner sort are commonly
capable of. For though God be not of so austere a nature, as to gather where he
has not straw'd, and to reap wherehe has not sowed; yet where he has strawed
he will look to gather, and where he has sown he will expect to reap, and that
in some measure, proportionable to his sowings. Nor will he be content with an
handful of Gatherings for an armefull of Strawings, or that the seed of an
Ephah should yield but an Omer; but to whom Much is given, of them More will be
required.

Platina reports of one of the Popes, that in the depth of Melancholy, of a
sudden he stroke the Board, and said, Non video quomodo possunt salvari, etc.
Those that are in such high places as I now am, I can scarce imagine how they
Quam difficile hi ad requiem tendunt, qui tam duris rationum multiplicium
nexibus astriuguntur. Greg. mor. 1. 4. c. 5
should be saved. O'twill be an heavy thing for one Judge to arise with the
weight of so many Shires, Cities, and Counties upon him, for which if he gives
not a good account, 'twill be a sadder load, then so many Milstones about his
neck, or so many mountains upon his back at the day of Judgment.

If he that had but one Talent cannot pass his Math. 25. 25.
Accounts, though he bring again that one entire, and undiminish'd; sure he
that had ten Talents, must not think to come off with accounting for five; nor
he that had five, to reckon for two only.

Therefore when I read in the Gospel of that Mat. 18. 24
Servant, that owed his Lord so many thousand Talents, as that must needs be
some great Lord, who was able to lend so much, so the other must signify (me
thinks) some great man too, who was able to borrow so much, else sure he had
never been so deeply entrusted. No, it is not for a mean man to arrive at so
honorable a ruin. Your petty Larceny, poor sort of Sinners, they Prove. 23. 21.
indeed may transgress for a piece of Bread, or a pair of Shoos, or a burden
of Sticks, and so overrun themselves in God's books, with such trifling
Mite-trespasses, and Sins of the lesser Shekel. But it is the sad Privilege of
great ones, they can take up their condemnation by Talents, and at last utterly
break with God for many thousands.

Hence it is, that (as one observes) Pharoh and his Chariots are said, to sink
like lead into Ex 15. 10.
the mighty waters. It Is for your slighter sinners to float up and down upon the
surface of that Infernal lake: but for great Transgressors (compared to
Pharaoh's Chariots, because the Devil is most victorious and triumphant in
them) Zach. 5. 7, 8.
they sink down like lead, which as it is the proper Emblem of Sin in that
Prophet, so the higher it falls, the heavier it lights, and the lower it sinks
toward the Center. Therefore as Solomon says to every one, If thou be wise,
thou shall Prove. 9. 12.
be wise for thy self the like I may say to you great ones, if you be good, you
shall be good for your selves, and therefore it concerns you, that you be so.
And that is the second respect.

3. And as for themselves it behooves Judges and Counselors to be good; so
thirdly in regard of the People, whose following reformation we see here wholly
depends upon their Restoring. So that their being good, is of very great
importance to the People; and that upon this account.

First, if they are had, they cannot without sin be resisted; unless we prove
our selves plain Romanists, and that of the rankest sort among them.

For this Doctrine of Non-resisiance was heretofore an ancient Landmark, to
part betwixt them and true Protestants, who like Isaac, when they see nothing
but knives and cords, fire and faggot, yet know no other Language, but, My
Father, My Father, and so follow on Genesis 22. 7.
in peace and quietness to the place of slaughter: whereas a fierce Romanist
would have snatched the Knife out of his Fathers hand, struck him beneath the
fifth ribb, flung the fire in his own face, and if but strong enough, to twist
and wrest them from his hands, He will quickly bind the common Father, even
with cords to the Altar.

Which Resistance, if it be still upheld secretly in hearts of of men, I see
not what Stage there is for Passive Obedience to appear upon in this World, and
there is no room for it in the other World, and so one Pearl (of great price) is
dropped and utterly lost from off this chain of Graces.

Sure, if those of Old had thought so slightly of it, as some of late seem to
have done, for certain there had been but very few Martyrs, and so one of the
highest Mansions in Heaven, should still stand void and empty.

Think thou, that I cannot now pray to my Father, Mat. 26. 53.
and be shall presently give me, says Christ, more then twelve Legions of
Angels? Christ, you see here, though he could, yet will not resist an unlawful
Power, (for such was that of the High Dr. Hammond.
Priests, as that Learned Man observes) no not so much as by a Prayer, which
one would think was the most innocent resistance in the World. And therefore I
believe, that he, who rather then suffer, would resist, if he could, though the
Power be never so lawful; well may such a one suffer as a Murderer, as a busy
body in other men's matters, as an evil doer, or an evil speaker. But 1 Pet.
4. 15
because he does not suffer like Christ, he cannot suffer like a Christian, and
so can justly have but little Comfort, much less of Glory in those sufferings.

But for this, we need not pass beyond the bounds of our Text. It Is certain
here the jews had evil Judges and Counselors, and therefore God promises to
restore them those that should be good, but for ought I find, gives them no
power to pull out those that were bad.

Secondly, and as they cannot be resisted, if they are evil, so they will be
imitated by the People, whom therefore it much concerns they should be good.

That device of Pharaohs, how that the midwives Ex. 1. 16.
should murder the Hebrew Infants was most unnaturally cruel: for their
employment which was the office of life, was thereby abused, and made an
instrument of death to the Babe, that was new born. Just so is it with those in
power and authority; the midwivery of whose good examples should give life,
their bad examples bring death upon a People.

Those Dames that have breasts, have no bowels, who poison those fountains of
nourishment; and pity it is to see poor Infants draw in death from those
Nipples that should be the Springs of life.

All this is done by these evil Examples, which, like Ezekiels waters, so long
as they are no higher Ezekiel. 47. 3.
then the Ancles, the Knees, or the middle, (that is, the sins of our Equals or
Underlings) then we may happily wade over; but if by another measure (that of
greatness) they come to rise higher, and get above us, then the deep waters run
over our Heads, and grow up to a drowning river, so that we cannot pass over.

Sin I Will warrant you is none of those modest Guests, who when they are bidden,
choose to sit down in the lowest room; it desires rather to come Luke 14. 10
in with gay apparel, and those of the Gold ring, and Jam. 2.
with them be bidden, Friend, sit here in a good place, rather then like a poor
Sneaks, to stand under the footstool.

Indeed Sin is a mere Pharisee, and loves the uppermost Luke 11. 43
seats in the Synagogues, and greetings (...), that is, in the Courts of
Judgment, rather then in the Market place. And if it be so kindly greeted, as
to get upon the Bench, 'twill quickly soak through all those seats below it. If
it once be upon the solemn board with the Masters of Israel, soon get down
among the Dogs underneath the Table; and with the same easiness, when once it
scales the Pulpit, it makes nothing of over-leaping the lower Pewes and Basses
of the Congregation.

Judges and Magistrates in Scripture are signified by those that sit in the
gates. As when Job was a Judge, says he of himself, I went out to the Job. 29.
7.
Gate through the City. And such were those that Ps. 69. 12.
sat in the Gates, and spoke evil of David. Now if the Sickness once seizes
upon the Gates and Entries of a City, what with going forth, and coming in
continually, both City and Country will quickly catch it. If your common
Pillars be but besmeared with the Infection (I have heard of some Devilish
minded men, that so designed to propagate the Plague) sure there is a mighty
danger of its spreading: and if great ones, such as are or should be Pillars,
the common resting places of wearied souls, where every one comes to lean and
repose himself: I say, if these common Pillars are once infected, the Disease
cannot choose but increase, and Death will multiply.

The word which is here set to signify Lawyers (...) Forerius in loc.
and Counselors in the Hebrew, signifies also Foundations. Now if the
Foundations be not only destroyed in themselves, but by ill Examples
destructive unto others; alas what hopes can there be of that Building?

But on the contrary, if they be good, and such as at the first (here promised)
and as those at the Beginning, that is, like Moses, Joshua, Samuel, etc. then
it follows, Thou shall be called the City of Righteousness, the faithful City;
or, it is in one Translation, Metropolis Iustitiae, Matter fidelis Zion, that is,
Jerusalem and Zion, the State hoth Ecclesiastical and Civil, Chruch and
Kingdom, both shall be the better for them.

Water you know, comes forcibly from above, and how small a stream we see
drives an overshot Mill: certainly, if you that are in height and power, would
but make use of that advantage-ground which God has given you, 'twere
impossible the Chariot wheels of Reforming (after this Restoring) should drive
so heavily, and that this Afterward in the Text, should be so long a coming.

We have a great while talked our selves out of breath about this general
Amendment: if indeed we have any mind to it, these very words before us, point
out that which must be the way, and none other: first, Good Judges and
Counselors, and then a Good People; unless we think to read the Text
backward, then indeed we may for on at the bottom of the verse; begin with the
People, and so force Reformation to creep upwards from them to their Governors.

But mending, you kuow, is a sort of moving, and motion has its rise from
above; from the heads, and not the heels of the people. Good Judges and Lawyers
seem here to be sufficient of themselves for the work: but if to them we
readded a Religious Gentry (we may putin a pious and obedient Clergy, though
not one word is here spoken of them; for alas, the gleanings of your Ephraim is
more considerable this way, then the whole Vintage of our Abiezer; therefore) I
say again, had we to those helps in Government, which the Textmentions, an
additional assistance from a Religious Gentry, doubtless Sin in a short time
would grow into such disgrace, that it would be an absurd uncivil thing for a
man to be Ineligious.

All we lie in a low Flatt (as it were,) but the Gentry are the rising ground
in a Kingdom; and as it was in Noah's flood, so was it also in our late
Deluge, the very first sign of the Abatement of those waters was, when the tops
of the Mountains Cen. 8. 5.
were seen, I mean when the Gentry began to lift up their Heads. As they are
Mountains, so were they but spicy ones, O how would Christ (and his Kindome)
come running like a Roe upon Cant. 8. 14
those mountains of Spices? But if these mountains of Spices should prove
mountains of Gilboah, whereon no drops of heavenly dew descends, or mountains
of Golgotha, Where in stead of beholding 2 Samuel 1. 21.
Christ running like a Roe, we may see and hearhim crucisyed like a common
Slave all the day long: Surely very sad must be the condition of that Kingdom.

Great men were allowed to derive their Pedigree Varro.
from the Gods, ut ad magna impellantur, that their Actions might rise as high,
and be as divinely noble, as their Extractions. But when the people shall
behold this highborn blood to boil over so much in vanity, excess, and
impiety, when those that are brought up in Scarlet embrace Dunghils, and their
Sins as deep in grain as their Garments, O what shall we do in the end thereof?

Sed spero meliora; and therefore it is, God knows, that I have said thus much:
for I could not rub and chafe a Corpse, but that I have a desire and hopes of
life in it. To which purpose, I Will here relate to you, what I have from Origin,
super. Genesis Hom. 17.
who reports concerning the young Lion, that when at first he is brought into
the world, he lies stillfor many days, as it were in a dead sleep, without any
stirring at all: at last in comes the old Lion, who beholding his beloved young
still lying in the same death-like posture, what with grief and rage falls a
roaring, wherewith the Den shakes again, and so at last the young sleepy
Creature stirs and rowzes.

Our Land is the Lioness; after a long time of pain and travel (when the
Thunder of the late Wars produced nothing but Gourds and Mushromes) at last
there is a young Lion brought into the world; Men of noble Birth and
Extractions, Persons of generous Designs and Inclinations, and what loyal
Subject, yea what good Christian is not truly joyful at the sight hereof? But
alas, as yet the newborn Creature stirs not, very little show of life there is
in it. If it must be so, forcertain that old Judah's Lion will come among us at
last, and beholding so sad and unpleasing a spectacle, he will fall a roaring,
and our Dens of Security will fall a trembling; then sure those that now seem
divided between Sleep and Death, will hear that voice of God, and live. That so
the many enemies of God and the King may all know this Noble Creature was not
dead, but sleeps. When once the due Fear of that our God, the true Love and
Honor to this our King, the tender regard and pity toward this our Native
Country, together with a just care of our own common Concerns and Safety,
shall make us think it high time to stir and look about us in obedience to that
Jogg, which St. Paul has given us, Awake to Righteousness, and sin not. 1
Cor. 15. 34.
So much for the third Inference.

Now for the fourth and last. Since good Governors, Judges, and Counselors
etc. are here given of God as meet Instruments to make a 4. Inference.
good People, Then sure those People must needs beexceeding bad, whom such good
Government and Governors, as aforesaid, can make no better. And here because
my remaining Task and what I have to do therein, is you see with evil, very
evil Persons; and since also that in Scripture, Luke 6. 35.
Evil and Unthankful, are Synonymous, and that Mis-thankfulnesse (may I be
allowed so to speak) is a kind of Unthankfulness, what I have to say upon this
last point, I Will share betwixt those two sorts of Persons, the Unthankful, and
the Mis-thankfull. I mean such, who though they have some kind of Thankfulness
within them, yet they make choice of very untoward and unlucky expressions
thereof.

First to the Unthankful: who, albeit that Government be a mercy of God's own
promising and performing ( I will restore to the Jews, he bath restored to us)
though it be like that Vessel let down from heaven to earth (as was shown in in
the first General, that Government is from God) and this Vessel also (as that
was) full of all Variety and Satisfaction, yet many like S Peter will not with
thanksgiving partake of any of those Blessings therein laid before us; yea
notwithstanding their present necessity and hunger (as I may say, like his) be
never so instant and urgent. For if (as some misled Scruplers will say) they
are Damned if they Eat, sure they are Starved if they do not eat, and heartily
join in those common causes we all have of Rejoicing. Yet for all this, Now the
satted Calf is killed (I mean, Rebellion is Luke 15. 23
slain) and there be now (as then there were) some more then ordinary shows of
Joy, the Elder Brother will not come in, though never so ib. 28.
much wooed and entreated by all the Importunities of a most tender Father,
whose mere Rogamus with good natures should be the strongest Mandamus. And all
because he seems to show too much kindness (as they think) to this lost child,
the Government now established, which was lost, and is found; was dead, and now
begins to live. ib. 32
.

Besides, The Gold ring, and the best Robe: the new Shoos (they conceive) at
first tread awry toward Superstition. As for that, I could heartily wish that
Learned men were fully agreed aabout the Length, Breadth, and other Dimensions,
of that which indeed is Superstition, and then I am verily persuaded, those who
do cry out of it in others, would find it mostly amongst themselves. But I
cannot stay now to Define or Dispute, only I Will tell you my fears; since so many
of God's houses have of late been turned into Stables, this Age I fear may have
enough to do to farm the Churches.

Which work since our Royal Hercules has begun, (the God of Heaven grant he
may live to finish, then no doubt but he will do as Moses there, neither turn
to the right hand, nor to be left, but go by the King's highway) I say, since
like another Number. 20. 17
. Hercules, his Sacred Majesty has begun this cleansing work, let not any say,
the Place smells of holy water, because it does not scent so rank of Horse-dung;
nor let any give out, that Popish Altars are going up, when only Racks and
Mangers are taking down.

This is the wretched Perverseness of some unreasonable men, as indeed the
world is merely made up of strong prepossessions as to our selves, and the
Spirit of unkindnesse and contradiction, as to others. Though we have been
newly drawn up out of the Dungeon (as Jeremiah Jer. 38. 12.
was) with rags and clouts (in the account of the Enemy the most unlikely
means;) nor is it so long since our shoulder have been eased of our burdens,
but that the marks of the Iron-furnace are still upon us.

And yet how many are there, whose Fingers itch to be making Brick and Mortar
again, (though tempered with the blood of Christians,) only to build houses for
a company of Egyptian Lords to dwell in

Those I speak of, who long to be offering up their reasonable service, indeed,
by presenting bumane bodies (and souls too, if they could) a living, dying
Scarifice upon the Sword's point, and so they may but consecrate themselves
Bellona's Priests, no matter, though by the blood of God's own Clergy.

Have ye not read what David did, when he was an hungered? faith our Savior.
And give me Mat. 12. 3.
leave to ask one Question not much unlike it; Have ye not read what David did
when he was thirsty? He longed indeed for some of the water of Bethlehem, but
yet when he perceived 2 Samuel 23.
it looked like Blood, he is content to loose his longing, and will not so much
as once taste of it; and why, because, thinks he, it is the blond of these three
men. For my part I am not yet covinc'd, best water in Bethlehem (I mean, the
pretended clearest Reformation, that would make us never so clean) is sit to be
bought with the blood of one man, much less should we offer to purchase a
little (we know not what) Puddle by the blood of thousands.

Tell me, Oye lowering and discontented souls: is it nothing, that God should
please so unexpectedly to send us another Elias to restore all things? Math.
17. 11.
and He not by might, nor by power, but merely by his long wrapt-up Mantle
(Prudence and 2 King. 2. 8.
Reservednesse) to smite our angry Jordan, so that the Waters thereof dividing
hither and thither, he and his Army marched through on dry ground, without
dipping their foot in one drop of blood. And when for a time we were all
quietly enclosed ( clean and unclean) in one Ark of Government, such as it was,
not made of Gopher wood, but Bull-rushes (the best that then could be gotten)
where one might behold our infant Kingdom, like the Babe Moses, floating upon
the waters; what, was it nothing, that neither the blustering winds, nor
boisterous billows from without, no, nor all those wild unruly Creatures from
within, should be able to overturn that Ark of Bull-rushes, wherein for a while
we were contained?

Yea, one thing more, when either by Acts of open Hostility, or close
Neutrality, the most among us had forfeited his Majesty's protection, and so
made a sad Shipwreck of life and livelihood all at once. What, was his
Majesty's gracious Pardon, the Act of Oblivion nothing? whereby after so
universal a shipwreck, some on boards and planks (like those with St. Paul)
others on broken pieces of the Ship, almost all escaped Act. 27. 44.
to land, by the merciful support of those Lethaean Waters. And for all this,
should we again leave the shadow of the Royal Oak, and adventure a second
scratting and tearing by the basest Bramble?

I heartily wish, we would all impartially consider, what we have, as well
as what we would have; and lay those two before us (like Beauty and Bands)
in several distinct heaps, and Zech. 11.
then say, if our heaps of Beauty be not far the biggest.

Many thousands we know came short of Canaan, merely for their murmuring and
mis-believing; And we, if we still join with those Jews in their repining
notes, Wherefore came we Number. 21. 5.
sorth of Egypt, here is neither bread nor water. Our soul loathes this light
bread. If so, then as we par-take with them in their Sins, let us beware we
share not with them in their Sufferings, and so the Lord send Serpents amongst
us, even as he did amongst them. A sly and subtle generation, that are wise as
Serpents, but innocent as Eagles or Vultures, and long to be dividing the Prey
upon the Carcases of the two grand Combatants.

Therefore let us not murmr, as some of them murmured, and were destroyed of
Serpents. And that is all I have to say to the Unthankful.

Secondly and lastly, to the Mis-thankfull(as I may so call them,) who err and
miscarry much in those wrong and improper expressions of that Thankfulness,
which else they seem to have; as Drinking, Swearing, Swaggering, abusing
themselves, and insulting over others, and such other sad expression in this
kind, which too frequently we meet withal.

What has our Kingdom been so lately blown up, and hovered in the Air for so
many years together, and now at last(as I have read of a City-wall) light upon
the very same Foundations again, and must our Sins be needs sinking a new Mine
to try the fortune of a second Blast?

God indeed has restored, and here it is, Afterward thou shall be called,
Civitas Justi, (as one Translation has it) the City of the Righteous one, that
is, Christ's City: but when will this Afterward once be? me thinks, like the
hinder-wheels of the Chariot of Sisera, it is too long a coming.

We have had bouncing and Knocking, God knows, enough, and too much, and some
have still hoped, all in order to a very glorious Building at last: But what
will others say, Is this your Civitas Iusti, and are such as these and these
Jud. 5. 28.
the Citizens thereof?

Is this the end of all God's purging, purifying, and refining here spoken of,
only to produce a Vessel of Dishonor? Have we been so long stripe of our
Jewels and Ornaments, (the Majesty and Glory of our Kingdom, and by Fasting
and Prayer labored in the very fire, and after all, out comes the Beast,
instead of the Man or Christian?

I speak it with shame and sorrow concerning some of our selves. Had it not
been better for some, that the Iebusite and Canaanite had still Stuck like
Thorns in their sides (would that have kept them upright) rather then the
Beasts of the Field should thus prevail against us, and all manner of Brutality
and Sottishness over run us? What do some say, Are these the good Subjects of
his Majesty? Are these the true Sons of the Church? those especially whose
Garments should proclaim their gravity and purity? -- As with a sword in my
bones, the enemy reproacheth me daily, saying not, where is their God, but
where are his Servants? We may say in this case, as St. Paul does in another
(not much unlike it,) If unbelievers (or Mis. believers) come in amongst such,
-- will they not say they are all madd? When 1 Cor. 14. 23.
David did but act a madd man's part, what says Achish? Have I any need of
madmen? But sure it is 1 Samuel 21. 15.
now beyond Acting; when even the Ass leaves her old Hebrew prose, and now of
late turns English Poet, to reprove the madness of such Prophets.

However St. Paul affirms, The Head cant 1 Cor. 12.
say, it has no need of the Feet; yet I am confident, our Head may say of such
soul and dirty Feet, I have no need of you.

God says in the Text, he will Restore; but we can say, he has Restored, and
our eyes may behold our own Judges as at the first, and our own Counselors as
in the beginning, but above all our own King; whose exemplary goodness and
temperance, justice and prudence is such, that however some Heretics have
falsely affirmed, we sinned at first, yet certainly now, we may at last be
reformed, merely by lmitation; unless the People that pretend to love him
most, shall imitate his Goodness the least of any.

But to conclude, remember this, that Resorming is the only end of Restoring:
God has done the one, it rests upon you and me, all yours and all ours, really
to endeavor the happy attainment of other; which, do not, we stick still in
the midway, and have come through but half our Text; but if indeed we do it,
then the Whole verse is dispatched: and we, not being hearers only of what God
has done for us, but Doers of what we should perform back again to him, shall
most assuredly be blessed in our deed. Which blessing, God Almighty, the
fountain of all Blessings, bestow upon us, for Jesus Christ his sake. To whom
etc.

FINIS.
MOSES THE Peacemaker his Offers to make one of two contending Brethren.

A SERMON Preached in COVENTRY, at the usual Anniversary of the Maior's Feast
there, upon All Saints day, 1661.

At the Request of the Present Mayor, several Knights, and Gentlemen, in and
about that City.

By JOHN RILAND, Archdeacon of COVENTRY.

Si Haeredes Christi sumus, in Pace simus. Cypr. Beati Pacifici, quoniam Filii
Dei vocabuntur. -- Parens enim omnium Deus est, neque aliter transire in
nuncupationem Familiae ejus, licebit. Hilar. in Mat. And the work of
righteousness shall be Peace, and the effect of righteousness Quietness and
Assurance for ever. Isa: 32. 17. -- I am for Peace. Ps. 120. 7. OXFORD, Printed
by HEN: HALL, Printer to the University. 1662

To the Right Worshipful THOMAS PIDGEON Esquire MAYOR of Coventry:

To the Right Honorable the RECORDER, JAMES, EARL of NORTHAMPTON, Lord
LIEFTENANT of the County of Warwick, and the City, and County of Coventry:

Sr. THOMAS NORTON Baronet, Sr. ARTHUR CAILEY, and Sr. RICHARD HOPKINS, Knights:

HENRY SMITH, and MATTHEW SMITH, Aldermen, Deputy LIEFTENANTS of the said City
and County, with the rest of the Aldermen,

The Author wishing all the Blessings of Peace, dedicates the following SERMON.

Act. 7. 26. -- Saying, Sirs, ye are Brethren, why do ye wrong one to another?
THE words came at first from him, who was the designed Governor of the Jews,
and may not be impertinently discoursed upon before an elected Magistrate among
Christians. Moses their Ruler elect (as yours is now) spoke them, so they cannot
be unsit for the time: and the main Purport of them driving at Peace, I think
they may not altogether be improper for this Place.

The whole Chapter contains St. Stephens Apology for himself, against a lewish
Calumny, whereby they charged him with blasphemy against Moses; who chooses to
defend himself chiefly out of Moses; producing Moses all along Act. 6. 11.
speaking for him, who, they falsely said, had spoken against Moses.

Our Savior says to the jews, do not you think that I will accuse you; there
is one that accuses you, even Moses, in whom ye trust. Now is that Scripture
here fulfilled in our Ears, where we have Moses accusing the Jews, as fast as
they do St. Stephen: he saying little for himself, being not so tender of
preserving his own life, (no notice taken of that) as of saving their Souls,
only we have Moses, almost in every verse, accusing his Accusers and
considering the bloody design they were now upon, to take away the life of a
just person, and so to do that great wrong to their innocent Brother, the said
Accusation lies against them in no one passage more strongly, then in this of
the Text; imagining Moses himself now speaking to them, what St. Stephen did
out of Moses, Sirs, ye are Brethren, why do ye wrong (especially so great a
wrong as this) one to another?

The Text (as'tis now before us) is part of a dying man's speech, containing
some small drops (as it were) of that full (few in Scripture so full) and
divine shower of words, which by and by was to be answered with a strome
Stones. ibid. 58. v.
Which harsh reply sufficiently proves, that if the Speaker have a sharp
tongue, the Hearers have a hard band; and though it is said, he cut them at the
heart, he shall feel for all that, they can sooner bruise his Bones, then he
can break their Hearts.

But however the words were slighted by that, I hope they will not be so by
this Audience; and that the rather, because their Importance is nothing but
Government and Peace. Things, which, as they are very suitable to the present
Occasion, so are they much becoming the lips of the first Martyr in this his
last Speech. And 'twere well, if all that seem now adays to covet his Name,
(the name of Martyr,) would be careful to copy out his Example; and when they
go, be sure to leave the World such legacies of Love and Peace, as he did, to
whoom though the Peoples ears were stopped, yet the Heavens were ib. 57. v
. opened, where he beheld by Glory of God shinning ib. 56. v
. upon him through a thick cloud of Stones ready to overwhelm him; and
apparently saw the glittering of Christ's face above, even through ib. 54. v.
the gnashing of their Teeth below.

In our passage (before we come to particulars) I thought it not amiss to
point at two general Observations: the First inferred from somewhat of
Coherence with, but Antecedent to the Text: the Second, from a Circumstance
arising in it.

1. First, we may consider, how ready Satan is by his instruments to hinder any
good settlement in the Church, especially, if it have any relish of, or
tendency unto that (...), Government Act. 6. 5, 6.
Ecclesiastical. For no sooner had the Apostles ordained Deacons in the
Church, (an Office derived from, and compounded of the very Dust, (...), still
minding the (...) of their Duty, Industry, and Humility, as it is in the Jewish
Proverb, Beatus qui se pulverizat, etc.
Blessed is he that is dusty with the dust of the Temple, that is, ever
laboring in the concernments of God's service, which was the work of these
Deacons) I say, no sooner had the Apostles made so good an Establishment in the
Church, but presently the Devil projects how to hinder the work; stirring up
malicious Engines (those of the Libertines) who by false Accusations should cut
off St. Stephen the chief workman, Act. 6. 9.
thereby to weaken the hands of the rest. That is the First.

2. For the Second general Observation, it is this, though here we have the
words from St. Luke, he from St. Stephen, he from Moses (as we see Exodus is
quoted in the Marg: of the Text) yet notwithstanding we have the words here in
Ex. 2. 13.
the Acts, I suppose we shall hardly meet with them in Exodus. Now St. Luke
being full of the Holy Ghost, when he wrote them, and St. Stephen also, when he
spoke them, 'twere a kind of Act. 7. 55.
Blasphemy to imagine, they should both belly Moses. Therefore we may conclude,
that Moses being the humblest, as well as the meekest man on the Earth, did not
himself record all that he Number. 12. 33.
said, or did, in that matter of Peacemaking betwixt the two Brethren, but
might leave somewhat (then not recorded) to be brought down by constant
Tradition, or some such like way: which I observe the rather, in regard the
observation of the Lord's day, Infant Baptism, the ancient Church Government
now established, yea the Scripture it self, (as here you see) may be somewhat
cleared, and explained by this way. All Tradition should not presently be flung
away, because some has been foysted in, that (perhaps) may be frivolous. What
if others preserve only Shells and Froth should we therefore hurl away those
Pearls, which the bottom of this Sea affords us? 'Twere very great folly in us
to reject good O are, because others dig and find nothing but Dirt. This is
certain, good Gold and Silver may be kept in the same Box, where some put
nothing but Counters, or Brassefarthings.

Now (as the Psalmist bid's) walk about Zion, Ps. 48. 12.
go round about her, tell the Towers thereof; so we having by these degrees
surrounded the Text, and fully viewed the several Strengths thereof; these
following Propositions we may tell out to you, as so many Towers of Zion,
arising in this order. The First sort from Moses, here the Peace maker: the
Second sort from the two Brethren, the Peacebreakers. Of the First sort, thus.

1. That every good Christian (those especially that are publicly
commissioned, as Moses was) should with all diligence labor to make up the
breathes betwixt Brethren. This is warranted from Moses Example here, (which we
all should imitate) who, as elsewhere, he throws himself into the Gap betwixt
God and Man; so here, he sets himself in the breach betwixt man and man, he
showed himself, and would have set them at one again, as here it is in the former
part of the verse ib. 26. v.
.

2. This endeavor of Peacemaking must be managed with abundance of
Meekness, Prudence, and Tenderness, even toward him that does the wrong; to
both indifferently: Sirs, ye are Brethren, why do ye wrong etc.

3. As this Endeavor is to be carried on with much Meekness, Prudence, and
Tenderness, so also with as much vigor and earnestness. For so the word (...)
signifies. He would have forced and constrained them to Peace, without which
sweet kind of violence, it is not truly Mosaicall.

4. If the said Endeavors be in all points managed so as aforesaid, then,
though the Peace be not made, yet God is pleased so to accept the Will for the
Deed, as if it were made. For here though Moses was fain to fly, and leave the
two Combatants in the midst of their Quarrel, yet says the Text, (...), he
did constrain them to Peace, though (alas) he could not do it.

These four Observables, the Peacemaker here affords us, and the Peace-breaker
just so many more.

1. That Brethren may be at mutual strife and contention; yea farther, they
may actually injure one another, (as (...) here, and (...) in the Septuagint,
together with (...), amount to so much at least) and yet continue Brethren for
all that: Sirs, ye are Brethren, though ye deal thus unbrotherly one with
another.

2. In the heat of Contention men are apt to slight and forget their nearest
relations. As the eyes of these Brethren were blood shotten, they could not
discern Moses to be their King; so had they quite forgotten themselves to be
Brethren; else Moses needed not have been their Remembrancer here: Sirs etc.

3. When Brethren strive, the wrong most commonly is reciprocal, at least,
it is hard judging which is the wrong-doer, and which the wrong-sufferer; so
that we must divide the wrongdoing betwixt them, (...), why do ye etc. i. e.
For certainye both do wrong one to another: he that had the best of it, might
ill manage it, and so (though in the right) might be a wrongdoer.

4. The strife and variance of Brethren is the most unreasonable that possible
can be in the World. -- Why do ye wrong? which why implies there was no
wherefore, but is a Question, that remains upon Record, without an Answer to
this day.

And should the same Question be put to many of our causeless Quarrellers, I
suppose it might meet with the same, that is, no answer; unless it be one, as
full of Impertinency, as Blood, like this, ib. 27. v.
Who made thee a Ruler over us? will thou kill etc. Each of these might
challenge some particular regard from the words now in hand, and in respect
also of their abundant usefulness in the application, they may be compared to
those Can 4. 2.
even shorn Sheep in the Canticles, -- every one of them will bear Twins, and
none is barren among them. And if by your Patience (to make proof of their
Fruitfulness) they should be allowed to bring forth their thousands, and ten
thousands, (all that various sort of Matter, which were hence derivable) though
the Oxen were so strong to labor: yet this would prove a sad Captivity, and (I
perceive) there would be great complainings in your Street.

Therefore from following these Ewes (as it were) great with young, lest I
should quite tire you in following me, I return, and here present unto you 2 Samuel 12. 3.
this one little Lamb, which (like that of the Poor man's) I would have every
one of you buy and nourish, that it may grow up with you and your Children; let
it eat of your Meat, and drink of your Cup, and lay it up in your bosom, I
mean this one mild, profitable, peaceable, and every way Lamb-like Assertion,
viz.

That the most effectual means to Peacemaking amongst us, is to consider, we
are all Brethren.

The very remembrance of our Spiritual and Natural Nearnesses, and Relations,
should be srongly preventive, or expulsive of that Rancor, which is too apt to
rest in the bosom of Christians one toward another. In speaking whereof

1. First, I should show what is meant by Brethren; as for Sirs, that is a Term
of mere civility, and common usage, and affords us only thus much: That
although we are told in the Heb. 12. 21.
Hebrews, that Moses once said, I exceedingly fear and quake, yet if this,
Sirs, be here rightly rendered, and he that was skilled in all learning of the
Egyptians, be here made to speak proper English, then sure Moses was none of
our modern Quakers. But we leave them to God's mercy, without which, like the
Turkish Enthusiast, they run round and round, till they swell, and at last fall
down and deliver Oracles; and so let them, only so they do it in that fallen
posture. But yet the wisdom of Rulers must (as one said wittily and shrevvdly)
take heed in time, left at length these Thou's and Thee's quite destroy all
Mine and Thine.

To return; (as I began to show) First, what is meant by Brethren, (for some I
told you before might forget it,) together with its chief Co^prehensivenesse,
as it were, the outstretched arms and open embraces of this one word in
Scripture. And here we might speak of Brethren by nature, nation, religion,
kindred, and affection; all which (except the last of all, which indeed is all
in all) all I say, or most of them (I am confident) would fetch in those, that
yet stand at the remotest Distances among us. And one would think too, that the
first should of it self be able to reach and command the last; and the
nearness of our Natures fill up those Chasms, and Gulfs of Distance in our
Affections. Sure St Paul thought it should do so, when he said, God had Act.
17. 26
made of one Blood all nations of men, much more should it be effected, when
that of Nature is assisted with all those other auxiliary Relations aforesaid.

All Mankind is (as it were) Gods Oar; but Christians, says an ancient
Writer, are (...), Clem. Alex.
God's proper lavvfull money: and would we but rubb off that Rust, (which by
an inveterate Rancor, and mutual Malice) has formerly been brought over it,
we might soon see whose Image and Superscription lies underneath it; and then
how should we dare thus to scorn and refuse the meanest piece of God's Money?
As what is meant by Brethren, so

2. Secondly we might bring Reason, why this Word should be such an over coming
Quirites, so potent a Charm amongst Christians, as to allay, and rebuke the
most violent Storms and Tempests, saying unto them, Peace, be still. What
manner of thing this is, that even the Winds and Seas, (the boisterous and
unruly Passions of men) should obey it, and why?

3. Thirdly, whence it is, that amongst professed Christians, and those (to see
to) none of the lowest form neither, there are so many deaf Adders, that
refuse to hear the voice of this charmer, but like St Stephen's Enemies, stop
their ears, (and withal) widen their mouths, and hurl about those Stones,
even harsh unchristian language one of another, I say, whence is it, that such
deaf Adders should be so loath to part with their poison, or give way to have
that venomous Tooth pulled out, whereby they bite and devour Gal. 5. 15.
one another, and so (more like Cannibals then Christians) are consumed one of
another.

And here, had we but time and leisure, to cast the lot aright, most of the
demure and darling sins of this Generation would be taken: especially it must
needs challenge the Pride and Passion of Some, the Interest and Ignorance of
Others, and the wilful Prejudice and Prepossessions of most Christians one
against another. By which means it comes to pass (as St Austin observes) that
Dragons and Lions, Bears and wild Boars, maintain no such deadly seuds, and
destructive hostilities, as Men do. But there is one thing more, which being
produced, may supersede all those other Reasons of this continued averseness.
The strongest Reason is, there can be no Reason for it. For (as I said before)
Strife amongst Brethren was the most unreasonable strife in the World. This why
in the Text, being without any wherefore; so that we need not further enquire,
what should be the causes of its Continuance, whereof there can be assigned no
Reason; or else such only as is a Contradiction, that is, the
Unreasonableness, which is to say, the Unmanliness of Men.

But the time would fail me to speak fully to each of these, and therefore I
shall only offer some Proofs of the Proposition last of all tendered; make some
more particular Deductions (tending to Knowledge and Practice) from the whole
matter, and so conclude. For the First, viz. the Proof of the Proposition; how
that our being Brethren should make us Friends.

1. For this end we find the Scripture very frequently making use of this
Compellation, in order to purposes of Peacemaking, and gaining, or confirming
of Affection.

Men and Brethren, let me freely speak unto you, Act. 2. 29.
faith St. Peter, at that time, when at once he won three thousand souls. And
St Paul (when ib. 41.
he was pleading for his life, and it behooved him to speak persuasively) begins
with, Men and Brethren: in both instances, the very fame words in the Greek, as
here. And not to load you with heaps upon heaps of more Quotations to the same
purpose, let this suffice to say, That as in all holy Rhetorical insinuations
we met with this Word, Brethren, as a chief Ingredient, so most commonly (as in
the two Instances aforesaid) is it placed in the Re^er^e, according to the
Rules in Oratory, whose strongest Forces usually appear last, and bring up the
Rear, as there we see Brethren does in both those places.

2. A Second Proof may be thus When Christ was about to teach all the Christian
World a Form of Prayer, and therein chiefly to insinuate that love and
Kindness that should be among Christians, he was pleased (after the delivery
of the said Form) to turn back again, repeat and explain that one Petition,
concerning mutual forgiveness amongst men, and none other, For if ye forgive
not men their trespasses etc. I say, when Mat. 6. 14.
Christ was upon prescribing such a Form, which might not only comprize all our
Wants; but unite all our Hearts too, he finds no fitter an Introduction
thereunto, then Our Father; whereby it is necessarily implied, that those who
call him Father, should also call, or at least account themselves as Brethren,
which is intimated Joh. 20. 17
by Christ elsewhere; Behold I go to My Father, and your Father; and the more
to endear himself unto them, thinks it no scorn to call his Mat. 28. 10
Disciples Brethren; Go tell my Brethren.

O how dare any slight or slacken the blessed Bands of that Name, which
Christ's own lips (as it were) have fastened upon us with so many sacred Knots.
Be that spoken to Despisers. And on the contrary, why should some others so
much contract and overstreighten that Relation, as to make Brethren only a
peculiar Band to such a small Fardle of Mankind? when, to my thinking, Christ
meant it rather for an universal Girdle, that should go round and encompasse
all Christians. That Is for Engrossers.

3. Because in this Appellation, Grace and Nature, Flesh and Spirit may both
innocently unite, and join forces.

Thus St Paul in that his persuasive Epistle to Phil. 19.
Philemon, concerning Onesimus, speaking of a common Brotherhood wherein he
related toward himself, faith (...) How much rather to thee, Philemon, both in
the flesh, and in the Lord. The which two respects, when they are twisted
together, like two Streams, one running into the other, with combined
embraces, go hand in hand, with a greater force down the same Channel.

In the Tragic Description of that Fatal battle, faith the Poet,

-- Cunctos hoerere cruores

Romanus, campisque vetat consistere Torrens. In the slaughter there made, the
thick blood of the Barbarous enemy stood like a Lake, till the Conquerors sword
began to open the Roman Sluices, then it ran down like a Torrent. Thus the
Waters of Siloeh may move softly, but if the Rivers of Damascus should Change
their course, and run into the Rivers of Israel, the paces of both may be
amended. And albeit Abanah and Pharpar should be slow-paced Heathen streams,
yet if once they come (as it were) to be baptized in Jordan, and join with that
River, they soon would partake of its swiftness. And further to illustrate
those advantages which Grace makes of Natures Relations, it is thought by some,
that St John was the beloved Disciple not only as a Disciple, but as a Brother
of Christ: And that here also, This is bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh,
was some endearment to the Genesis 2. 23.
second Adam, as well as heretofore it was to the first.

So much for the Proof of the Proposition. In the next place follow those
several Conclusions from the whole matter.

Since there are (as has been shown) such 1 Concl.
bands in Nature, as well as Religion, we infer, That those are much to be
condemned, who have broken all those Bands asunder, and cast away those Cords
from them.

Among many other of those sad Predictions 2 Timothy 3. 3
(which we have lived to see fulfilled, and running over in abundance of other
mischiefs) it is said, Men shall be without natural affection. These are the
men, whose unnatural Tempers help to complete that Prophecy, and their ungodly
Actions flowing from those No-naturall Affections, do justify St Paul was a
true Prophet, as well as a faithful Apostle. How many have we now adays,
whose fierceness so great and abounding, that they have enough to spare the
Brute Creatures, so that we think we have set a sufficient mark of Cruelty upon
a Bull or a Boar, if we once say he is Man-Keen (a name derived from this sort
of men) I say, how many, though they came shamefully short in things of common
humanity, yet the very same men in matters of spiritual concernment are so
seemingly transported, that (if their own conceits may carry it) like Saul,
they are taller by the head (where those conceits are lodged) then others, and
indeed so much over and above Christians, that they fall much below Men. For
it is expected a man should first be honest, then holy; first just, and then
religious: and we must all make good our ground and right standing in Nature,
before we can advance to those higher Transcendencies of Religion; else'tis,
as if we should engraffe in the Sea without a Stock, or build in the Air
without a Foundation.

But without some better fruits meet for Repentance, the very Heathen will
arise and condemn such Christians: and then, Quanta erit damnatio a damnatis
damnario when Tire and Sidon, Sodom and Gomorrah shall give Judgment against
Jews (much more against Christians) how great is that Judgment!

Indeed St Paul says in one place, Hence forth 2 Cor. 5. 16.
know I no man after the flesh, and thence some take occasion to cut off all
Relations, as King and Subject, Father and Son, Brother and Brother, and the
like, merely as superfluities of the Flesh; and because (in their sense) we
must not know them, 'twill follow in time we may destroy them; and then (as
heretofore we have) so again we shall destroy we know not whom. Thus some, like
those Barbarians, do mistake Act. 28. 4.
a blessed Apostle, for a base Murderer.

But, as'tis in Amos, The Lion has gotten a Am. 3. 12.
piece of an Ear, so the People run away with a piece of the Apostle's
language, and will only hear him by parcels, and hot suffer him to speak out;
which if they would (as Amos his Shepherd takes the piece of an Ear out of
the mouth of the Lion) St Paul himself would soon rescue this piece of his
language out of the mouths of such Scripture-invaders. For do but compare St
Paul with himself; St Paul in the forecited place to the Corinth: with St Paul
to Philemon in the ib. 16. v.
verse aforesaid: Much more a Brother beloved to thee both in the Flesh, and in
the Lord: with St Paul Romans 10. 1
to the Romans, My hearts desire is for Israel, that ib. 9. 3.
they might be saved; and he could wish himself accursed for his Brethren and
Kinsmen according to the flesh.

These, and diverse other passages will acquit the Apostle from that horrid
meaning, wherein some mistake him. But when men have quite debaucht their own
Natures, no wonder they dare abuse the holy Scriptures. Whereby it falls out
amongst us too frequently, that, as the false, dead Child is cast into the lap
of the true Mother, these wrongful and rotten Conceptions of Men are daily
thrown into the bosom of the only true, and living Father.

But to pass on to a second Conclusion, in that Moses is here so earnest, and
daring to make Peace (for though *it was but yesterday that he Act. 26. 28 Ex. 2.
12.
had killed an Egyptian, whom he could not so hide in the Sand, but that, it
seems, *it was discovered; yet when he saw two of his Brethren strive, he must
adventure to show himself (as it is in the Text.) Hence we infer in the second
place:

Those sure are very contrary-minded to Moses, 2 Concl.
who instead of being Peacemakers, like him, make it their main business to
be Peacebreakers; with these two quarrelsome brethren, throwing about their
wildfire where ever they go, secretly scattering the seeds of Sedition,
infusing Discontents, and disloyal aversations into the hearts of the People,
and so compass Sea and Land to gain Proselytes for a new War. As if we had not
bled enough already, they deal with credulous people (who else would be quiet
in the Land) just as the Devil did by Job; -- verba Greg: Mor.
post vulnera, reserving the cutting words of his Wife's tongue, after all the
deep gashes his own hand had given him. So is it with us: we have been a long
time followed with breach upon breach, one Wound spreading and multiplying into
many, and yet still we hear most edged and dangerous words, notwithstanding we
have felt already such desperate blows. Certainly, this is one of the most
abominable things to God, to sow discord among brethren. But on the other Prove.
6. 16.
side, Behold, how good and joyful a thing it is for Ps. 133. 1.
brethren to dwell in unity! David himself admires it, but many amongst us
cannot endure it; but if City or Country should be on fire again, they would
cheer and warm themselves at that fire, and like Nero, sit and sing some of
Homers verses by it. Being much of the same mind with that other Monster,
Optime olere hostem, sed melius civem; the carcass of a Turk would smell well
Sueton. Vitell.
indeed, but the carcass of a Protestant far better.

Hence it is, that since the late Deluge of blood has been so newly abated,
whereas every good Christian, like Noah's Dove, should now be coming in with
the Olive leaf in their mouths, these, with the Raven, are still hovering
about, and croaking for more Carcases.

And the better to set forvvard this work of Destruction, as those Heathens
bedavvb'd their own Bodies with strange figures, to render them the more
formidable; so do these disgaize and blacken their Brethren with most ugly
shapes and representments, to make them the more odious and detestable. Or as
the Persecutors of old dealt with the poor Martyrs, because their Dogs would
not seize on them, while they looked like Men, 'twas but clapping a Bears skin
about them, and so bait them. Thus diveise good Protestants, who, in my soul I
think, would dye for Christ, are by way of Calumny, clad in the skins of Turks,
Popes, Anti Christ's, Baals, and Belials, that so under those ugly notions
(which their enemies please to put upon them) the base Ban-dog of the Rabble
may (when time serves) the more eagerly fasten on them, and tear them in pieces,

Upon the same account also it was, that in that decretory and concluding Fight
between Caesar and Pompey, when both Armies came closetogether, the Father
being on this side, the Son on that; the Uncle taking one part, the Nephew
another, and Brother fighting against Brother: Caesar (fearing lest at those
near approaches they might discern each other, and so give back and resuse to
join Battle) rides up and down, calling on his Soldiers, -- Miles serl
faciem, Soldiers, strike and foyn at the Face. Not but that L. Flor. l. 4. c.
2.
the breast or bowels were more mortal then the face; but because, it being
once mangled, they might not discern whom they killed, whether a Father, Son,
or Brother, and so might kill him the more undauntedly; which action of his the
Poet thus expresses, Luc^an.


Adversosque jubet ferro consunde^^ vultus. i. e. Dash and confound the known
Characters in the looks of your nearest Relatives, that so with less
relentings you may dispatch them. And in like manner, though not with our
swords, yet with our tongues and pens, what horrible gashes and deformities do
we engrave upon the face of that way of Others, (which we like not) lest
happily we might discern how little it differs from our Own. Thus as Hypocrites
disfigure themselves for self-affliction; these cruel ones disfigure Others
for their Destruction.

Tully likens the People to the Sea, which of it self would be smooth and calm
enough, but that the boisterous winds do so enrage and discompose it: and thus
the minds of Christians, after all these troubles, sure would be of themselves
Even, and quiet, but only the blustering breath, and tempestuous tongues of some
men do nothing else but ruffle and disturb them.

And this they will do: for as he in the Hieroglyphick, that had the Quiver of
Arrows, could say, Nequicquam, nisi emitterem, To what purpose, unless I spend
them? So those that abound in Malice, Pride, Self-willednesse, ill Principles,
and the like, and have their Quivers full of them: alas! they loose their
Talent of Mischief, unless they trade with it. And hence is it, that
Firebrands, Arrows, and Death are hurled about with such confidence, and all in
sport; indeed a mad-man's sport, so was it formerly accounted: but now adays
this and more is done in good sad earnest, by the sober Subverters of our
Kingdom, who very seriously contrive the Plat-forme of new Confusions, and
upon pretense of pulling down I know not what imaginary Babylon, (as I have
seen the blackest Chimney bedeckt with the goodliest Flowers) do indeed what
they can lay the foundations of another Babel.

Is this torrid Temper any part of that Fire, Luke 12. 49
which Christ came to send upon the Earth? no, I cannot believe it. Is this the
Gospel trumpet, which that Evangelicall Prophet speaks of, saying, Life up thy
voice like a Trumpet. I cannot believe Isa. 58. 1.
that neither. It Is confessed, they do lift up their voice like a Trumpet indeed,
but what? not to tell Jacob of his Sins, so much as his supposed Sufferings,
nor to reproove Transgressions, but rather to raise, and encourage Rebellion.

Truly one would think, that English Swords had now been sufficiently made
drunk with blood, and long before this, might all have been beaten into
Plow-shares; even those,

Qui niteant primo tantum mucrone cruenti, whose points have been only dipped;
much more some others, whose blades have been drencht in Blood. But if Swords
are not become Plowshares, nor Spears, Pruning-books, but remain Swords and
Spears still, then thank the Restlesnesse of those, who will not suffer it:
whose Tongue, as'tis the most sharp-edgedsword, so is it still unsheathed, and
runs riot every where, walking through and through the World; as he describes
that fierce Commander in the Head of his several Regiments:

-- Quacunque vagatur Sanguineum veluti quatiens Bellona Flagellum. i. e. Their
Tongue is an overflowing Scourge, wheresoever it lights, it draws blood.

O how contrary are these to Moses! He says here, Sirs, ye are Brethren: no,
say these, they are Tyrannical, Antichristian, any thing rather then Brethren
He says, Why do ye wrong one to another? not then positively determining,
which was the wrong-doer, till afterward he wronged him also who was the
Peacemaker: but these say peremptorily, Sirs, they are in the Wrong, and
doubtless you are in the Right, O why will ye take the least wrong from any
other? In a word, he finds men at emnity, and would gladly make them friends:
these find men at unity, and would fain make them enemies. So that however they
please to call others Anti christ's, themselves are plain Anti-Mose's, yea I
doubt, Anti-Prophets, and Anti-Apostles also: and indeed, like genuine Jews
(according to that character of theirs) they please not God, and are contrary
to all good men. For the Word is the Gospel of Peace, Christ is the Prince of
Peace, God is the God of Peace; but these are People that do err in their
hearts, the way of peace they have not known.

If such as these will needs be Preaching: (For I would not have you think, I
have been all this while speaking of lawful Preachers, I hope I have not; O
how beautiful are their feet, that bring glad tidings of salvation! and pity
it were, any of those beautiful feet should prove bloody feet.) Therefore I
say again, if such as those (I have here spoken of must needs be Preaching,
twere well they would think of such Subjects as these.

Study to be quiet. Follow the things that make for Peace. Obey them that have
the rule over you. Let nothing be done through strife etc.
In which kind should they make any adventures, yet such Subjects as these now
proposed, being so much out of their way, I suppose it would not be worth a
Sabbath days journey to go out of ours, to hear them. So much of the 2d
Conclusion.

And as from this Act of Moses here, we have raised (as to some contrary minded
ones) matter of just Reprehension; so

In the third place to All (the chief Magistrate 3. Concl.
especially) here is matter of Religious imitation. Reconcile persons at
variance, compose their differences, part their Quarrels, prevent their petty
strifes, and wranglings; these little Beginnings from growing to greater
Mischiefs. Do, as does Moses here, who was first their Peacemaker, then
afterward their Lawgiver.

This is a time of uniting; this days Solemnity calls for it: the Church now
comemorating that grand Union betwixt Heaven and Earth, in the Unity and
Community of All Saints. Not that we are for his Patrocinia Dominorum. One God,
One Lord. Dominus we own, and adore, but cannot tell what to do with that
Dominorum.

Angels themselves, though we know not of what Original Extraction, before, or
above us; yet, as the same Author elsewhere says, acknowledge themselves, in
respect of us, Consanguineos Bern.
in sanguine Redemptoris: there is Consanguinity betwixt them and us. And
Origin affirms Hom. 5. sup. Levit.
Quandam esse cognationem inter visibilia et invisibilia, Heaven and Earth are
a Kin (as it were) and the Kindred this day commemorated.

In this Chapter (where our Text is) we read how the Heavens were opened; and
in one of ib. 56. v.
the Lessons for this day, we have them opened Rev. 19. 11
again. And whereas in the Transfiguration of Christ, we find three together on
the Mountain, Moses, Elias, and Christ, a Congregation made up of Heaven and
Earth, two from Above, and one yet Below: so here in our Text we find the like,
though not just the same Congregation, Moses, St Stephen, and St Luke; one
penning, another pronouncing, the Third (we know not how) dictating unto him:
and this Congregation so also compounded as the former, one yet of the Church
Militant; the other two of the Church Triumphant.

Which several Openings in Heaven (as aforesaid) to receive and take in Earth:
and holy combinations on Earth, Earth (as it were) mixing with Heaven, me
thinks should much encourage us to the ready embracement of those uniting
Motions, which this Text affords us, especially at such a time as this;
concerning which (beside what has been already spoken in that regard) I shall
only add that of the Psalmist (which hints both the day, and its duty,) Sing
unto the Lord all ye Saints of his, and give thanks, etc. All Saints, except
some new ones, who (they say) care not much for any Singing, and so how they
may share in the Day I know not, but doubt they will not join in the Duty.

No question, but you (the Magistrate, to whom I speak) like Moses your
Pattern, may meet with some Egyptian, as well as Hebrew Transgressors, I mean
some Criminal Offenders; as well as other slight Quarrellers, and peevish
Contenders. If so, you must with Moses here, admonish the one, but smite the
other. When there is any Sin or Mischief going forward, Swearing, Drinking,
Whoring, contemning the Lord's day, despising the Lords worship, plotting
against the Lord's Anointed, and the Peace of this Kingdom, etc. All these are
mischievous Egyptians; and'tis high time then for Moses to show himself, and
not Himself only, but his Sword also.

Thus the Curser and Blasphemer were brought before Moses; and so the
Stick-gatherer on the Lev. 24. 11
Sabbath day was brought before Moses, and his bundle of Sticks (poor Sinner!)
turned into an Number. 15. 33.
beap of Stones. Which I observe, not that we Christians ought to mete by that
severe Jewish Measure, but this in general, you cannot likely over-doe in the
Concerns of God's Glory.

Only remember, as the Breast was Moses his part of the Sacrifice, so Prudence
should be yours. Ex. 29. 26.
Here you are in the midst of Dividings, (as where else would you not be so)
Ephraim against Manasseh, Manasseh against Ephraim, (but few I hope against
Judah) what should you do, but with St Stephen here in the Chapter, Look up
sted fastly into Heaven, and with Moses here in ib. 55.
the Text, look down directly upon your Duty, and doubt you not, but the Lord,
and his Anointed will direct and defend you. So much of the Third.

And now having said thus much to the Magistrate, me thinks somewhat more
should be spoken to the People.

Therefore in the Last place, let me persuade 4. Concl.
you all to these two Duties, First to Obedience toward Superiors. Secondly to
Love and Peaceablenesse amongst your Selves; the Former implied, here the Later
expressed; both I am sure claiming very properly and directly from the Text

First for Obedience. Without this there can be no Peace; and with this, there
could have been no Strise betwixt these two Brethren. For had they but obeyed
Moses, as they ought to have done, when he said, Sirs, why do ye wrong etc.
then there had been an end of the Quarrel. Peace is the Daughter of Obedience;
Obedience is the true Mother of Peace; which Peace cannot any way be broken,
but the Daughter must be dashed pieces against the Mother.

Thus it was with these two Combatants (which the Text presents us withal,)
before they had quite forfeited their Peace, they must needs bid adieu to their
Obedience. For Moses was now their Governor, deputed from God to deliver them
(as'tis in the verse foregoing,) and ib. 25. v.
though where he might have commanded, he only entreated a Peace, Sirs, why do
ye wrong? yet in the account of good Subjects, such Entreaties are the most
powerful Commands.

But we see, how little Moses is regarded betwixt them; the One (probably)
sleighting him, the Other thrusting him away, and threatening him: while he
(poor Prince) is fain to fly for it, the Field is kept, and the Quarrel
maintained, by the two Brethren, as well through their Disobedience to him, as
their Variance one with another. For had they been but loyal Subjects, and
hearkened to Moses, without more ado they head been loving Friends: but as the
fruit of Submission had been peace; so on the contrary nothing but Strife,
endless strife is the Product of Disobedience: which one disloyal act of
theirs, beside the particular trouble it cost them two, it (occasionally)
brought a general mischief upon the whole body of the Jews, by being one
visible means of retarding their Deliverance, yet forty years longer.

St Bernard vvriting to one of his Brother-Abbots Epist. 87.
who in his love to Obedience, had voluntarily quitted his place of being a
Governor, for that he smartly rebukes him; but in that he presently put
himself under the Power of another, he does as highly commend him, adding this
of his experience, Securius possum praeesse multis aliis, quam mihi soli etc.
He could with far more ease Qui se sibi magistrum constituit, stulto se disci.
pulum subdit. ibid.
and safety dispose of others then himself, much more be at others Disposal
then his own, as he intimates in that Epistle.

O there is a great deal of Sweetness in the Conscience of Obedience: do but
taste and see. Certainly there is none but may perceive it, except those, who
never did, never will taste, or make Trial of it.

The sickly Woman in S. Mark, touches not Mar. 5. 28.
the very body of Christ, yet by touching his clothes only, (which do touch his
Body) she is healed. And we that live in this sickly Haemorroisse Kingdom of
Ours, though by our submission to our lawful King (and all those under him)
don't just touch the very top of Christ's scepter, yet mediately we do, by
touching that, which does touch it, and is in immediate subordination unto it:
and would we all touch but so, we might soon be healed. So that Obedience is
no^ only a pleasing, but a healing Virtue.

All is not, cannot, ought not to be, as every one would have it; what then?
must People repine, wrangle, fight for it, rather then be debarred of their own
peculiar fancies? God forbid. Remember at the rebuilding of the Temple, some
joyed, Ezr. 3. 12.
others wept, yet such was the Obedience of them all, they don't offer to
remove, or hinder the laying of one Stone, whereby to disturb the Building. So
much for Obedience.

Secondly for Peaceablenesse. And here one would think, that few Arguments
might serve to persuade men to be happy. However, let us First look upon the
Danger. 2ly the Deformity of its contrary, that so the mischief and ugliness
of Strife, may, if not enhance, yet give a due worth to the Blessings and
Beauties of Peace.

1. First the Danger of this kind of Strivings. What said one? Vincere fratrem,
non interficere volui. I will only conquer my Brother, I don't mean to kill
him. Indeed, it is so at first, men strive only for Mastery; yet rather then
they will not master, they will Kill and murder, And when once it comes to
that, -- Iusque datum sceleri, that kind of legal Killing, or (as the Psalmist
has it) imagining, (yea and doing) Mischief by a law: then we shall find, Non
solu^ cum Rhodiis, sed cum Artibus bellum geri, the War is not only levied
against men, but against good manners, against good Learning, and Religion too.
Inso much that however we may slight it, yet in God's account (who best knows
the weight of his own Judgments) a three-months War, especially if in the 2 Samuel 24. 33.
bowels of the Kingdom) is put in the Counterballance to weigh against a
seven years Famine.

And sure we, that now but seem to behold the Ghastly looks of one year, may
thereby think how it would be, should we feel the hard pinches of a seven
years famine, and thence imagine what has been, and what would be a seven,
and seven years war.

It Is recorded of the Civil Wars in France, that they produced 30000 witches,
and above a Million of Atheists, what the Effects of ours has been upon us in
particular we know not, but it is much to be feared, there has been a greater
increase of such Monsters, then good Christians. For as it is with that of
Nilus, so with those Overflowings Diod. Sic.
of War; these are the vermin, and half-made Creatures, that use to Crawle out
of the Slime and Mud of those Over flowings. And generally we find that is
shrewd Proverb, When War begins, Hell opens; for be sure then some Customers
will be coming; but especially, if they be Civil Wars: those being Hell's huge
Fair days, when others are but ordinary Markets.

I have heard indeed, how that Woolves, if they want Prey, will devour one
another. But we are in no such want, (I wish we were,) nor are likely to be,
so long as the Turk, that circumcised Heathen defies all the armies of the
living God. There we may go, and show our Zeal, Skill, and Courage, and be
confident we fight against Antichrist, and (if not the Whore, yet) the great
Ravisher of Christendom. But what says old Galdas? Englishmen are strong at
home, but little doers abroad. If we should adventure upon another Grapple
within our selves, I much fear the Moral of that Fable, which tells us, that,
while two smaller Birds are tugging and pecking one another, down comes a
third, that is greater, and at one swoop both are taken. Therefore as Origin
observes of the Dove, when ever she drinks at the rivers, she looks not only
up into the Air, but down into the Water, and even there does plainly discern
the shadow of the hawk approaching. And if we will be sipping at the Waters of
Strife, and Bitterness, let us look well about us, and we cannot but see, not
mere shadows, but many substantial enemies, without us, and within us, both
hovering over us, and ready to prey upon us, and devour us. And hovvever the
Israelites may differ (as here they do) I am confident these Egyptians will
never quarrel, unless it be which of us shall afford them the first, and
fairest Morsel. There Is the Danger.

2. Now for the Deformity of this Striving. As the danger thereof (we see) is
great, so were there no danger at all, yet its mere Deformities are so
exceeding great, that to all, who have but their Senses exercised, it must
needs be very odtous, and abominable.

None ever hated his own flesh, says the Apostle: and is it not a dreadful
spectacle to see a Ephesians. 5. 29.
man catch on this hand, and snatch on that, and tear off the flesh of his own
Arms? Do but look again into the Text, and you will go near to see as ugly a
sight, as that is. Behold here two Brethren, hewn out of the same Rock, derived
from the same Fountain of Israel; so that, if one had said, Thou art flesh of
my flesh, the other might have replied, And thou art bone of my bone. These two
in a strange Land, under hard labor, in the midst of Enemies, and in the
presence of Moses, a man sent from God to be their Deliverer, yet for all these
outward Circumstances, and obliging Relations, they can a while, thus to
manage an inward Quarrel, and so fall on, tugge and tear one another, that
is, their very selves, as if both had not been their own, but each the flesh of
some other; and all this done in despite of Moses, who stood by unregarded.

This I am sure, and (in some regard) more then this has been our Condition.
For albeit Moses here saw this sad Combat, yet it is likely, the Egyptians did
not; which if they had, Moses durst not, because of his yesterdaies
slaughtering one of their Brethren (as before was observed) but suppose they
had stood by, and beheld the Conflict, O what sport and rejoicing had this been
unto them!

Now this is the transcendent and peculiar unhappiness of these our Duellings,
we perform them, not only in sight and despite of this our Moses, (who may
fitly be so called, not so much because he was drawn, as that hestrangely drew
us out of the waters) but also in the presence of the Egyptians, those many
enemies round about us, who will most gladly make us a Ring, so we will but
make them Sport, especially if it be such a sport, as Abner's was, Come let the
Young 2 Samuel 2, 14.
men arise, and play before us:

I neverlov'd to see the Butting (some call it the Playing) of Sheep. But to
behold a Flock well fed, and safely guarded by their own Shepherd, I say, to
seethem run, and dash one against another, while a company of woolves, and
fleering Foxes look on, and laugh; this me thinks is one of the most unpleasing
sights in the World. And since there are seven things, which are abominable to
the Lord, this (I am persuaded) may be the eighth thing, which his Soul hates.

Which also is the more hateful, because mostly it is your smaller matters
which chiefly uphold and maintain these vast distances. We agree well about
Judgment, and Mercy-matters, and only differ in Mint and Cummin-concernments.
As if Abraham and Lot should be well accorded about the whole Countries they
were to go into, and only wrangle about their several Inches.

And here (besides diverse other dismal consequences) I might speak, and show
how this Disuniting weakness and unravells us: as it is observed when those two
huge Armies of Hannibal and T. Live.
Scipio came near to join Battle; Hannibal's Forces being rakt and pitckt up
from several Nations, and parts of the World, the Showt which they gave upon
the Onset, was but ragged and contemptible, whereas Scipio's Soldiers, being
all Romans, having all the same language, their Showt being uniforme, was more
Majestic and Formidable. I leave the History to your Application.

But (to omit several other Disswasives of that nature) me thinks, a Sin that
is so much its own Punishment, as is Contention, should in it self have Amulet
enough to unpoyson the minds of men, and dis^enamour them of those other super*
added Deformities, which now we are speaking of, (for if there be any Hell
above ground, sure this Strife and Contention is part of the Suburbs thereof,)
yet take it with all its faults, some are still most paffionately in love with
it; but especially the wrong-doers, as we say of some, they never forgive, whom
once they injure; and here (if we observe) he that did the wrong, ib. 27. v.
thrusts Moses away, and talks of killing, when Moses speaks of reconciling;
Will thou kill me, as thou did the Egyptian? indeed it is Death to some to
hear talk of Peace. As Millers and Sailers, with other such, that live by the
winds, a perpetual Calm would undo them.

Give such as those Sea-room enough, and then they are safe, whereas if they
come near firm ground, and are once cast upon Shore, they split, and are
broken to pieces.

The Disciples of Christ (we read) were once Mat. 14. 27.
afraid of their own Master, as if they had seen a Spirit: So many when they
see Peace a coming toward them, are afraid, and think it is an Apparition. But
what Christ said to them, his Majesty has been pleased to say to us, Be not
afraid, behold it is I.

In some it is probable the fear of Restitution may lie like a Lion in the Way.
And indeed should many amongst us repent, but at half that rate, as the little
Publican did, and restore but twofold, (yea but the same again) for his
fourfold, I doubt many that are great ones now, would soon be as little in
Estate, as Zacheus was in Stature, and they would quickly repent of such a
Repentance. Therefore that the way of Peace may be straw'd with Flowers, as
well as paved with Marble, so that all may be persuaded to come, and walk in
it, Behold, here are no severe exhausting Satisfactions, no grievous, and
ruining Restituions, no harsh and cruel Compositions.

As for the (...) here, that must be let alone for ever. Be of good cheer, if
thy sins are forgiven thee, thy wrongs are. Only after all the Injuries on one
side, and the Acts of Kindness on the other, let us be willing to be friends
with our King and Country, and those, whom we have so much wronged; if they
have wronged us, in forgiving us, O forgive them that wrong.

St Austin observes, that whereas the other Creatures were made two and two,
God created Man single, there assigning the reason thereof, De uno multitudo
propagatur, ut in mult is unitas Civ. D. l. 22. c. 26.
servaretur. Thus that we might be all taught of God to love one another; God
would at first give us all one Spring head (as it were,) that so we might the
more undividedly stream along in the same Channel. God is the God of Love and
Peace: be perfwaded to it for God's sake.

And Christ, though content to be crucified on Mount Calvary, yet while he was
living (as may be observed) he was most delighted to be in Mount Olives. He
loses his life in the place of Skuls, an Emblem of War, (where, the truth
is, he is still crucified,) but he leads his Life most commonly in a place of
Olives, an Emblem of Peace. There he prays, there he preaches, there he
walks, contemplates, and watches, does all but dye, that was reserved for Mount
Calvary, yea thence he ascends up into Heaven: and as Peace Act. 1. 12.
was one of the last legacies his Lips bequeathed us, when he dyed; so Mount
Olives (the dwelling place of Peace) was the last piece of Earth his blessed
Foot touched, when he ascended.

Remember Christ is the great lover of Peace; Do it for Christ's sake. But if
neither for God's sake, nor Christ's, yet some perhaps may be moved for their
Countries sake.

Imagine you sawthis native Kingdom of ours like another Job, not now upon,
but newly crept off the Dunghill, and thus bespeaking you, as there he does his
Visitants, Have pity upon me, O Job. 19. 21
my Friends, have pity, for the hand of the Lord has touched me. Indeed the
hand of the Lord has not only touched, but a longtime lain heavy upon this Land
of ours; and if after all, we have yet no pity, we are far more miserable
comforters then ever Jobs were. For if we observe, they seem to have some kind
of sympathizings with his Sorrow. He rents his Mantle, and they rent theirs, he
shaves his head, they throw Dust upon theirs. If he sits upon the Ground, so do
they; and their Sorrows maintain as long, and as sad a silence as his do. Yea
as in most things they did with him, Job. 2.
so in one passage they out-did him. For whereas we find not as yet that Job
had shed one Tear for all his sufferings, it is said of them, They lift up ib.
12. v.
their voice, and wept.

O be not more remorselsse then were Job's friends: Do it for your Countrey's
sake.

But if the present age prevail nothing, yet have some regard, and pity upon
Posterity. Let not the little ones (as soon as born) be taken, and dashed
against the stones (as it were) by being taught such hard, and unrelenting
Lessons, and exposed unto such harsh, and ruthlesse principles, as the men of
this generation have proceeded upon.

I have heard of an ingenious Limmer, who mostlively represented a dying piece
in this manner A goodly Matron, mortally wounded, at the Storming of a City, as
she lay bleeding, and expiring of her Wound, behold, her helpless hungry
Infant, comes crawling toward her Breasts, while the dying Mother looks wistly
and carefully upon it, Ne sanguis metuens pro lacte bibatur, as if fearing,
(lest the hungry Babe should suck down Blood in stead of Milk.

How far this sad Resemblance might (not long since) be suitable to our Church
and Kingdom, I leave to your Consideration. Only take heed (I speak it to all
unpeaceable, implacable Spirits) that the Children yet unborn, in lieu of the
innocent, wholesome milk of true Christian Principles, be not betrayed to Blood
by your Examples.

I do not despair, but that by these poor, yet wellmeant Motives, some
Salamander may be enticed out of his beloved fire, and that we Christian
Brethren will regard these Peace-offers of Moses, although the Jewish ones did
not.

But what need we a further wast of Words to a Christian Audience, when one
Quirites has pacified an Heathen Tumult?

Men and Brethren, (that is only our Quirites,) what have, we so soon forgotten
the miseries of War, that we must already be labored, and persuaded to Peace?
Need there be a Law enacted, That every one shall eat, when he is hungry, and
drink when he is thirsty? Need any of us be entreated to sleep securely, live
plentifully, eat the fat, and drink the sweet of a good Land; sit quietly under
our own Vine by day, and rest undisturbedly in our own Beds at night?

What, is it indeed so much sweetness and pleasure for me, to eat my own
morsel with a trembling hand, and drink of my own Cup, as Belshazar did of
another, with a perpetual shaking, because of the sad, and frightfull Alarms
of War?

Well, if we must be argued into Peace, and men will not be happy, unless they
see good reason for it: at present, I shall seek no farther than the Text,
Sirs, ye are Brethren.

Were are they Hebrews? so are we Christians. Were they in the midst of
enemies? are not we? Had they a Peace making Moses? blessed be God so have we:
and if they are all Brethren, we much more. (...), Co-uterini, such as have
lain in the same womb of this our Church, drawn at the same Breasts of
Consolation, (both the Testaments,) have been nursed up with the same sincere
milk of Gods word, and a good Chatechisme.

And as we have been brought up on the same Knees, and hung upon the same
Breasts of one common Mother; so we hope all to be received into the Bosom of
one common Father.

What says St Paul? There Is one Body, one Spirit, Ephesians. 4. 4
one Hope of our Calling, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father
of all.

Now if after all these ones, we must still be two, I shall even leave you, as
Moses did them. Only remember this, the time may come, that what Moses here
speaks to us all, we may one day sadly repeat to each other, saying, Sirs, we
were Brethren, why would we do such wrong one to another?

THE END

