A DISCOVRSE OF THE ORIGINAL AND Fundamental Cause of Natural, Customary,
Arbitrary, Voluntary and Necessary WAR.

With the MYSTERY of Invasive WAR.

That Ecclesiastical Prelates, have always been subject to Temporal
Princes. And that the Pope had never any lawful power in England, either in
Civil, or Ecclesiastical business, after such time, as Britain was won
from the Roman Empire.

By Sir Walter Rawleigh Knight.

LONDON, Printed by T. W. for Humphrey Moseley and are to be Sold at the
Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1650.

A Discourse of the Original and fundamental cause of Natural, Customary,
Arbitrary, Voluntary, and necessary war, with the misery of invasive war.
That Ecclesiastical Prelates, have always been subject to Temporal Princes,
and that the Pope had never any lawful power in England, either in Civil, or
Ecclesiastical, business, after such time, as Britain was won from the
Roman Empire.
THe ordinary Theme and Argument of History is War, which may be defined the
exercise of violence under Sovereign Command, against withstanders force,
Authority and resistance, being the essential parts thereof, violence limited
by authority is sufficiently distinguished from Robbery and the like outrages:
yet consisting in relation toward others, It necessarily requires a
supposition of resistance, whereby the force of War becomes different from the
violence inflicted upon Slaves, or yiedling Malefactors; as for Arms,
Discipline, and whatsoever else belongs to the making of War prosperous, they
are only considerable in degree of perfection, since naked savages fighting
disorderly with stones, by appointment of their Commanders, may truly and
absolutely be said to War.

Nevertheless, it is true, that as the Beasts are armed with fierce teeth,
paws, horns, and other bodily instruments of much advantage against unweaponed
men, so has reason taught man to strengthen his hand with such offensive
Arms, as no creature else can well avoid or possibly resist. And it might
seem happy, if the sword, the Arrow, the Gun, with many terrible Engines of
death, could be wholly employed in the exercise of that Lordly rule, which the
Lord of all has given to mankind over the rest of living things. But since in
humane reason there has no means been found of holding all mankind at peace
within it self: It is needful that against the wit and subtilty of man, we
oppose not only the bruit force of our bodies, (wherein many Beasts exceed us,)
but helping our strength with art and wisdom, strive to excel our enemies in
those points wherein man is excellent over other Creatures.

The necessity of War, which among humane Actions is the most lawless, has
some kind of affinity, and near resemblances with the necessity of Law. For
there were no use at all, either of War or of Law; If every man had prudence to
conceive how much of right were due both to and from himself, and were withal
so punctually just, as to perform what he knew requisite, and to rest
contented with his own. But seeing that no conveyance of Land can be made so
strong, by any skill of Lawyers, with multiplicity of clauses, and provisoes,
That it may be secure from contentious Avarice, and the malice of false seeming
Justice: It is not to be wondered, that the great Charter, Genesis Cap. 1. ver.
28.
whereby God bestowed the whole earth upon Adam, And confirmed it unto the Sons
of Noah, being as breife in word, as large in effect, has bred much quarrel
of interpretation.

Surely howsoever the Letter of that Donation, may be unregarded by the most of
men, yet the sense thereof is so imprinted in their hearts, And so passionatly
embraced by their greedy desires, As if every one laid claim for himself unto
that, which was conferred upon all.

This appeared in the Gauls, who falling upon Italy under their Captain
Brennus, told the Roman Ambassadors plainly that prevalent arms were as good
as any title, and that valiant men might account to be their own as much as
they could get; That they wanting Land therewith to sustain their people, And
the Tuscanes, having more then enough, It was their meaning to take what they
needed by strong hand, if it were not yielded quietly. Now if it be well
affirmed by Lawyers, that there is no taking of possession more just, then In
vacuum venire, to enter upon Land unhabited, As our Countrymen have lately done
in the Summer Islands: Then may it be inferred, that this demand of the Gauls,
held more of reason then could be discerned at the first view.

For if the title of occupiers be good in a Land unpeopled, why should it be
bad accounted in a Country Peopled over thinly? should one family or one
thousand hold possession of all the Southern, undiscovered continent, because
they had seated themselves in Nova Guiana, or about the Straits of Magalane?
why might not the like be done in Africa, in Europe, or in Asia? If this were
most absurd to imagine, Let then any man's wisdom determine by lessening the
Territory, and increasing the number of Inhabitants, what proportion is
requisite to the peopling of a Region in such manner, That the Land shall be
neither too narrow for those whom it feeds, nor capable of a greater
multitude; Until this can be concluded and agreed upon, one maine and
fundamental cause of the most grievous War that can be imagined, is not like
to be taken from the Earth. It were perhaps enough in reason to succor with
victuals and other helps, a vast multitude compelled by necessity to seek a
new seat, or to direct them unto a Country able to receive them: But what
shall persuade a mighty Nation to travail so far by Land, or Sea, over
Mountains, Deserts, And great Rivers, with their Wives and Children, when they
are, or think themselves powerful enough to serve themselves nearer hand, and
enforce others into the Labor of such a Journey? I have briefly showed in an
other work, General History Lib. 2. Cap. 2. 28. S. 4. T. 3.
that the miseries accompaning this kind of War, are most extreme. For as much
as the Invaders cannot otherwise be satisfied then by rooting out or expelling
the Nation upon which they fall.

And although the uncertainty of tenure, by which all worldly things are held,
minister very unpleasant meditation; yet is it most certain that within 1200.
years last past, all or the most of Kingdoms to us known, have thoroughly
felt the calamities of such forcible trasplantations, being either over whelmed
by new Collonies that fell upon them, or driven, as one wave is driven by an
other, to seek new seats, having lost their own.

Our Western parts of Europe indeed have cause to rejoice, and give praise to
God, for that we have been free about 600 years, from such Inundations, As were
those of the Goths, Humes, and Vandalls, yea from such as were those of our
own Ancestors, the Saxons, Danes, and Normans, But howsoever we have together
with the feeling, lost the very memory of such wretchedness, as our
Forefathers endured by those Wars, of all other the most cruel. Yet are there
few Kingdoms in all Asia that have not been ruined by such overflowing
multitudes within the same space of these last six hundred years.

It were an endless labor to tell how the Turks, and Tartars falling like
Locusts upon that quarter of the world, having spoiled every where, and in most
places Eaten up all, as it were by the roots, Consuming together with the
Princes formerly Reigning and a world of people, the very names, language and
memory of former times. Suffice it that when any Country is overlaid by the
multitude which live upon it, there is a natural necessity compelling it to
disburthen it self and lay the Load upon others, by right or wrong. For (to
omit the danger of Pestilence often visitting those which live in a throng)
there is no misery that urges men so violently unto desperate courses, and
contempt of death, as the Torments or Threats of famine: whereof the War that
is grounded upon this general remediless necessity, may be termed the
general, the Remediless, or the necessary War. First War.
Against which that our Country is better provided (as may be showed hereafter)
Then any civil Nation to us known, we ought to hold it a great blessing of
God, And carefully retain the advantages which he has given us now.

Besides this remediless or necessary War, Second War.
which is frequent, There is a War voluntary, and Customeable, unto which the
offering party is not compelled. And this Customary War, which troubles all
the world, gives little respite or breathing time of peace, does usually
borrow pretense from the necessary to make it self appear more honest. For
Covetous Ambition thinking all too little which presently it has, supposes it
self to stand in need of all which it has not.

Wherefore if two bordering Princes have their Territory meeting on an open
Champaigne, the more mighty will continually seek occasion, to extend his
limits unto the further border thereof.

If they be divided by Mountains they will fight for the mastery of the
passages of the Tops, And finally for the Towns that stand upon the roots.

If Rivers run between them, they contend for the Bridges, And think
themselves not well assured until they have fortified the further banck.

Yea the Sea it self must be very broad, barren of fish, and void of little
Islands interjacent, else will it yield plentiful argument of quarrel to the
Kingdoms which it severeth.

All this proceeds from desire of having, and such desire from fear of want.

Hereunto may be added, That in these Arbitrary Wars, there is commonly to be
found, some small measure of necessity, though it seldom be observed, perhaps,
because it extends not so far, as to become public. For where many younger
sons of younger Brothers, have neither Lands nor means to uphold themselves,
and where many men of Trade or useful possessions, know not how to bestow
themselves for lack of Employments, there can it not be avoided that the whole
body of the State (howsoever otherwise healthfully disposed) should suffer
anguish by the greivance of those ill affected Members.

It suffices not that the Country has wherewith to sustain even more then
live upon it, if means be wanting, whereby to drive convenient participation of
the general store unto a great number of well deservers.

In such cases there will be complaining, Commiseration, and finally murmur (as
men are apt to lay the blame of those evils whereof they know the ground upon
public misgovernment) unless order be taken for some redress by the sword of
Injury, supposed to be done by Foreigners, whereto the discontented sort give
commonly a willing ear. And in this case I think it was, that the great
Cardinal Francis de Amiens who governed Spain in the minority of Charles the
fifth, hearing tell that 8000. Spaniards were lost in the enterprise of Algier,
under Don Diego de Vera, made light of the matter: Affirming, that Spain stood
in need of such evacuation, foreign War serving (as King Fardinard had been
wont to say) like a potion of Rubarbe, to wash away Choler from the body of the
Realm.

Certainly among all Kingdoms of the earth, we shall scarce find any that
stands in less need then Spain, of having the veins opened by an enemies
sword: The many Colonies which it sends abroad so well preserving it from
swelling humors.

Yet is not that Country thereby dispeopled, but mainteineth still growing upon
it (like a tree, from whose plants to fill a whole Orchard,) have bin taken as
many, as it can well nourish.

And to say what I think, if our King Edward the third, had prospered in his
French Wars and peopled with English the Towns which he won, As he began at
Calice driving out the French, the Kings his Successors, holding the same
course would by this time have filled all France, with our Nation, without any
notable emptying of this Island.

The like may be affirmed upon like suspicion of the French in Italy, or almost
of any others, as having been verified by the Saxons in England, and Arabians
in Barbary; What is then become of so huge a multitude as would have over
spread a great part of the Continent? surely they dyed not of old age, nor went
out of the world by the ordinary ways of nature. But famine and contagious
diseases, the sword, the halter, and a thousand mischiefs have Consumed them.

Yea many of them perhaps were never borne: for they that want means to nourish
Children will abstain from marriage, or (which is all one) they cast away
their bodies upon rich old women: or otherwise make unequal or unhealthy
Matches for gain, or because of poverty they think it a blessing, which in
nature is a curse, to have their wives barren.

Were it not thus, Arithmeticall progression might easily demonstrate, how fast
mankind would increase in multitude, overpassing as miraculous (though indeed
natural) that example of the Israelites, who were multiplied in 215. years,
from seaventie unto 600000. able men. Hence we may observe, that the very
propagation of our kind, has with it a strong insensive, even of those daily
Wars, which afflict the earth. And that Princes excusing their drawing the
sword by devised pretenses of necessity, speak often more truly then they are
aware, there being indeed a great necessity, though not apparent, as not
extending to the generality, but resting upon private heads.

Wherefore other cause of War merely natural there is none, then want of
room upon the earth, which pinching a whole nation, begets the remediless
War, vexing only some number of particulars, It draws on the Arbitrary: But
unto the kindling of Arbitrary War, there are many other motives. The most
honest of these is, fear of harm and prevention of danger. This is just and
taught by nature, which labors more strongly in removing evil, then in
pursuit of what is requisite unto her good. Nevertheless, because War
cannot be without mutual violence: It is manifest, that allegation of danger
and fear serves only to excuse the suffering part, the wrong doer being
carried by his own will. So the War thus caused proceeds from nature, not
altogether but in part.

A second motive is, Revenge of injury sustained; This might be avoided if all
men could be honest; otherwise not. For Princes must give protection to their
Subjects and adherents, when worthy occasion shall require it, else will they
be held unworthy, and unsufficient: then which there can be to them no greater
peril.

Wherefore Caesar in all deliberations where difficulties and dangers threatened
on the one side, and the opinion that there should be in him Parum Praesidii
little safeguard, for his friends, was doubted on the other side, always chose
rather to venture upon extreamities then to have it thought that he was a weak
protector. Yea by such maintenance of their dependants, Many Noblemen in all
forms of Government, and in every man's memory have kept themselves in
greatness with little help of any other virtue. Neither have mere Tyrants
been altogether careless to mainetaine free from oppression of strangers,
those Subjects of theirs, whom themselves have most basely esteemed and used,
as no better then slaves. For there is no master that can expect good service
from his bondslaves, if he suffer them to be beaten and daily ill entreated by
other men: To remedy this, it were needful that Justice should every where be
duly ministered as well to strangers as to Denizons. But contrariewise we find,
that in many Countries (as Muscovie and the like) the Laws or the
Administration of them are so far from giving satisfaction, as they fill the
general voice with complaint and exclamation.

Sir Thomas Moore said, (whether more pleasantly or truly I know not) that a
trick of Law had no less power then the wheel of fortune, to lift men up, or
cast them down.

Certainly with more patience men are wont to endure the losses that befell
them by mere casualty, then the damages which they sustain by means of
injustice, Because these are accompanied with sense of indignity, whereof the
other are free: when Robbers break open a man's house and spoil it, they tell
the owner plainly that money they want, and money they must have: But when a
Judge corrupted by reward, hatred, favor, or any other passion, takes both
house and Land from the rightful owner, And bestows them upon some friend of
his own, or of his favorite, He says, that the rules of Justice will have it
so, that it is the voice of the Law, the Ordinance of God himself. And what
else does he herein, then by a kind of Circumlocution tell his humble
suppliants that he holds themselves Idiots or base wretches not able to get
releife; must it not astonish and vex withal, any man of a free spirit when he
sees none other difference between the Judge and the Thief, then in the
manner of performing their exploits? as if the whole being of Justice consisted
in point of formality. In such case an honest Subject will either seek remedy
by ordinary courses, or awaite his time until God shall place better men in
office, and call the oppressors to account. But a stranger will not so, he has
nothing to do with the affairs of Barbary, neither concerns it him what officer
be placed or displaced in Taradante, or whether Mulisidian himself can contemn
the Kingdom, his Ship and goods are unjustly taken from him, and therefore he
will seek leave to right himself if he can, and return the injury ten fold,
upon the whole Nation from which he received it. Truth it is, that men are
sooner weary to dance attendance at the Gates of foreign Lords, then to tarry
the good leisure of their own Magistrates; Nor do they bear so quietly the
loss of some parcel confiscated abroad, as the greater detriment which they
suffer by some prowling Vice Admiral, Customer, or public minister at their
return.

Whether this proceed from the Reverence which men yield unto their proper
Governor, I will not here define, or whether excess of trouble in following
their causes far from home, or whether from despair of such redress, as may
be expected in their own Country, in the hoped reformations of disorders, or
whether from their more unwillingnesse to disturb the Domestical then the
foreign quiet by loud exclamations, or whether perhaps their not daring to
mutter against the Injustice of their own Rulers, though it were shameful,
for fear of faring worse, and of being punished for Scandalum Magnatum: As
slanderers of men in authority, wheresoever it comes; As there can be but one
Allegiance, so men are apt to serve no more then they needs must. According to
that of the Slave in an old Comoedie: Non sum servus publicus, my Master bought
me for himself, and I am not every man's man.

And this opinion, there is no Prince unwilling to mainetaine in his own
Subjects. Yea such as are most Rigorous to their own, Do never find it safe
to be better unto strangers, because it were a matter of dangerous Consequence,
that the People should think all other Nations to be in better case then
themselves. The breife is, Oppression in many places wears the Robes of
Justice, which Domineering over the naturalls, may not spare strangers, And
strangers will not endure it, but cry out unto their own Lords for releife by
the Sword. Wherefore the Motive of Revenging Injuries is very strong, though it
merely consist in the will of man, without any inforcement of nature.

Yet the more to quicken it, there is usually concurrent therewith, A hopeful
expectation of gain. For of the amends recovered, Little or nothing returns to
those that had suffered the wrong, but commonly all runs into the Princes
Coffers. Such examples as was that of our late Queen Elizabeth of most famous
memory, are very rare. Her Majesty when the goods of our English Merchants
were attached by the Duke of Alva, Anno Domini 1569.
in the Netherlands, And by King Philip in Spain, arrested, Likewise the goods
of the Low dutch here in England, that amounted unto a greater value: Neither
was she contented that her Subjects should right themselves as well as they
could, upon the Spaniards by Sea, But having brought King Philip within four
or five years, Anno. 1573.
to better reason, though not so far as to Restitution; She satisfied her own
Merchants to the full, for all their losses out of the Dutchmens goods, and
gave back to the Duke what was remaining. This among many thousand of her
Royal Actions, that made her glorious in all Nations, though it caused even
strangers in their speech and writing to extol her Princely Justice, to the
skies: yet served it not as a President for others of less virtue to follow.

It were more costly to take pattern from those Acts, which gave Immortal
renown to that great Queen, then to imitate the thirsty dealing of that
Spanish Duke, in the self same business, who kept all to his own use, or his
Masters, Restoring to the poor Dutch Merchants not one penny. It falls out
many times indeed, that a Prince is driven to spend far more of his treasure in
punishing by War the wrongers of his people, Then the loss of his People did
amount unto. In such cases it is reason, that he satisfy himself, and let the
people (whereto commonly they are apt) rest contented with the sweetness of
revenge.

But when victory makes large amends for all, it Royally becomes a Prince, to
satisfy those for whose satisfaction he undertook the War. For besides the
purpose it were now, to teach how victory should be used, or the gains thereof
Communicated to the general content. This being only brought into show, that
the profit thereby gotten, is a stirring provocation to the redress of
Injuries by the sword. As for the redress of Injuries done unto Princes
themselves, it may conveniently (though not always, for it were miserable
injustice to deny leave to Princes of mainetaining their own honor, be
referred unto the third motive of Arbitrary Wars, which is mere Ambition.

This is and ever has been that true cause of more Wars, then have troubled
the world upon all other occasions whatsoever, though it least partake of
nature, or urgent necessity of State. I call not here alone by the name of
Ambition, that vain glorious humor, which openly professes to be none other,
and vaunts it self as an imperial virtue (for the examples are not many of
that kind:) But where occasion of War is greedily sought, or being very
slight is gladly entertained, for that increase of Dominion is hoped thereby,
we should rather impute the War to the scope at which it aims: then to any
idle cause pretended.

The Romans feared lest they of of Carthage by winning Messana should soon get
the mastery over all Sicilie, And have a fair entrance at pleasure into Italy:
Which to prevent they made a War upon the Carthaginians; this fear I call
Ambition, Had they not trusted in their own Arms, hoping thereby to enlarge
their empire, but being weaker, and more afraid indeed, they would have feared
less.

For Color of this War they took the Mamertines, A Crewe of Thieves, and
cut throats into their protection; Whom being their associats they must needs
defend. But had not their Ambition been mightier then their Justice, they would
have endeavored to punish these Mamertines, and not to protect them.
Innumerable are the like examples: Know ye not (said Ahab) that Ramoth Gilead
is ours? He knew this before, and was quiet enough, till opinion of his forces,
made him look into his right. And of this nature (though some worse then other
in degree) are claims of old forgotten tribute or of some acknowledgements due
perhaps to the Ancestors of a vanquished King, And long after challenged by the
Heirs of the Conqueror, broken titles to Kingdoms or Provinces, Mainetenance
of friends, and Partisans, pretenced wrongs, and indeed, whatsoever it pleased
him to allege that thinks his own sword sharpest: But of old time (perhaps
before Helen of Greece, was borne) Women have been the common Argument of these
Tragedies. As of late Ages in our parts of the world, since the names of Guelf,
and Ghibeline, were heard, The right of St. Peter, that is the Popes Revenews
and Authority.

This last and other of the same kind I know not, how patiently they will
endure to be ranged among Ambitions quarrels: For the War that has such
foundation, will not only be reputed, free from worldly Ambition, Just, and
honorable, But holy, and meritorious: having thereto belonging Pardon of Sins,
Release from Purgatory, And the promises of the life to come, As may be seen in
the Popes Crociata.

The truth is, that the Saracenes, affirm no less of the Wars, which either
they make against Christians, or which arise between themselves from difference
of Sect. And if every man had his due, I think the honor of devising first
this Doctrine: That Religion ought to be enforced upon men by the sword, would
be found appertaining to Mahomet the false Prophet, sure, it is, that he and
the Caliphes following him obtained thereby in a short space a mighty Empire,
which was in fair way to have enlarged, until they fell out among themselves.
Not for the Kingdom of Heaven, But for Dominion upon Earth. And against these
did the Popes, when their authority grew powerful in the West incite the
Princes of Germany, England, France, and Italy. Their chief enterprise was
the Recovery of the Holy Land. In which worthy, but extremely difficult
action, it is lamentable to Remember, what abundance of noble Blood has been
shed, with very small benefit unto the Christian State.

The Recovery of Spain (whereof the better part was then in Bondage of the
Saracens,) had been a work more availeable to the men of Europe, more easily
mainetained with supply, more aptly serving to advance any following enterprise
upon Kingdoms further removed, more free from hazard, and Requiring less
expense of Blood. But the honorable piety of the undertakers could not be
terrified by the face of danger, nor diverted from this to a more commodious
business, by any motives of profit or facility for the Pulpits did sound in
every Parish Church with the praises of that voyage, as if it were a matter,
otherwise far less highly pleasing unto God, to bear Arms for defense of his
truth against prosecutors, or for the Deliverance of poor Christians oppressed
with slavery, then to fight for that self same Land, wherein our Blessed
Savior was borne and Dyed: By such persuasions a mavelous number were
excited to the Conquest of Palestina which with singular virtue they performed
(though not without exceeding great loss of men) and held that Kingdom some
few generations.

But the Climate of Syria, the far distance from the strength of Christendom,
And the near Neighborhood of those that were most puissant among the
Mahometans, caused that famous enterprise, after a long continuance of terrible
War, to be quite abandoned.

The care of Jerusalem being laid aside, it was many times thought needful to
repress the growing power of the Turk by the joint forces of all Christian
Kings and Commonwealths, And hereto the Popes have used much persuasion and
often published their Crociata with pardon of sins to all that would adventure
in a work so Religious. Yet have they effected little or nothing, and less
perhaps are ever like to do. For it has been their Custom so shamefully to
misuse the fervent zeal of men to Religious Arms by converting the Moneys,
that have been Leavyed for such Wars, to their own services, and by stirring
up Christians one against an other, yea against their own natural Princes,
under the like pretenses of serving God and the Church, that finally men waxed
weary of their turbulent spirits, And would not believe that God was careful
to mainetaine the Pope in his quarrels, or that Remission of sins past, was to
be obtained by Committing more and more grievous, at the instigation of his
suspected holiness.

Questionless there was great reason, why all discreet Princes should beware
of yiedling hasty belief to the Robes of Sanctimonie.

It was the Rule of our Blessed Savior, By their works you shall know them,
what the works of those that occupied the Papacy, have been since the days of
Pepin and Charlemaine who first enabled them with Temporal donation, The
Italian writers have testified at large. Yet were it needless to Cite
Machiavell, who has Recorded their doings, and is therefore the more hateful,
or Guicciardine, whose works they have gelded, as not enduring to hear all
that he has written, though he spoke enough in that which remains. What
History shall we Read (excepting the Annals of Caesar Baronius, And some books
of Friars, or Fryarly Parasites) which mentioning their Annals do not leave
witness of their ungodly dealing in all quarters.

How few Kingdoms are there (if any) wherein by dispensing with others,
transferring the right of Crowns, Absolving Subjects from allegiance, and
cursing or threatening to curse as long as their curses were regarded, they have
not wrought unprobable mischiefs?

The shameless denial hereof by some of their friends, And the more
shameless justification by their flatterers, makes it needful to exemplify,
which I had rather forbear, as not loving to deal in such contentious
arguments, were it not folly to be modest in uttering what is known to all
the world. Pity it is, that by such demeanor they have caused the Church (as
Hierome Savanarola, and before him Robert Grosthead Bishop of Lincoln
prophesied) to be reformed by the sword. But God would have it so. How far
the Popes blessing therefore did sanctify the enterprise upon Jerusalem it
rests in every man's discretion to Judge.

As for the honorable Christians which undertook that conquest to justify
their War, they had not only the redress of injuries and protection of their
oppressed Brethren, But the repelling of danger from their own Land, threatened
by those misbeleivers when they invaded.

If the Popes extortions (which were not more forcible then those of Peter's the
Hermits) added spirit unto the action: yet altered they not the grounds of the
War, nor made it the more holy. Let the Indulgences of Pope Leo, the tenth,
bear witness of this, who out of politic fear of the Turks violence urged
a Religious contribution toward a War to be made upon them. The necessity of
that which he propounded was greater doubtless then any that had persuaded
the Conquest of Palestina.

But too foul and manifest was the unholinesse of obtruding upon men Remission
of sins for money, That the Sums which Pope Leo thereby raised and converted to
his own uses, have made his Successers loosers by the bargain even to this
day.

Pius the Second, formerly well known by the name of Aeneas Silvius, was
discernedly reckoned among the few good Popes of latter ages, who nevertheless
in a War of the same Religious nature, discovered the like (though not the
same) imperfection.

His purpose was to set upon Mahomet the great, who had newly won the Empire of
Constantinople and by carrying the War over into Greece, to prevent the
danger, threatening Italy.

In this action highly Commendable, he intended to hazard his own person, that
so the more easily he might win adventurers, who else were like to be less
forward, as not unacquainted with such Romish tricks; Yet was not his own
devotion, so zealous in pursuit of this holy business, but that he could stay
a while, and convert his forces, against Malatesti Lord of Rimini, letting,
Scanderbeg wait his Leisure, who had already set the War on foot in Greece.
For (said he) we first subdue the little Turk, before we meddle with the great,
He spoke reason if we regard policy. But attending one to Religion find we not,
that he held the Chastisement of one which molested the Sea of Rome, a like
pleasing to God, as would have been the holy War, against the Common Enemy of
our Christian Faith? So thought all the rest of those Bishops. And so much more
(upon their several occasions) declared themselves to think it, by how much
they were commonly worse men then this Aeneas Silvius. And good reason was
there that they should be of such belief, or Endeavor to make the Christian
world believe none otherwise. For the natural Constitution of their estate (I
mean since the age of Pepin and Charlmaine, or the times not long foregoing,
has urged them all hereto; though peradventure some few Popes may have been
overlewd, by their own private natures, and thereby have swarved from the rule
of policy. To speak in general, whosoever has dominion absolute, over some,
and authority less absolute over many more, will seek to draw those that are
not wholly his own into entire subjection.

It fares with politic bodies as with the physical; each would convert all
into their own proper substance, and cast forth as Excrement what will not so
be changed.

We need not Cite Philip the Father of Alexander, nor Philip the Father of
Perseus, Kings of Macedon for examples. Of which the former brought the
Thessalians, the latter would have brought the Acheans and many estates in
Greece from the condition of followers and dependants unto mere vassallage.

Philip the second of Spain is yet fresh in mind, who attempted the self same
upon the Netherlands.

Exceptions may be framed here against one, of the honest, quiet, or timorous
disposition of some Princes, yet that all, or the most are thus inclined, both
reason and experience teach: yea even our Cities and Corporations here in
England, such as need the protection of great Men, Complain otherwhiles of
their patrons overmuch diligence, either in searching into their private
estates, or behaving themselves master-like in point of government, But never
has authority better means to enlarge it self, then when it is founded upon
devotion. And yet never does authority of this kind, work to raise it self
unto mere dominion, until it fall into the hands of those whose piety is more
in seeming, then indeed.

The Leviticall Priests, in the old Law never arrogated unto themselves, any
Temporal or Coactive power Nor advanced their Miters against the Crown of
Israel. They well understood what authority God had committed unto them and
rested therewithal content. Some wrangling hereabout has been of late; The
Popes flatterers laboring to prove, That the high Priests of old were not
merely Subject unto the Kings of Judah, and men of better spirit and learning
having showed the contrary.

But whatsoever befell in those days, when there was no King in Israel, that
is, before the Reign of Saul, or after the Captivity of Babel, sure it is that
the sons of Aaron were always obedient unto the sons of David, And
acknowledged them their Lords. As for the race of the Maccabees, that held both
the Kingdom and the Priesthood at once, It falls not within this
Consideration; the first thereof (of whom I read) that used the advantage of
honor given to him in matter of Religion toward the getting of Temporal
possession, was (if not Mahomet himself) Abubaechar the Successor unto
Mahomet, This man having obtained by help of his friends, the miserable
happiness of being chosen heir unto that fool Impostor in his dignity of a
Prophet, made it one of his first works to dispoile poor Aliffe the Nephew of
Mahomet, and heir of his great riches, taking al from him by this pretense,
That unto whom belonged the Succession in wisdom, unto him also belonged the
Succession in wealth. And this grew presently to be a famous question among the
Doctors of the Saracen Law. But howsoever it were then decided, we see now the
Muphti or high Prelate, who is the only Oracle among the Turks in Spiritual
matters, lives and holds all that he has at the discretion of the great Sultan.

Nevertheless it should seem that the doctrine of Abubachar, has not lost
all force, for the examples are many in all Saracen Lands, of Prophets or
deceivers which got that name, that never rested until they became Kings.

The Seriph in Barbary, was one of the last: who having once acquired the
opinion of an holy Man, afterward found means to become a Captain, and Lord of
a small Territory; And finally increased his followers, and withal his bounds
so fast and so far, as having made himself King of Morocca, he had the grace to
tell the King of Fessy, (lately his Sovereign) that both Fesse and all
Kingdoms in those parts were belonging to his own holiness; and this he made
good by winning all sooner after.

Whether the claim which the Popes laid to a Supremacy over all Kingdoms and
estates, had not affinity with the principle of Abubachar, Let other men Judge
that their practices to mainetaine it, have been suitable to those of Seriffo,
all Historians do testify.

For when Pope Gregory the second, procured the City of Rome, and some other
places in Italy to Rebel against the Emperor Leo, the third, what other
color used he, then that himself had Excommunicated Leo, as an ungodly Prince,
for breaking down Images, that were worshipped in Churches, when for this
treason Paul the Exarch, Leiutenant unto the Emperor, besieged Rome with the
assistance of Lueitpraud King of the Lumbards, by what other art did the Pope
remove the siege, then by persuading the Lumbard with a Tale of Peter, and
Paul, that had consecrated the City of Rome with their precious blood. Thus
was devotion made the Cloak for treason? And thus did the Popes first slip
their necks out of the Emperors collar. Within very few years after this, by
the like Religious pretext were those Princes of France, Charles Martell,
Pepine, and Charlemaine, won to assist the Papacy, against the Lumbards, yea,
to give unto St. Peter, the most of those Lands which the Pope now holds in
Italy, And not restore them to the Emperor, from whom the Lumbards had gotten
them. And thereunto Pepine, was persuaded for his Souls health.

Yet had Pope Zachary through the opinion that went of his holiness, done a
notable good office for Pepine before, when he Released the Frenchmen of their
Oath to King Chilperick, And was the cause that Pepine was chosen in his stead,
by saying, That rather he should be King who did the Kings duty, then he that
did it not.

In like manner did Pope Leo recompense the benefits of Charlemaine, by setting
him up as Emperor in the West against those of Constantinople: But in these
mutual offices, the Popes did only help with graceful words to adorn that
might which Pepine and Charlemaine had before acquired. Whereas these Kings
used force of arms to erect the papacy in Principallity; That was held yet in
vassallage unto themselves. Now this could not satisfy the ambition of that
See, which gloried falsely to be the only See Apostolic.

For as the Reputation of the Roman Prelates grew up in those blind ages under
the Western Emperors, much faster then true piety could raise it, in former
times when better Learning had flourished; So grew up in them withal a desire,
of amplifying their power, that they might be as great in temporal forces as
men's opinion have formed them in spiritual matters. Immediately therefore upon
the death of Charlemaine, they began to neglect the Emperors consent in their
Elections. And finding in them that afterward reigned of the house of France,
either too much patience or too much weakness, they were bold, within
seaventy years to decree, That in the Creation of Popes, the Emperor should
have nothing at all to do. Having obtained this, It followed that they should
make themselves Lord over the whole Clergy in all Kingdoms.

But the work was great, and could not be accomplished in have, for they were
much disturbed at home by the People of Rome; who seeing about Fifty Popes or
rather (as mainetainers of the Papacy, would now have them called) Monsters to
succeed one another, and attain by the faction of Cutthroats, and Strumpets,
St. Peter's Chair, despised that hypocrisy, which the world abroad did
Reverence as holiness.

Likewise the Empire falling from the line of Charles, to the mighty house of
Saxony, was so strongly upheld by the first Princes of that race, as it
greatly curbed the ambition of those aspiring Prelates.

Yet no impediment could always be of force to withstand the violence of
seeming sanctity.

The Polonians, Hungarians, and some other far removed Nations, had yielded
themselves in subjection more then merely spiritual, even to those Popes whom
Italy knew to be detestable men.

As for the Roman Citizens they were chastised by the sword, and taught to
acknowledge the Pope their Lord, though they knew not by what right. Long it
was indeed ere they could with much ado be thoroughly tamed, Because they
knowing the Lewdness of their Prelate and his Court, their devotion, unto him
(the trade by which now they live) was very small. Because also they were the
Popes domestical forces, against which no Prince does happily contend. But
finally the Popes Arms prevailed, or when his own were too weak, the
Emperors and other friends were helping. Contrariwise against Emperors and
other Princes, the sword of the people even of their own Subjects has been
used by teaching all Christians in our Western world a false Lesson. That it
is lawful and meritorious to rebel against Kings excommunicated and deposed
by the Pope. This curse was first laid upon the Emperor, Henry the fourth by
Pope Hildebrand or Gregory the seventh. It is true (as I said before) that Leo
of Constantinople had felt the same though not in the same sort. For Leo being
excommunicated was not withal deposed; only he suffered a revolt of some
Italian Subjects. And one may say, That the Germane Empire deserved this
plague, Since the founder thereof had given countenance to the Popes Rebelling
against their Sovereigns the Emperors of Constantinople. Howsoever it were
when Hildebrand had accursed and cast down from his throne Henry the fourth,
there were none so hardy as to defend their Injured Lord, against the
Counterfeited name of St. Peter; Wherefore he was feign to humble himself
before Hildebrand, upon whom he waited three days bear footed in the Winter
ere he could be admitted into his presence, Neither yet could he otherwise get
absolution, then by submitting his estate unto the Popes good pleasure, what
was his fault? He had refused to yield up to the Pope, the investiture of
Bishops, and Collation of Ecclesiastical dignities within his dominions, a
right that had always belonged to Princes until that day.

It were superfluous to tell how grievously he was afflicted all his life
after; Notwithstanding this submission. In breife the unappeasable rage of
Hildebrand and his Successors, never left persecuting him, by raising one
Rebellion after an other; yea his own Children against him, till dispoyled of
his Crown, he was feign to beg food of the Bishop of Spyers, promising to
earne it in a Church of his own building, by doing there a Clarks duty, for he
could serve the Quire, And not obteining this, he pined away and dyed.

That Bishop of Spyers dealt herein perhaps rather fearfully, then cruelly, For
he had to terrify him, the example of Vteilo Archhishop of Mentz chief
Prelate among the Germans. Who was condemned of heresy, for having denied that
the Emperor might be deprived of his Crown by the Popes authority.

If Princes therefore be careful to exclude the doctrine of Hildebrand out of
their dominions, who can blame them of rigor?

This example of Henry though it would not be forgotten, might have been
omitted, had it not been seconded with many of the same nature.

But this was neither one Popes fault, nor one Princes destiny; He must write a
story of the Empire, that means to tell of all their dealings in this kind, As
how they wrought upon Henry the fifth, whom they had set up against his Father,
what horrible effusion of Blood they caused, by their often thundering upon
Frederick, And how they rested not until they had made the Empire stand
headless about seaventeene years.

These things moved Rodolph Earl of Habspurgh who was chosen Emperor after
that long vacation to refuse the Ceremony of being Crowned at Rome, though he
were thereto urged by the Electors. For (said he) our Caesar's, have gone to
Rome, As the foolish Beasts in AEsops Fables went, to the Lions Den leaving
very goodly footsteps of their journey thitherward, but not the like of their
return.

The same opinion have most of the succeeding Emperors held, all of them, or
almost all neglecting that Coronation. Good cause why; Since the Popes (besides
many Extortions which they practiced about that Ceremony) Arrogated thence unto
themselves, that the Empire was held of them in Homage, And dealt they not
after the same fashion with other Kingdoms?

What right had St. Peter to the Crown of Sicily, and of Naples? The Roman
Princes won those Lands from the Saracens, who had formerly taken them from
the Empire of Constantinople; The same Romans had also been mighty defenders
of the Papacy in many dangers, yet when time served, the Pope took upon him,
as Lord Paramount of those Countries, to drive out one King, and set up
another, with a Bloody confusion of all Italy; retaining the Sovereignty to
himself.

In France, he had the daring to pronounce himself superior unto the King in
all matters both Spiritual and Temporal.

The Crown of Poland he forced to hold of his Miter by imposing a subjection
in way of penance. For that the Polish King had caused one St. Stanislaus to be
slain.

For the death of St. Thomas Beckett and (more strangely) for a Refusal of an
Archbishop of Canterbury whom his Holiness had appointed, he imposed the like
penance upon England.

Also when our King Edward the First, made War upon the Scots, word came from
Rome that he should surcease: for that the Kingdom of Scotland belonged unto
the Popes Chapel.

A great oversight it was of St. Peter, that he did not accurse Nero, and all
heathen Princes, whereby the Popes Chapel might have gotten all that the
Devil offered, and our Savior refused. Yet what need was there of such a
banne: Since Friar Vincent of Valnarda could tell Atatalipa King of Peru: That
all the Kingdoms of the Earth were the Popes, who had bestowed more then half
thereof upon the King of Spain. If the Pope will have it so, it must be so;
otherwise I should have interpreted that place in Genesis, Increase and
multiply and fill the Earth, As spoken to Noah, and his Children, not as
directed only to Tubal, Homer, and Phatto, the supposed Fathers of the old
Iberians, Goths, and Moors, of whom the Spanish blood is compounded. But of
such impudent presumption in disposing of countries far remote, And whereto
the sword must acquire a better title, the mischief is not presently discerned.

It were well if his Holiness had not loved to set the world in an uproare by
nourishing of War, among those that respected him as a Common Father.

His dispensing with oaths taken for agreement between one King and another, or
between Kings and Subjects, do speak no better of him. For by what right was
it, That Fardinand of Arragon won the Kingdom of Navar? why did not the
Confederacy, that was between Lewis the Twelfth of France, and the Venetians
hinder that King from warring upon Venice? why did not the like between
England, and France, hinder our King Henry the eighth for warring upon the same
King Lewis?

Was it not the Pope who did set on the French, to the end that himself might
get Ravenna from the Venetians? Why was it not the same Pope, who afterward
(upon desire to drive the French out of Italy) excommunicated Lewis, and his
adherents? By virtue of which Excommunication Fardinand of Arragon seized upon
Navarr.

And served not the same Warrant to set our Henry upon the back of France? But
this was not our Kings fault more then all the peoples. We might with shame
confess it, (if other Countries had not been as blindly superstitious as our
Fathers) That a Barque of Apples blessed by the Pope, and sent hither for
presents unto those that would be forward in the War upon France, made all our
English hasty to take Arms, in such sort as the Italians wondered, and laughed
to see our men, no less greedy of those Apples (then Eve, was of the forbidden
fruit) for which they were to hazard their lives in an unjust War. Few ages
have wanted such and more grievous examples of the Popes tumultuous
disposition, but these were amongst the last that fell out before his
unholinesse was detected. Now for his dispensing between Kings and their
Subjects, we need not seek instances far from home.

He absolved our King John of an oath, given to his Barons and people. The
Barons and people he afterward discharged of their allegiance to King John.

King Henry the third, had appeased this Land (how wisely I say not) by taking
such an oath, as his Father had done; swearing as he was a Knight, A Christian,
and a King. But in a Sermon at Paul's, People were taught how little was to be
reposed on such assurance, the Popes dispensation being there openly read,
which pronounced that Oath void. Good cause why. For that King had the
patience to live, like neither Knight, nor King, But as the Popes Tenant, and
Rent-gatherer of England. But when the same King adventured to murmr, the
Pope could threaten to teach him his duty with a vengeance. And make him know,
what it was to winch and play the Frederick.

Thus we see what has been his Custom to oppress Kings by their people, And
the people by their Kings, yet this was for serving his own turn.

Wherein had our King Henry the sixth offended him (which King Pope Julius would
after for a little money have made a Saint) Nevertheless, the Popes absolving
of Rich: Duke of York from that honest oath, which he had given by mediation
of all the Land to that good King occasioned both the Dukes and the Kings
ruin. And therewithal those long and cruel Wars between the Houses of
Lancaster, and York, and brought all England into an horrible Combustion. What
he meant by this, I know not, unless to verify the Proverb; Omnia Romae
venalia, I will not urge the dispensation, whereby the Pope released King
Philip, the second of Spain, from the solemn Oath by which he was bound to
maintain the privileges of the Netherlands, though this Papal indulgence,
has scarce as yet left working, And been the cause of so many hundred
thousands slain, for this last forty years in the Netherlands.

Neither will I urge the Pope encouraging of Henry the second, and his sons, to
the last of them against the French Protestants, the cause of the first three
Civil Wars, And lastly of the Leavyings of Byrons, in which there has
perished no less number, then in the Low-Countryes.

For our Country it affords an example of fresh memory, since we should have
had as furious War, as ever both upon us, and amongst us, in the days of our
late famous Sovereign Queen Elizabeth, if Pope Pius his Bull, Could have
gored, as well as it could Bellow.

Therefore it were not amiss to answer by a Herald, the next Pontifical
attempt of like nature, rather sending defiance (as to an enemy) then
publishing answers as to one that had here to do, though indeed he had never
here to do (by any lawful power) either in Civil or Ecclesiastical
business, after such time as Britain was won from the Roman Empire.

For howsoever it were ordered in some of the first holy general Councills,
that the Bishop of Rome, should be Patriarch over these quarters, yea; or it
were supposed that the forged Canons, by which he now challenges more then
precedence, and primacie, had also been made indeed: yet could this little help
his claim in Kingdoms, that hold not of the Empire. For those right holy
Fathers, as in matters of Faith, they did not make truth, But religiously
expounded it: so in matters of Ecclesiastical Government, they did not create
provinces for themselves; But ordered the Countries which they then had.

They were assemblies of all the Bishops in the Roman world, and with the
Roman dominion only they meddled. Requisite it is that the faith which they
taught should be embraced in all Countries, As it ought likewise to be
entertained, if the same had been in like sort illustrated, not by them, but by
a general Council of all Bishops in the great Kingdom of the Abissines,
which is thought to have been Christian even in those days.

But it was not requisite, nor is, that the Bishops of Abissines, or of India,
should live under direction of the Patriarch of Alexandria, and Antioch.

Questionless, those godly Fathers of the Nicene, And of the Calcedonian
Council so thought. For they took not upon them to order the Church
Government in India, where St. Thomas had preached, nor to range the Subjects
of Prester John (as we call him) under any of themselves; much less to frame
an Hierarchy upon earth, whereto men of all Nations whatsoever should be
subject in Spiritual obedience.

If Constantine or his Successors the Roman Emperors could have won all
Asia: like it is that in Councils following more Patriarchs would have been
ordained for the Ecclesiastical Government of that large continent, and not
all those vast Countries have been left unto him of Antioch or Constantinople.
But since contrariwise, the Empire became looser, the Patriarchs whose
Jurisdiction depended upon the Empire, become loosers also.

We grant, that even in the times of persecution, before Christian Bishops
durst hold open assemblies, there was given especial honor to the Bishops
that were over the chief Cities; That unity might the better be preserved and
heresy kept out of the Church; But this honor was no more, then a precedence,
a dignity without Coactive power, extending no further then to matter of
Religion, And not having to do, save in the general way of Christian love
with any strangers.

We therefore, that are no dependants of the Empire, ought not to be troubled
with the authority (be it what it may be) with any assemblies of godly Fathers
(yet all Subjects of that Empire, ordained for their own better Government)
But rather should regard the Bishop of Rome, As the Islanders of Iersey, and
Garnsey, do him of Constance in Normandy, that is nothing at all: since by
that French Bishops refusal to swear unto our King, those Isles were annexed
to the Diocese of Winchester.

FINIS.

