THE RISE and FALL OF THE Late Eminent and powerful Favorite of SPAIN, The
Count OLIVARES.

THE Unparalled Imposture OF MICHAEL de MOLINA Executed at MADRID in the
Year, 1641.

The Right and Title of the present King of Portugal Don JOHN the fourth; With
the most memorable Passages of his Reign unto the year 1644.

Translated out of the Italian, Spanish, and Portughez, By Edw: Chamberlayne,
Gent'.

In tenui Labor --

London, Printed by T: N: for Thomas Heath at his shop in Russell street, near
the Piazza's of Covent Garden, 1653.

FIDE ET FORTITUDINE.
The Right Honble. Algernon Capell. Earl of Essex* Viscount Maldon* and Baron
Capell of Hadham* 17^1

coat of arms or blazon

To the Reader.
THE Original Structures, from whence the materials of these pieces are taken,
seeming more spacious then was necessary, I have taken the pains to pull them
down, and rebuild them in the narrow room here presented; wherein my principal
care has been ( ut misceam utile dulci) that no part of these new buildings
may be without commodity or delight, although the beauty of them may be
somewhat defaced (for translations are ever prejudicial to the grace and
splendour of the Original, especially when done by an unskilful pen) yet I
choose rather to be censured of weakness in exposing to the public, then of
envy in engrossing to my self a Commodity that might any way benefit my
Contrymen.

Amongst the many curious Pieces that came to my hands in foreign parts, I
have made choice of these in the first place (wanting opportunity for a more
weighty task) because pieces of this nature have this peculiar unto them, that
they are acceptable to most intelligent persons, for that they represent
sunccinctly many curious particularities, whereof general Histories cannot
take any notice.

The first of these Relations was written at Madrid in Italian by an Agent
there to one of the Princes of Italy, at the time that the Conde Duke de
Olivarez was banished the Court of Spain. I have pruned off some superfluous
branches, and ingrafted a few necessary Cions borrowed from other trees.

The second was written at large in Spanish by the Alcalde, or Judge to whom
was committed the prosecution of that whole business. The Book was swollen with
various digressions and infinite quotations (as their manner is) which would
have been very impertinent to an English Reader.

The former part of the third Discourse was written in the Portugal Tongue, and
the later part in Italian; the one amplified with the numberless authoritics of
Civilians, and the other with many prolix excursions, which in English would
have been as tedious as improper.

If the Reader reaping in few hours the fruits of many days labor, shall
receive content, I shall not only be satisfied for this pains, but encouraged
for another undertaking.

Faults to be corrected.
PAge 10. line 8. for Aunt read Cousin. p. 14. l. 2. leave out would. P. 47. l.
8. for in read ni. P. 51. l. 26. read fuer Ca. P 52. l. 17. for having read he.
P. 57. l. 24. r, debauched. P. 102. l. 19. for mus read mas. P. 104. 24. for in
r. ni. There are many false pointings and other inconsiderable mistakes,
whereof the Printer humbly demands pardon.

THE RISE and FALL OF THE Late eminent and Powerful Favorite of SPAIN, Don
Jaspar de Guzman Conde, Duke of Olivares and St LUCAR.
DON Jaspar de Guzman, son of Don Henry Count de Olivares, was born in Rome at
the time that his Father was there Ambassador from Philip the second* and it
was noted as an unlucky presage that he drew his first breath in the Palace of
Nero* which gave occasion to some Wits to style him the Nero disguised; because
his actions were always very cruel, yet without shedding blood; his
deliberations violent, but without noise; his carriage courteous, but without
love* his words very fair, but without effect.

Being the third Son of his Family, he be took himself to the study of the Law
at Salamanca, where he was Corrivall with three Learned persons for a
Prebendary at Sevill, which he obtained. Not long after coming to Court at the
time when Don Balthazzar Zuniga was in favor with Philip the 3d upon the fall
of the house of Lerma, he easily crept into the favor and familiarity of Philip
the fourth; then Prince; and complying in all things with his humor, became
absolute master of his Will, by that time the death of his Father had made him
absolute Monarch of Spain.

To assure himself in this height of Honor and Power, he held at a distance
from his Majesty the Princes of the blood; particularly Prince Philibert de
Savoy, and it is believed, that jealous of the vivacity and Nobleness of
spirit which began to shine in the Infant Don Carlos (who was idolized by the
Spaniards) he hastened his death As for the Cardinal Infant Don Ferdinando, he
speciously pretended that it was necessary he should be employed in the Wars of
Germany, and afterward in the Government of Flanders. Sent most of the A
Grandee of Spain, is any Nobleman that has the privilege to be always covered
in the Kings presence, as all Noblemen had before the time of Charles the fifth.
Grandees and persons, whose parts or power gave any occasion of jealousy to
the Conde Duke, to Employments far from the Court; thereby so powerfully
suppressing the worth of all other, that none being left to oppose him, he
became the sole Arbibitrator of the Monarchy, and absolute Master of his
Masters will.

As for the Queen, whom the the Laws of God and Man forbad to be separated
from her Husband; she was kept in such awe and subjection by the Duchess of
Olivarez, her first Lady of Honor, that though she had the Title and outside of
a Queen, she was little better than a slave to the Duke; who would often
intimate to the King, that no other account was to be made of a Woman, but as a
thing necessary to propagate the species.

Now although some rigor should be used in the examination of all the actions
of the Conde Duke, it will not be denied but that he had most rare endowments
for a Minister of State; for the zeal and passion he had for to Aggrandize his
Master and his Dominions, knew no bounds; He gave himself wholly to the
transaction of public Affairs; insomuch that he would not allow himself one
hour of Recreation; He was the declared enemy of all Presents, not suffering
any of his servants to sell his Favor, or their Credit with him: But on the
contrary spent of his own Revenues for the service of the King, professing that
all he had was devoted to the public good, and that he did nothing but to
augment the grandeur of the King, and to serve the State. Yet some that would
seem to see farther then vulgar eyes, say, That the reason why he received no
presents, was, because he conceived that to be the only way to continue in
favor; and that by other ways being as covetous as cruel, he found out the
true secret of heaping up treasure, without appearing ambitious. To this end he
got into his hands! Commanderies of all the three Orders of Knighthood, which
were worth to him 40000 Crowns per an'; made himself great Master of the Kings
Wardrobe; Master of the Horse; and Great Chancellor of the Indies, which three
Offices were worth him 200000 Crowns per annum; but much more considerable
were the vast sums received from the Indies; for when the Fleet set sail from
Sevill and Lisbon, he caused to be shipped abundance of Corn, Wine, and Oil
Custome-free, which he sent from his County of Olivarez; and selling the same
in the Indies at four times their worth in Spain, caused the Moneys to be
employed in Spices, Jewels, Indigoes, etc. which are there at a low price, bur
of great value in Europe; so that without cousening the King he has this way
gained many Millions which Wise men persuade themselves were never spent in the
Kings service.

As for his zeal to augment his Masters greatness; some are of opinion, That
the excess of so eminent a Virtue was in him a Vice which produced great
Mischiefs; for he was so passionate in the pursuance of that design, that he
feared not to discontent the People, the Nobility, the Princes, the Queen her
self, so he might content the King, and carry on his design.

First, for the People, whose Love is the main foundation and strongest prop of
Monarchies: This blind passion carried him away so far, as to endevor to
abolish in Spain diverse privileges and Liberties, to the end he might render
the King more absolute over his Subjects: He extorted from the Laity and
Clergy, by the Mediannates, an invention of his own, which was the Payment of
half an years Revenues of all Offices and Benefices that were bestowed; also by
abasing and raising the value of Coin, an intolerable grievance to the
Subject; and by many other Impositions, raised above Two hundred and sixteen
Millions of Gold.

Such like endeavors were the first ground of the total revolt of the
Catalonians, who together with the people of Aragon, had so great Privileges
and Liberties, that they passed rather for a people recommended then subject to
the Kings of Spain; whence it has ever been Arcanum Imperii amongst the Kings
of Spain to endeavor to infringe those Privileges that rendered suspicious the
Loyalty of those people: Insomuch, that in all the Wars with France, the Kings
of Spain durst not suffer their Armies to march that way. Those of Aragon, in
that notable business of Don Antonio Perez, were by Philip the second, not
without much craft and force, brought into absolute subjection: but the
Catalonians continued steadfast in the maintenance of their Privileges, and
very difficult to be reduced to such subjection; because being borderers upon
France by sea and land, they could commodiously receive thence assistance or
succor. Nevertheless the said zeal of the Conde Duke put him upon that
attempt, so that at a Parliament holden at Barcellona, the chief City of
Catalonia, the jealous Catalonians took no small distaste that the Duke
endeavored to invade their Privileges, by not suffering their Commissioners to
be covered in his presence, which had used to be covered in the Kings presence.
After this the Duke proceeding in the like attempts to diminish their
Privileges, and yet to keep them in obedience, quartered Soldiers upon them
after the fashion of Lombardy; but the Catalonians not being able to endure the
insolence of the soldiers, took Arms, killed and drove away their soldiers,
killed also their Viceroy, the Conde di Coloma, and put themselves under the
protection of the French. Thus was lost the most populous part of all Spain, a
Country above 800 miles in compass, and the only Country of all Spain
wherein is to be found all materials necessary for making and rigging ships:
The Castles, Manors, Villages, great Towns, and Cities stand so thick, that
they seem rather one continued City then a Province.

To this may be added the inexpressible loss of the Kingdom of Portugal,
with all the dependencies upon that Crown in the East and West Indies, Africa,
and Tercera Islands, by the miscarriage of the Conde Duke in discontenting that
Nation, which shall be related at large as a most remarkable History. There
have ever been a certain Antipathy and enmity betwixt the Spaniards and
Portugals, as great as between the Spaniard and French. But since they have
been subject to the Kings of Spain, have been so averse from the Government
that the Parish Priests and Preachers at the end of their Mass and Sermons,
were wont to exhort the people publicly to say two Ave Mary's, to the end that
it would please our Savior and the blessed Virgin to deliver them from the
Tyranny (as they termed it) of the Castillians, expecting always some
favorable occasion to make an universal Revolt.

Notwithstanding, in the year, 1636. the new Tax called the Fifth part, was
generally imposed, that is Five per Cent. upon all Estates and Merchandise;
which being judged not only very grievous, but also most unjust, gave occasion
to all the Southern part of Portugal to rise in arms, and had no question set
the whole Kingdom on fire, had it not been quenched by the great care of the
Infanta Margarita of Savoy, the Kings Aunt, then Governess.

The Court of Spain observing hereupon the inclinations of that people to an
universal revolt, resolved to use the best means to secure it: In the first
place, to allure forth the great Duke of Briganza, who for Riches, power,
number of Tenants, affection of the people, and kindred, was the chief Nobleman
not only of Portugal, but of all Spain, and (which was more then all had an
undoubted right to the Crown of Portugal, and therefore certainly it was a
cruel pity in Philip the second, to seiz upon this Kingdom, and yet to leave
the pretender to the Crown, not only alive, but greater and higher then ever
he was: It being an infallible Maxim, That nothing can be sufficient to
secure his Loyalty, who has power enough to justify disloyalty To make sure
of the Duke, they first offered him the Government of Milan, which he modestly
refused, resolving not to stir forth of Portugal. Hereupon the Conde Duke
was resolved to try all ways imaginable; to which the Rebellion of Catalonia
seemed to offer a fit opportunity for this design; for the Conde Duke
politickly gave out that the King was to go in person against the Catalonians;
and therefore that all the Nobility in the Kings dominions were to appear
within 4 Months at Madrid, to wait upon the King in this Expedition. But the
Duke of Braganza well knowing the affection of the Portugals and suspicion of
the Castillians; to the end that he might take off the one, and assure the
other, retires himself to his Country house, there to follow his hunting,
excusing himself to the Conde Duke, that his affairs at present were in so bad
a condition, that he could not appear abroad with that splendour and dignity
that became a person of his Quality; and that he was confident he could do his
Majesty better service by staying at home when all the rest of the Nobility
were gone forth. This answer much augmented the former suspicions of the Conde
Duke: wherefore he resolved to make use of the most exquisite dissimulation
that ever he had done in all his life; and because it was a most ticklish
affair, an extraordinary caution and subtilty was necessary: First then, the
Conde Duke by Letters assures the Duke of Braganza he was well satified with
his reasons, and of his good inclination to his Majesty's service. Secondly, to
make a show of true amity, seemed to be very compassionate of what regarded the
Dukes Interest. Thirdly, he assured him that the King was very well content
that he should continue there, and to restifie unto him the confidence and
trust was reposd in him, made him General of all the Militia of Portugal,
leaving it to his choice to reside in what place he pleased near Lisbon; and to
supply his present necessity, sent him 60000 Crowns.

This Intrigue of the Conde Dukes appeared to those that saw only the outside
of the business, so strange and so prejudicial to the Kings interest, that
they cried out, This was the very way to lose all, the rather because by
calling back the Duke from his retired life at his Country House, he was now
exposed to the view of the Lisbonians, in whose thoughts the House of Braganza
has ever been represented as right heir to that Crown, that his presence must
needs augment the hopes of the Portugals, and new kindle their desires to have
a King of their own.

Lastly, That the Militia of Portugal was put into those very hands that
aspired to the Scepter: but this kind of dealing was the Conde Dukes ordinary
course, who was often heard to brag, that he gained much more by such counterfeit
Caresses, then with downright threats. It was never Olivarez intention to trust
the Duke, but to carry the business so, that the Duke might trust him. And
indeed what greater testimony of confidence could have been imagined, then to
send the Duke near Lisbon, give him the command of all the Forces, and supply
him with moneys. All these crafts and subtilties no doubt would had bin enough
to have charmed the Dukes spirit, and to have made him to confide in Olivarez,
but that the particular acquaintance he had with his dealings, had instructed
him to stand upon his guard. In the mean time the Infanta Margarita upon whole
shoulders all the good and bad events of Portugal was like to fall, amazed at
these manifest opportunities of Revolt were offered to the Duke, advertised the
King thereof by diverse Letters, whereunto she received cold answers full of
Riddles and darkness; the obscurity whereof a little after seemed much greater;
For, without giving her any notice, all the Spaniards that kept Garrison in
Saint John's Castle, which commanded Lisbon, were drawn forth, at a time when
the safety and security of the whole Kingdom depended upon that Castles
strength, and that strength upon the fidelity of those Spanish soldiers; but
it was a stratageme wherein consisted the last attempt of Olivarez to secure
the Duke; and that his cunning might not be discovered, but lie hid for a time,
staid till Summer, 1640. before he would invite afresh the Duke to come to
Court, which he did at length by a large Letter; wherein after ample
testimonies of affection, he much commended the Loyalty of the Duke, his
vigilance and diligence in his Office of General; and the happy effects of his
authority over the Portugals; then represented unto him the sad condition of
the Monarchy, by reason of the disorders of Flanders, disasters of Italy, and
the great preparations of the Turk; but chiefly because of the most powerful
Enemies the French, already entered into Spain by the assistance of the
Catalonians: that the only way to save the Kingdom, was to chase away these
last, but that this could not be well effected but by a vigorous assistance of
all the Grandees of Spain, of which he was the chief; He might by his presence,
and with a good number of his Tenants, give example to others; and that to this
end his Majesty expected him every moment, with design to Honor him, and
conferr upon him privileges and dignities of high concernment. Now although
the Duke was reputed a man not very well versed in the world, yet he carried
himself with so much wisdom and discretion, that after he had supplied the King
with a considerable number of his Tenants and Friends, he refused to go in
person; but using craft against craft, retired himself to his Country house,
that so he might take off all suspicion of jealousy, that he plotted any thing
against the State. The Conde Duke in all this used all fair means, because he
saw there was no hope of prevailing otherwise, insomuch that by reciprocal
dissimulation each of them labored to give testimony of singular affection
and perfect confidence.

The Infanta vigilant upon all ocasions, observing these proceedings, and
foreseeing what would be the issue, wrote to the King and to Olivarez very
urgent letters, protesting that if speedy remedy were not taken, the Kingdom
must needs be lost; The King hereunto gave no answer* but Olivarez in his
Letters uses her like a silly woman, fitter to govern a Family then a Kingdom,
bidding her, that if she comprehended not the mysteries of State, at least she
should not discover them. In the mean time Olivarez sent secret Instructions to
Don Lopez de Ossis, and Don Antonio de Oquendo, after they had relieved
Flanders with men and money, to put in with his whole Fleet upon the Coast of
Portugal; and so soon as the Duke of Braganza should come aboard the ships,
according to the duty of his place, and new office, they should set sail and
bring him away to Cales; but that great Fleet was ruined by the Hollander upon
the Downs in the year 1639. Hereupon it being thought necessary to weaken the
Portugals by draining the Kingdom of superfluous humors, a great number of
Soldiers were drawn forth, which inflamed more those ill humors, that had been
much stirred by the diverse discontents and distaste which generally was taken
against Vasconzellos chief Secretary of State, who taking upon him the manage
of all affairs, leaving to the Infanta only the bare Title of Vice-Queen,
governed absolutely according to his own will and pleasure, being a man of
unsufferable petulancy, and set as controller of his Mistress actions, and in
Madrid the Principal affairs of Portugal were menaged by Don Diego Suarez,
father in law to Vasconzellos: These, with some other miscarriages, were the
true occasions of that general revolt, which was contrived in few days, and
executed in fewer hours. For as soon as some of the chief Nobility privately
met together, began the discourse of the many grievances, intolerable
taxations, pride and arrogance of the Castillians that were Officers of State,
in particular of the tyranny of Vasconzellos, their Liberties violated, their
Clergy impoverished, their Nobility destined for the slaughter, their Country
ruinated, and all their Privileges engraven upon a Marble pillar, exposed to
the public view, violated and infringed, etc. It was proposed at the same
private meeting to change it into a Commonwealth; But the Archbishop of Lisbon
with powerful reasons made abortive that design, and set their thoughts upon
endeavoring to win the Duke of Braganza to accept of the Crown, the Dukes name
was John son to Theodosius, son to Katherine, who was daughter to Edward, son
to Emanuel King of Portugal: so it was agreed that one Don Gaston Cotigno
should make this Overture to the Duke, who went immediately to his Highness at
His Country house, and there told him of the general discontent of the people,
of the general consent of the Nobility and Clergy to receive Him as their
King; and that the present conjuncture of affairs seemed to invite Him to
embrace without delay so profitable and necessary a design, for that now the
House of Austria was at a low ebb, distracted with Wars on every side, all the
Forces of Spain employed against Catalonia; that they could not want assistance
from France, and others that were jealous of the greatness of that House; that
now was the time for him to recover that Right which has been so long detained
from his Ancestors; that Fortune seldom offers a man a Kingdom; that this
opportunity being let slip, in vain might He hereafter hope for the like, or
for succor from the Portugals, when He shall be clapped in prison at Madrid;
that if He would not take it upon Him, the whole Kingdom was resolved to
change it into a Republic, and then He should not only be equalized with the
rest of low Condition, but hated by all, and looked upon as one who refused to
be an instrument of His Countries Liberty, and so should be the most unappy
man amongst them.

After a long silence, the Duke told him He thanked him and the whole Nobility
for their affections toward Him, but that this was a business of such weight,
that it required a more mature deliberation; That he knew well, that this was
an Affair of that kind, that knew no medium betwixt the Crown and the Halter.
The next night communicating the whole business to his Wife, who is sister to
the Duke of Medina Sidonia, a Woman of a Manly courage, fit for such a bold
Enterprise; and wavering with Himself whether He had better consent to the
Nobility, or fly to Madrid, his Wife thus briefly spoke to him; My Friend, if
thou go to Madrid, thou runnest the hazard of losing thy Head; if thou
acceptest the Crown, thou runnest the same hazard; If then thou must perish,
better dye nobly at home, then basely abroad: At which words the Duke was so
animated, that he came forth of his Closet, and bad one of his Confidents go
and acquaint the Nobility, that he was resolved to undertake the same
Enterprise, and run the same hazard with them all; whereupon, immediately, (for
this business could not suffer delay) the Nobility about Midday dispersed
themselves into several places of the City, as they had agreed, some amongst
the guard of Swisses; some toward the lodging of the Infanta; some to the
Castle; others to the Spanish Fleet in the Haven; others to the Spanish Corpse
de Guard before the Kings Palace; and others to the Lodgings of Vazconzellos:
And at the hour appointed, a Pistol being shot off near the Palace, the next
fell upon the Swisse guard; and others hearing the noise of them, fell on in
their appointed stations, made themselves Masters of all in a moment, without
killing but one Swisse who made resistance, besides Vasconzellos, who was
killed in his chamber, and thrown down out of his window to be a public
spectacle to the people. Others presenting themselves before the Vice-Queen,
she told them, That if this insurrection had no other aim but to revenge
themselves upon Vasconzellos, she assured them upon returning to their
obedience, to gain a general pardon from the King. But she was answered, That
as for their most unjust grievances they had now received satisfaction upon
Vansconzellos, and had no other King but Don John the fourth. Hereupon the cry
went all over Lisbon, God save King John; and from one of the clock till three
all shops were shut; but then all were again set open with so great joy and
content of the Citizens, that all rancor and malice set apart, the most
inveterate enemies embraced one another with tears of joy. The Infanta for more
security they removed away from the Palace to the House where anciently the
Infanta's of Portugal were wont to dwell, leaving her some Soldiers to guard
her. The Archbishop of Lisbon went in solemn procession through the City, and
to encourage the people, and fix them the better in their resolutions in
choosing a new King, made use of one of the nails wherewith Christ was nailed to
the Cross, which he carried in his hand, thereby authorizing this insurrection
with an act of Religion, to intimate to the people, that all was ordained by
the special providence of heaven, and that in defending the cause of Braganza,
they should defend the cause of God: To corroborate which conceit, they made
use of certain old Prophesies and new Prodigies, that in the person of this
Duke was verified a certain apparition of Christ to King Alfonso just as he was
ready to give battle to the five Kings of the Moors, by which he was promised
not only victory, but that he and his generations should reign to the
sixteenth Generation, at which his Race should be thought extinct, but should
flourish again when it should be least of all thought upon: They made their
observations also upon the day, being the first of December, on which day the
City was recovered out of the hands of the Moors, and seized upon by Philip
the second, so that it was a day fatal to Lisbon. Amongst other prodigies that
were given out to keep the common people the better in their loyalty to their
new King, one was, that the next day in the chamber where Vasconzollos was
killed, there were found so great a number of Bats, that none could enter into
the room. Also, that the plot should be kept secret so long time, for it was
plotted some weeks before it was executed, was reckond as a great wonder, that
among so many persons of different degrees, kindred, age, rich and poor, the
design should be kept undiscovered. Another as great a wonder was that Lisbon,
a City so wonderfully populous, and the whole Kingdom should with one
universal acclamation accept of the Duke, not one person gainsaying, That all
the Forts and Castles garrisoned by Spaniards, should be delivered up without
resistance, and that all the Spaniards also should be sent away, and the quiet
of the Kingdom settled without the effusion of more blood then of two or three
persons. The Marquess de la Puebla, kinsman to the Conde Duke, with some other
of the principal Spaniards, were secured as Hostages for those Portugals that
should be found at Madrid, or else where in the Catholic Kings dominion.
Thursday following the Duke made his entry into Lisbon, with the general
acclamations of all sorts, crying, God save King John, all the Canons
discharging, Bells ringing, with Bonfires and Fireworks for three nights
following. And the more to gain the peoples affections, diverse impositions were
taken off, prisoners set at liberty, and Offices conferred upon the Race of
those whose Ancestors had enjoyed the same under the natural Kings of
Portugal.

All sorts of Men, Clergy or Laymen or women, brought in their Plate, Gold,
Jewels, etc. to make money for the maintenace of this new Kingdom. The Clergy
brought in as a gift six hundred thousand Crowns, the Nobility four hundred
thousand, and the people one Million of Gold.

The 15 of December the King was sworn, and January the 28 following, was
delared and confirmed in a general Assembly or Parliament of the Three States,
Lords Spiritual, Lords Temporal, and Commons of that Kingdom.

The King sent a courteous Complement by some Nobles to the Infanta Margarit of
Savoy, assuring her of all civil usage befitting a Princess of her quality,
desiring her withal to forbear all discourse whereby she might instill into
his subjects hearts any opinion prejudicial to his most just and righteous
cause. But she notwithstanding, with much boldness, after many expressions of
thankfulness to the Duke, fell into a large and grave exhortation to those
Nobles to lay aside all vain hopes, and return to their true allegiance, not
doubting to obtain pardon, but the Rubicon was already passed; nor is any
Rhetoric powerful enough to persuade a King to quit a Royal Scepter.

The King was about 37 years old when he was proclaimed King, affecting always
a plain Garb and sober diet, often saying, that great personages ought to be
affable, and that any clothes become them, and any diet nourishes them; he is
very active of body, few there are that can outrun him; and indeed he has run
well that has gained a Crown. He has ^y his wife the sister of the Duke of
Medina Sidonia, many sons and daughters.

Thus was the Kingdom of Portugal, the best pearl in the king of Spains Crown,
utterly lost. It is for wealth, power and commodity of situation, above all
other that Kings Dominions; It is 350 miles long, and about 12^ broad, lying
all along upon the Sea, thick peopled and powerful at Sea. With it revolted all
the Tercera Islands, all the East Indies, all upon the coast of Africa, but
only one Town called Ceuta, which is the only place that belonged to the
Portugal Kings, that is now in the hand of the Spaniard.

Immediately Ambassadors were dispatched into England and Holland, but chiefly
into Catalonia, to offer them all aid and assistance possible. The news of
the general Revolt of Portugal stroke a general sadness in all the Court at
Madrid, only the Conde Duke came laughing to the King (some would thereby
collect, that the Duke took great delight in chastising the people, and
imposing new Laws) and demanded of His Majesty las Albricias, as they call it,
that is A reward for bringing of good news, for that His Majesty was now
absolute over Portugal, (the People having forfeited all their Privileges by
their Rebellion) and lawful Owner o^ all the Estate of the duke of Braganza,
and all the Nobles his followers, to disp^^se amongst his Loyal Subjects:
Although others imagine with more reason, that the Conde Duke inwardly resented
that business more then any man; but according to his manner, would set a good
face on it.

After so many principal Feathers had been plucked out of the Austrian Eagle;
as if the world had conspired to leave Her sta^k naked, some nearer home began
to be plucking likewise. The Duke of Medina Sidonia, whose sister was now Queen
of Portugal, with some other discontented Nobles of Andaluzia (the next best
Country that the King of Spain had at this time) resolve by the help of the
Portugal, their next Neighbor, and the assistance of the French and Dutch
fleet, then near upon that Coast, to Cantonize all Andaluzia, and Medina
Sidonia to be Head thereof; unless the King would be persuaded to change the
present Ministers of ^tate, and require a ^ust account of so many Millions
gathered of the People; which if He would do, they would then continue his
Loyal Subjects: But the Conde Duke by his cunning extinguished this fire in
the Birth, for with much sweetness and fair words, without the least violence,
he drew the Duke of Medina Sidonia to Madrid, and secured his person (as he
stands at this day in Valliadolid) and sent another Govern ur with such
instructions, that he satisfied or terrified all turbulent spirits.

These many disasters one upon the neck of another, awaked the Court of Spain*
and so startled them, that they now began to double their diligence and
circumspecti* insomuch that the Council of State sat constantly morning and
Evening, to provide against the many storms that threatened on every side. Not
long before the disgrace and death of the Conde Duke, was discovered the
unparaleld Forgery of Michael de Molina, and his Treachery in giving
informations, some false and some true, to most of the Ambassadors of Foreign
States; which for its extraordinary strangeness (for it is Exemplum sine
Exemplo) shall after this Relation be fully rehearsed.

But to proceed, nevertheless the Conde Duke cast all the miscarriages in
Portugal upon the Infanta; and labored as much as possibly he could to
hinder her from coming to Court, lest she should justify her self, and cast
(if not suspicion upon his Loyalty, yet at least a foul blot upon his
Reputation; therefore she being sent out of Portugal, was by Olivarez means
confined in Estremadurae, and afterward at Ocania near Madrid, where she was
not allowed necessaries; which made her at length privately fly away to Madrid.

Besides the Infanta, he had also much discontented the chief Nobility, who
afterward all helped to pull him out of his seat; for he never thought himself
sufficiently assured in the Kings favor and command of the Kingdom, unless
after Tarquins example* he abased (instead of cutting off) the Heads of the
Grandees; the house of Lerma, the house of Toledo, the Duke of Alva, the duke
of Ferrandino, the duke of Hijar, the dukes of Maqueda, Lemos, Fuentecalida,
Altamire, etc. All either ruined or disgraced by the Dukes means. Only the
Conde de Monterey, and the Marquess de Leganes were thought worthy by Olivarez
to have part in the Government, two Men of mean extraction and Fortune, by
their prodigious exactions (for which they were called Los dos Ladrones, the
two Thieves) raised to incredible wealth. Whereat the prime Nobility of Spain
were so much incensed, that they all withdrew themselves from Court, none
waiting upon the King at Table, at Chapel, nor in Hunting; so that Olivarez
now was said to be sole Servant, as sole Master of his Catholic Majesty; at
which time he was in his third Seventh year, or grand Climacterical of his
Favor, for he declined and fell soon after, beyond the hopes and expectation,
but on this side the desires and wishes of the w^ole Monarchy. Because the Fall
of this huge tall Cedar was so late and eminent, the manner of his Fall, the
Ropes and Engines made use of, together with the Persons that put their Hands
to this work, shall be more particularly related.

The favor of the Count Olivarez, duke of St Lucar, which had continued twenty
two years, had cast so deep roots in the heart of the King, that all the world
believed it to be as immovable as the old Oak that resists all storms; and
that it was never to be shaken, neither by the Winds of Envy, nor the
Whirlwinds of persecution, nor yet by the Tempests which of* ten arise in Kings
Courts by the conspiracies and conjurations of those who are ambitious of rule;
that which upheld this common conceit was the natural inclination which the
King had from his youth to the person and rare endowments of the Lord Duke; an
inclination which proceeded as some judged rather out of a kind of respect
then bare amity, because the affection toward him which upon all ocasions he
expressed was not a token of singular love only, but of a certain fear to do
any thing that might give the least disgust to him, which was no small
diminution of his Royal greatness, and seemed to overthrow the very order which
Nature and the laws does establish twixt King and subject: insomuch that some
out of respect to his Majesty would not question his prudence, but rather
believe and publish that this so strong passion could not be effected without
some kind of witchcraft; but the Dukes known virtues were sufficient to
convince such popular slanders.

The first motives of the disgrace of the Lord Duke, were the unfortunate
successes of the Monarchy of Spain, whilst he had the managing thereof. In the
loss of Ormus, Goa and all those other vast dominions in the East Indies, the
loss of Brasile and the Terceras Islands, of the Kingdom of Portugal and the
Principality of Catalonia, the two most populous and fertile parts of all that
Continent: of Rossillion and a part of Burgundy: of Hesdin and Arras in
Flanders, of diverse strong Towns in Luxemburg, of that most important Place
Brisach: The impoverishment and almost ruin of the Kingdoms of Naples, and
Sicily, and of the Duchy of Milan: the loss of above two hundred ships at
sea: the extorting from the subject by First fruits; One part whereof was
employed toward the raising of Armies that were soon lost, and to rigge Navies
that were soon destroyed; the other part hoarded up in the Coffers of the Vice
Royes, Governors, Generals and other Ministers of state, his creatures. ^ll
these things laid together made the world desire to see the recovery of these
losses built upon his ruins, by his fall to see the rise of the Monarchy, and
by his disgrace and ruin to set up the reputation of the King and reformation
of the State.

But desires effect little, there must be vigourous endeavors to remove such a
favourit, with a resolution to ruin or be ruined, no medium there; Chi vuoll
appicar il sonaglio alla gatta? when none other durst venture to hang the bell
about the Cats neck, it was undertaken by the Queen.

It happened that the King going in person to his Army in Catalonia, the Queen
was left Governesse at Madrid, where she had opportunity to employ and make
known her rare qualities and endowments; for abateing the austere gravity of
the Spanyard, and mixing it with the courtesy of the French; she often visited
the soldiery about Madrid, discoursed with the Captains, took order for their
pay, encouraged them to serve faithfully the King, caused Justice to be
administered with integrity, gave often audience to all sorts, discontented
none in the raising moneys, and in all affairs behaved her self with such an
heroic discretion; that all men esteemed her the most deserving Queen that
ever Spain had, the fame of her merit that had been buried so many years,
arrived to the Kings ear at his return to Madrid, where she took occasion to
speak of the Interest of the Monarchy, of the loss of Kingdoms and ruin of
Armies, the want of money, the continual complaints of subjects: and that the
King might not imagine she spoke in opposition to the Duke, she authorized all
with the testimonies of some of the principal Ministers of state, who had
already agreed to second her so soon as she had broken the ice; amongst whom
was the Count de Castrillo, who was the more forward herein, not only because
he was a lover of the Public, but also because he was brother to the Marquis
de Carpio who married the Dukes sister, whereby he had Don Jews de Haro (the
present favorit) who was the only nephew of the Duke, yet disinherited by him
to the end he might advance his bastard.

The King considering their discourse, began to be persuaded at length that if
the Duke had any longer the Managery of the state all would come to ruin;
hereupon every day abateing the fervor of his affections toward him, he would
sometimes reproach the Duke that he was ill informed, and sometimes that he
was a most unfortunate man: The Duke foreseeing his declination, demanded
leave to retire himself from the Court; whereto the King answered coldly, my
Lord, we ought both of us to devise some remedy for these misfortunes. In the
mean time it was noysed abroad that the favor of the Duke was so shaken that
one shock more would down with it to the ground, all men blessing and
commending the Queen, crying that the Isabells were ever fortunat to the
Monarchy of Spain, Isabell of Portugal wife of King John the 2d overthrew the
insolent favor of Alvares de Luna, and discharged her husbands Kingdom of the
tyranny of that favorite: Isabella de Castile demonstrated to Ferdinand her
Husband that in the Kings Court, the Kings favorite ought to be none but the
Queen that the subjects were born only to obey and the King to command: and
that the happy removal of this most puissant favorite could be hoped from no
other hand but of Isabella de Burbon.

When a Tree is falling, every one cries Down with it. A Lady that was once the
Kings Nurce, Donna Anna de Guevara, partly out of zeal to the Kings service,
and partly to be revenged on the Duchess, as the King was to pass by night
from his Lodgings to the Queens, she put herself in the passage, casting
herself at the kings feet, and having protested that she was not there to
demand any grace at his Majesty's hands, but to render to the Crown of Spain
the greatest service that it could receive; she said that her motherly
affection enforced her to discover to his Majesty what perhaps many others
durst not for human respects. The King giving her leave to speak freely, she
represented unto him the general affliction of his people, the calamity of his
Kingdoms, the abuses committed in his Revenues, the many losses on every side,
and the sad condition of the whole Monarchy of Spain showing him, that these
evils were the judgments of God upon him, for suffering the government of his
Kingdoms which God had appointed for him only, to continue in the hands of
another, that now it was high time that his Majesty should be out of his
minority, and that he should not incense the wrath of God against him, by
suffering his poor subjects to be abused,; at least that he would have
compassion on the Prince his Son, who ran an hazard to be simple King of
Castile, or less; concluding, that if she had offended his Majesty by her
liberty of speech, she was ready to receive punishment, being well content
having given her milk for the good of her King, to sacrifice her blood for the
good of the Realms of her Prince. The King having hearkened unto her with much
attention, answered, Haveis hablado verdades, You have told me the truth.

After this appears upon the Stage (for perfecting the Catastrophe of the Dukes
Tragedy) the Infanta Margarite de Savoy Duchess of Savoy, who had been so
roughly handled by the Duke both before and after her leaving Portugal, being
secretly come from Ocania, where she had been in a manner confined, and arrived
at Court, the Duke did his utmost to debar her audience with the King, and to
discredit her in the Council of State, and would not vouchsafe to visit her.
Nevertheless the Queen invited her to come to her Lodgeings, and took order
that she should have opportuity to speak with the King for two hours space.

The Infanta gave God thanks for her safe deliverance out of the hands of the
Portugals, that after so great sufferings, she might once more appear in the
presence of his Majesty, to make known her innocence, and the failings and
errors of others, made a brief Relation of all things past in Portugal, making
it appear that she was innocent, and that the loss of Portugal was to be
attributed to the carelessness and negligence, if not to the intention of the
Duke. The Queen in the mean time failed not to help out the Infanta in all her
discourse, which left so deep an impression in the heart of the King, that it
may truly be said, That the mortal wound was given that very day to the favor
of the Duke. To dispatch him the sooner, it was represented to the King what
little respect the Grandees bare now to his Majesty, not waiting upon him as
they were wont, but all retiring themselves. The King asked the Marquess of
Carpio what was the reason hereof? Who replied, That being little accounted of
by the Duke, they judged it more meet to forbear the services they owed to his
Majesty, then to lie under the suspicion of the Duke, and to give him occasion
by their residence at Court, to make them feel the effects of his jealousy. To
help forward, there happened a memorable accident in Segovia, where six men
masked entering by force into the Governors house, who imagining them to be
Robbers, offered them money, and all that he had, so they would not defile his
wife, and defloure his daughters: One of them answered, That they were not come
to rob him, but to serve the King, and delivering a paper into his hands, told
him, that if he would save his life, t he should go immediately to Madrid and
present this Writing, not to the Duke, but to the King himself, that it
contained affairs very secret, and of great importance to the State, and to the
service of his Majesty; and would not depart till they saw him upon his way to
Madrid, threatening to kill him if he performed not that whereto he was obliged
as a subject, and as a Minister of the Kings. Being arrived, he had audience of
the King, and so was sent back to his Government. It was judged by the
circumstances, that the contents of the Writing was very prejudicial to the
Duke.

Hereunto may be added one thing more that might probably have a strong
influence upon the spirit of the King for the removal of his Favorite. The
Marquess of Grana, Ambassador in Madrid for the Emperor, bringing with him the
hereditary valor of the House of Caretti, the courage, prudence, and conduct
of Affairs whereof he has given sufficient testimonies in the military
employments which he has had many years in Italy, in Flanders, and in Germany,
together with his great gift of five Languages, which he speaks as if they were
all natural, has gained him a great esteem with all men. And the liberty
which he used in speaking of the affairs of the State (although it proceeded
from the natural ingenuity and zeal toward the interest of the House of
Austria) rendering him odious to the Duke, whose ears had been accustomed to
hear only applauses full of flattery, and not the plain sincere truth, having
now an opportunity to revenge himself with Justice, did it to the purpose: For
having received a letter from the Emperor to the King, that the affairs of the
House of Austria grew worse and worse every day, so that if speedy order were
not taken, all would be ruined, that his Majesty ought to consider well the
quality of the person that had made him lose Portugal, Catalonia, and so many
other Dominions, etc. He presently communicates the same to the Queen, together
with his instructions, that he had a part of what he should do therein (for
the Letter was open) and so had audience of the King, where it may well be
imagined with what violence and ardor he pressed the affair against his enemy.

To all these assaults that came upon the neck one of another, this was none of
the least, that the Prince Don Balthazar Carlos the only son of the King, was
now going into the fourteenth year of his Age; yet to the great astonishment of
all the world, he continued under the tuition of Women, without any Officers
and servants given him, after the manner of Princes; whereas at the same time
one of the Kings base sons of the same age had a Court formed him, was declared
Generalissimo of Portugal, Prince of the Sea, and Grand Prior of Castile for
the order of Malta, and named Don John de Austria, and had the Marquess of
Castanieda given him for his Governor; whereat the people murmured greatly: For
this Don John was begotten upon a Woman of base Extraction, called la
Calderona, a Comedian, not handsome, but of extraordinary pleasantness; who is
since made a Nun. The Youth being of excellent parts, and like to make a
gallant Man, was much affected by the King, though he be quite of another
complexion.

The King having before been earnest to have formed a Family and Officers for
the Prince, the Conde Duke always hindered the same; because first, he feared
that the Prince, who was of a most lively spirit, would then find out that
abroad, whereof the King was kept ignorant at home. Secondly, to gain an
opportunity by prolonging the time, for Don Henry his Bastard to fashion
himself for the Court, and by his Match and Honors conferred upon him, be at
length reputed fit to be Governor to the Prince, and succeed in the grace and
favor of the King. At length the King being earnestly solicited by the Queen,
formed a List of the Servants that were to serve the Prince in his Court now to
be erected, because he was of the Age of Fourteen years; giving notice to the
Duke that provision might be made of al things necessary for a Court: The Duke
took the List and changed a great number in the same, which displeased the
King extremely, having been before for other reasons sufficiently moved; after
the King spoke of the Princes Lodgings, desiring to know the Dukes Opinion; who
answered, That his Highness would be very well in the Lodgings of the Infant
Cardinal deceased: But why my Lord (replied the King) will not He be better in
those Lodgings you are in at present, which are the very Lodgings that my
Father and I had being Princes? The Duke was with this struck dumb, perceiving
well that his disgrace drew near: for certain it is, That his extreme
insolence hastened as much as possible the Resolution that the King had taken:
For that very Evening his Majesty wrote him a Billet with his own Hand, whereby
he forbad him to meddle any more in the Government; and from henceforward he
should retire to Loeches, not far from Madrid, until farther Order should
be given. The Duke read this Billet without any disturbance, resolving in a
matter of that weight not to discharge his mind but to his Wife only, to whom
he sent the Note by a Post to Loeches.

Next day she came weeping to her Husband; and after two hours discourse went
to speak with the King, who soon dispatched her, the same day she cast her self
with tears at the Queens feet, beseeching her to intercede for them, in
consideration of the many services and sincere faithfulness of the Duke her
husband.

The Queen gave her a short answer, Lo que han hecho Dios los vasallos y los
malos sucessos no lo puede deshazer el Rey in ye. What God, the people, and
evil successes have done, the King nor I can undo. This business was not
known Friday and Saturday to any but Don Lewis de Haro, of whom the King made
use to talk with the Duke about some secret affairs. This Don Lewis de Haro is
Nephew to the Duke, but so hated by him, that lately his mother dying, who was
sister to the Duke, he would not once send to visit him; notwithstanding Don
Lewis carried himself so Nobly in this occasion, that casting himself at the
kings feet, he beseeched him that in regard the Dukes removal was irrevocable,
yet that it would please his Majesty at least that it should be done with all
the mildness, and with as little diminution of his Honor, as the Justice of his
Majesty could permit. The King hereupon granted that the Duke should continue
three days in his Palace; that he should assist at the Councels and
Assemblies, and give Audience for his particular affairs: Also, it was
permitted to the Duke, that in presence of the chief Notary, and of Secretary
Carnero, he should review all his Papers, and burn what he pleased; which he
did: Though the King were thought too indulgent therein.

The same day, as some came to have Audience of the Duke, he bad let them know,
That he was a little indisposed, and suffered none to enter. Saturday morning
the King sent to demand the Key wherewith he entered the Kings Lodgings at his
pleasure; but he sent to demand Audience of the King, which He granted him in
public before the Patriarch, and diverse Gentlemen of his Bedchamber; where he
spoke more then a quarter of an hour; and whereas the King was wont to hear
with attention those that spoke, he now seemed to be careless of what the Duke
said; who having made an end, went immediately into a Junta, where he showed
himself as rigorous as ever; and handled so roughly two of the Secretaries,
that they said afterward one to another, Que Diablo tiene el Conde en la
Cabe^a nos ha tratados como trapos viejos. What the Devil aileth the Count? He
has handled us like Scullions. The same day some Ambassadors demanded
audience of him, but had not admission under pretense that he was not well.
Finally, that evening being St. Anthonies day, the disgrace of the Duke began
to be noised in the Palace, but with such excess of joy, as that the next
morning was found a paper stuck up at the Palace gate with these verses;

En el dia de Sant Antonio
Hisieronse milagros dos
Empeco a reinar Dios
Y del Rey se echo el Demonio.
Upon the day of Saint Anthony
God did his reign begin,
The Devil on the same Saints day
Was cast out of the King.
Next day being Sunday, the joy was so universal, that had it not been a
little curbed by the fear that men had that the Duke by his craft would regain
the Kings favor, there would have been public fires of joy; however all that
day the Fruterers and Bakers threw their Wares to those that would have them,
without taking any money, to testify their excess of joy and contentment.

Monday the King, Queen, Prince, Infanta, and Duchess of Mantua, passing all
in one Coach toward the Carmelites, a great multitude of people followed,
crying, Viva el Rey por lo que ha hecho viva el Rey y muer a el mal govierno.
God save the King for what he has done; let the King live, and the ill
government die. There arrived also an infinite number of people to participate
of the common joy which was taken for the disgrace of the Duke.

Tuesday the Duchess with extraordinary submissiveness, attempted again to
make an accommodation, but all in vain, whereat the Duke was so enraged against
the Queen, whom he looked upon as the sole cause of his disfavour, that as soon
as the King was departed to go to the Escuriall, he carried himself in the
Councels and Junta's in such a manner that he made the world believe he was yet
to stay, which not only cooled the general joy, but amazed the Queen so
greatly, that that night she wrote a most pressing letter to the King concerning
him.

Thursday evening, the King returning toward Madrid, met on the way ten
Grandees of Spain, and asked them what was happened at Madrid, that made so
many come together? Don Melchior de Borgia answered him, That the time was how
come, that his Majesty might know the true devotion of the Grandees toward the
Crown, and that if heretofore they had not waited upon him according to their
obligations, his Majesty knew well ^he reason of the same.

The King being arrived at the Palace in Madrid, asked whether the Duke was
^etired, it was answered, No. The King (...) a chafe turning to Don Jews de
Haro, ^ying, Que aguarda el hombre, la fuerca? What does the man stay for to be
thrust out? Hereupon the Duke seeing no more hopes left, prepared himself to be
gone, spending the whole night in viewing his papers, and burning a great part
of them. In the mean time the people longed to see the day of his departure,
and one more impatient then the rest, set abroad this Distick;

Phosphore read diem, quid gaudia nostra moraris,
Ecce Comes Cecidit! Phosphore read diem.
Friday about one of the clock afternoon, he departed not without much
artifice; For fearing to be torn in pieces by the people, having caused Coaches
and Mules to stand ready for three days together before he intended to depart;
But as the Coaches with six Horses waited at the great gate of the Palace, he
went forth by the back gate behind the kitchen, and put himself into an
ill-favored Coach drawn with four Mules, where having drawn the Curtains, and
placed himself between two Jesuits, as if he had been going to execution, he
took his way by the street of Atocha, at the same time that his Family in his
velvet Coaches passed the ordinary way, where they were met with a company of
Boys, that thinking the Duke was there, discharged a shower of stones at the
Coaches; but being shown that the Duke was not there, they ceased; so that the
Duke by this subtilty arrived safe at Loeches, a place whereof he had the
Royalty.

In the mean time the Duchess continued at Court, governing the Prince and
little Infanta; but without once entering into the Queens chamber.

Now the consequences of this disgrace of Olivarez, are many, and those very
remarkable. In the first place, the King has thereby recovered the credit and
reputation which he had utterly lost in the opinions of all men as well
forraigners as sublects, who saw him so wholly led away by the will of the
Conde Duke, that he seemed rather a Subject then a Sovereign.

But on the Saturday after the departure* of Olivarez, the King called a
Council of State in his Lodgings, where he spoke so judiciously, that all
admired his ability, and testified by their tears their great affections and
respects toward him: The subject of the Kings discourse was to advertise the
Council how he had deprived the Conde Duke of his dignities, not for any crime
that he had committed, but to satisfy himself in giving satisfaction and
content to his subjects; That his desire was, That the memory of the Conde Duke
might be kept in esteem among all men for the good services which he had so
faithfully rendered to the Crown so many years, protesting for the future, not
to give the Title of Favorite to any of his subjects, but to assist himself in
all Councels, and that all weighty affairs should pass through his own hands,
commanding to every one of those there, to speak their opinions freely without
partiality at all times, and not to conceal the truth from him. Whereto the
Cardinal Borgia, as head of that Council, answered, That they would give
obedience to these his Majesty's commands, as to Laws Divine.

Next day his Majesty having called together all his Gentlemen of his
Bedchamber, whereof most are Grandees of Spain; he demanded the assistance of
their Tenants, Friends and Kindred, for the speedy settlement of the kingdom:
Which together with other testimonies of prudence and care that his Majesty
manifested, made all men say, It was now the time that Philip the fourth
deserved the surname of Grand, which had been given him by the flattery of
Olivarez, at that time when he caused his Majesty to lose his Dominions and
Reputation.

Next day the King caused all his plate to be coined into money, by whose
example also the Nobility and Commons sent theirs to the Mint, and all
contented themselves to be served in earthen ware.

The next consequence of Olivarez disgrace was the advancements of diverse
Noblemen to their dignities, and the pulling down of the Favorites of the Conde
Duke.

The third effect, and perhaps that which Olivarez resented most of all, is the
miserable condition of his Bastard son, a business of that strange and
extraordinary carriage, that it is worthy a large Treatise, but was briefly
thus: The Conde Duke being at Madrid twelve years before he was in favor at
Court, fell in love with Donna Marguerita Spinola, whose Father was a Genoway,
and mother a Spaniard. This Lady, though noble and rich, yet was not free from
temptations, amongst which riches and honor are the most efficacious. Don
Francisco de Valeasar, Alcalde of the Court and Palace, one of the highest
places of Judicature in Spain, although he had a wife, one Donna Marguerita to
his lust, maintained her and her family at his charges, and with profuse
presents and Jewels, kept her wholly to himself. At length Olivarez with much
difficulty, got a share in her also; and she soon after had a son named Julian,
which none then made doubt to be the son of the Alcalde, who nevertheless
understanding that others had had a finger in the pie as well as himself, took
no affection to, nor care of the child; so he was brought up idly by the mother
until the age of 18 years; at which time his mother dying, and he finding
himself without father or mother, went boldly to the Alcalde, and besought him
to declare him his son, that so he might not be exposed to the world without
Father and without Name; protesting that he would never lay claim to any thing,
but only under the name of Valeasar he would get his living with his Sword.
The Alcalde wholly uncertain that he was his child, would not be induced to
declare thus till upon his deathbed, and then rather out of charity then belief
that he was his son. So then by the name of Julian Valeasar he went first into
the Indies, where for some Roguery he was condemned to be hanged; but because
the Vice-king there was a great friend to the Alcalde, he gave him his pardon.
Thence he went into Flanders and Italy, where he served as a common Soldier,
but was very debosht and of rude behavior. In the mean time Olivarez having no
further hope of children, sent to search out this vagabond Valeasar, who he
remembered was born at the time that he had to do with his mother; but before
Valeasar could be found, he had married D. Isabella de Azueta, a common
Strumpet; nevertheless November 1641. to the astonishment of all men, Olivarez
owned him for his son, and declared him so by a public act by the good will
and pleasure of his Majesty, wherein he names him, Don Henry Philipe de Guzman,
heir apparent of the Count de Olivarez, and of the Duchy of St. Lucar, so soon
as it shall please his Majesty in acknowledgement of his services, to make him
a Grandee of Spain; because the Title of Duke in Castile is not given but to
those that may stand covered in the Kings presence.

Olivarez advertized all Ambassadors and Grandees hereof, to the great
displeasure of all his Family and Kindred; then resolves to marry him with one
of the principal Ladies of Spain: To which end he cast his eye upon the first:
Lady of the Court, Donna Juana de Velasco, daughter to the Constable of
Castile, who for Nobleness of blood is not to be equalled by any the Subjects
of that Kingdom. For he shows in the Arms of his Predecessors, five Royal
Quarrers. To accomplish this match, it was necessary to annull the former
marriage by an order from Rome. The Pope deputes the Bishop of Avila with full
power, who notwithstanding the Protests of the woman, gave sentence against
her, because she was not married by her own Parson, although some more
conscientious Divines gave their opinions in favor of the woman, and that the
marriage was good and valuable; but the authority of the Favorite prevailed
over these reasons, and the marriage was solemnly broken. In pursuance whereof
Olivarez treated for a match with the said Lady, and in spite of her Father and
Kindred, obtained her for his Bastard. And here one might observe the base
spirits of Flatterers, for all the Grandees, all the Nobility of the Court, all
Officers of State, went to give Don Henry el para bien, or joy of his marriage,
treating him by the Title of Excellency, and giving him respect fitter for a
King then a subject. In the mean time he became so rediculous a personage in
his carriag, that not being accustomed to such ceremonies he often fell into
great absurdities which made some Italians say, Don Harrigo era un Facchino
vestito da ReSpagnuolo. That Don Henry was a plowman dressed like a King.

A Palace was provided for Duke Henry, so rich and sumpteous that never any,
Grandee of Spain had the like, Presents were sent him from all persons and all
Places, the Duke of Medina de las Torres sent him a present valued at twenty
five thousand Crowns. Don Henry received the Habit of Alcantara with a
Commanderie of ten thousand Crowns and was declared a gentleman of the Kings
bed chamber with promise to have the Charge of President of the Indies and all
to make way for to be governor to the Prince for which porpose the Prince was
kept under the government of the Duchess of Olivares and no Court formed
longer then the ordinary and accustomed time. Now the hatred was so general
and so great against D. Henry who could not forbear his base carriage and
behavior that the people sang publicly.

Enriquez de dos Nombres y dos Mugeres,
Hijo de dos Padres y dos Madres,
Valgate el Diablo el Hombre que mas quisieres.
Harry, a Man of two Names and two Wives; a Son of two Fathers and two Mothers.
The Devil take him that owns thee. The declaring of this Bastard heir to
Olivarez, greatly displeased the Marquess of Carpio, who married Olivarez
sister, because hereby was dis^inherited the right Heir Don Lewis de Haro, son
to the said Marquess, already declared so, an honest Gentleman, and of good
parts, and at present sole Favorite in the Court of Spain.

Upon the fall of the Conde Duke, Don Henry immediately lost the Title of
Excellency, his great train, and the Kings favor, and from a great Idol
became a Man of Clouts, scorned by all men. The Constable intended to take home
his daughter, and to declare the former marriage valuable. But some Nobles with
whom he advised thereof, telling him that he should forbear such attempt; for
the former marriage being declared valuable, his daughter will be declared an
Adulteress; whereto he answered, I had rather Donna Juana were taken for my
daughter and a Whore, then chaste and wife of such a Fellow.

Not long after D. Henry died without issue, and his Father the Conde Duke of
grief ended his days at the House where he was confined; the one ending like a
Comet after a great blaze for a short time; the other like a Candle, after a
long time in a snuff.

Next follows the unparalleld Case of Michael de Molina.
Exemplum sine Exemplo: OR, The unparalleld IMPOSTVRE OF Michaell de Molina,
Executed at Madrid in the Year 1641*

Faithfully Translated out of the SPANISH.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Heath, 1653.

Exemplum sine Exemplo: OR, The unparalled CASE OF Michael de Molina Executed
at Madrid in the Year 1641. Faithfully Translated out of the SPANISH.
MIchael de Molina, born of honest parents at Cuenea, a City in the Kingdom of
Castile, bred there in the Jesuits College, and after at the University of
Alcala de Henares; to try his fortune, went thence to Court, where to gain a
living speedily, he undertook to give secret intelligence to the secretaries
of the several Ambassadors then residing at that Court; and to give the more
credit to his reports, gave out, That he was servant to Andrew de Rojas,
Cavalier of the order of Santiago, and secretary of the Council of State:
insomuch that he forged letters, feigned discourses, framed intelligences
fitted for the purposes and affairs of the Ambassadors wherewith he dealt,
counterfeited the Kings hand, invented Ciphers, made consultations and orders
to the number of 345 several Papers, and all with that dexterity, that he
deceived and abused not only the secretaryes of the Emperor the Venetian, and
French Ambassadors, but also and most of all, Don Lorenco Coqui, secretary to
the late Don Lorenco Campegi, Nuntio to the Pope; in whose house he was at
length apprehended; upon whose apprehension and search of his papers, he told
the officers That if the tenor of those papers should be looked upon as jests
and conceits, he should not speed so ill; but if as a crime it would appear so
great that one life would not be enough to pay for the same. And his Majesty
taking notice that the business was of that importance that the like had not
been heard or found in any History, Commanded that there should be on purpose a
Court of Justice composed of two of the chief Nobility, and two of the Chief
Judges, before whom when the said Michael de Molina was sufficiently convinced,
and had made a large confession (which for its matchless strangenes shall be
verbatim set down) he was sentenced as follows;

IN the town of Madrid July 31 1641. the Lords of his Majestyes Counsel, who
by particular order have taken cognizance of the accusation given in by Don
Marcellino Faria de Guzman Attorney, nominated by his Majesty* for this cause
against Michael de Molina late of Cuenca, prisoner in the Jail of this Court
for offenses and high treason committed by him, whereof he has been accused,
do condemn the said Michael Molina to be hanged on a gallows, and his goods
to be confiscated to the Kings use, the execution whereof they leave to the
Lord Judge D. John de Quinnoues; and this is their will and pleasure.

This sentence was made known to the prisoner upon the first of August, and
execution done accordingly in the Placa Major of Madrid, the third day
following; at which time and place the Proclamation usually made at the
execution was thus;

THis is the Justice which the King our Sovereign Lord commands to be done
upon this man, for having committed high treason, and published falsities,
forgeries, and horrible cheats on the affairs and grave ministers of state;
for which he commands that he be hanged by the neck till he die, to the end
that it may be to him for a punishment, and to others an example; then
concludes, Quien tal haze tal pague, He that thus does, let him thus pay for
the same. As he stood upon the ladder ready to be turned off, he delivered in
writing to father Andrew Emanuel of the Society of Jesus, a declaration, the
contents whereof ensues word for word;

Loyal subjects of our sovereign Lord the King, I am Michael de Molina born
at Cuenca, the grievousnes of my crimes is so great, that a punishment can
hardly be invented to equalize mine offenses against God, against our
sovereign Lord the King whom God preserve, against the Emperor, against my
native country; against the Lord Duke de Olivarez, and Sant Lucar, against the
most grave, faithful and loyal Ministers of state, whom I have discredited
with my forgeries and lies. The clemency of the King our sovereign (whom God
preserve) has been very eminent in sentencing me so mercifully, God grant, to
whom I now go to render a strict account, that there be found mercy for me in
the life to come, and that I then pay not for the clemency showed me here. I do
here declare and confess upon mine own free will, that not having the fear of
God nor man before mine eyes, I have been the cause of the gretest part of the
mischiefs that this Monarchy suffers, and of those calamities and miseryes
which you faithful people yet suffer, for which I humbly beg pardon of all
those that are absent, as well as of you here present. For I am the man that
feigned that the King our sovereign Lord (whom God preserve) and the Emperor,
instigated thereunto by the Lord Duke of Saint Lucar, and fomented by him, did
plot the death of our most holy father Urban the 8th Pope, head of the Church,
and vicar of Christ, for which purpose I invented and contrived orders of the
King our sovereign, and of the Emperor, letters from the Duke, Orders,
instructions and judgments of the Counselors of State with letters from Vice
Royes and Ambassadors, with purpose to abuse and deceive the Nuntio and the
Ambassadors of several Princes, and thereby to get money from them, not
caring for the damage might arise and accrue from thence to the world, and to
this Monarchy; and not contented here with, I invented that in case the said
death could not be effected, that then endeavor should be to call a Council,
and to depose the Pope, or make a schism in the Church. I invented and forged,
that the Lord Duke did by order from the King, the Emperor and the Counsel of
state, endeavor to kill the Cardinal Richelieu, Favorit to the most Christian
King of France; for which purpose, and for the death of the Pope, I feigned
persons that were to have been instruments of the same; I gave notice to the
Ambassadors hereof showing them letters and Orders which I feigned as I judged
meet. I made them believe that I was an Officer of the Counsel of state, and
that by that means I came to the knowledge of these plots and conspiracies,
whereby I have disturbed the world, caused jealousyes and suspicions amongst
all the Princes of Europe, and the mischiefs that this Monarchy now suffers.
I also advertised the Ambassadors, and the enemies of this state, of letters,
consults, orders and decrees made by the King and Counsel for driving the
French out of Piemont, the Correspondencies of the Cardinal of Savoy with the
subjects of that state for effectuating the same; the coming of Prince Thomas
from Flanders to Savoy for the same purpose, and to lay siege to Casal, of an
Army to be raised and maintained in Alsatia; of an intention to kill Duke
Bernard de Weimar General of the Swedes, the intentions of the King our
Sovereign, with the states of Venice and Genoa concerning Piemont and Casal;
the purpose of supplies which both states of Venice and Genoa would send to
France and Holland; and the intentions of the Pope to assist France against
Spain; the intent of England to ^^gue with Spain; the purpose that the French
and Hollanders had to join their fleets to hinder all succors of Flanders, and
to surprise the plate fleet, and infect the coasts of Spain; the design that
the Hollander had upon Antwerp in the year 1638. the success of Fontarabie;
whereupon I feigned letters from the Prince of Conde, and from the Duchess de
Chever^use; also concerning the imprisonment of Don Gualterio Peni Secretary
and Resident for France in this Court, with whom I had intimate friendship,
which was the ground of all these disasters: of the secret compliance between
the Cardinal Infant, and the Prince of Orange: of the conspirarcy by the
Prince of Orange to kill the Cardinal Richelieu; the design of Holland, that
the States of Flanders should be independent of Spain, and our King should
renounce his right to the Cardinal Infanta to the end the Hollanders should
receive him, and subject themselves to him: of the capitulations and agreement
twixt the King our Sov: and the Duke of Modena, whereby I feigned that the said
Duke was to assist with six thousand men, at his own charge, against France;
and that the King was to give him the charge of Viceroy of Catalonia, and
twenty thousand soldiers to enter into France by Catalonia which was the first
ground of the war at Salsas and Perpignian the key of Catalonia; of the
general resolutions of the year 1639. in order to the affairs of Germany,
Flanders, and Italy: of the purpose to take away the Nuntio's Court in these
kingdoms for the disorders and excesses of the same: of the great resentments
of the King our sovereign against the King of France, for his leagueing with
the Swedes, his confederation with the Turks and Protestant Princes of Germany,
for his protection and league with Holland; for his commerce with Venice and
Genoa to the great discommodity of Spain; for the disunion which he endeavored
to make between Spain and England: of the resentment that the King our Soverain
had against the Pope, for his amity and assisting of France; and not his
endeavoring rather as a father of the whole Church to pacify the wars by all
means possible; of the design of changeing the commanders in chief of all the
Emperors armies and the Spanish, thereby to make the people desperate, because
of the failing of faith and credit; of the recruiting and arming the Galleys of
Spain, Sicily and Naples for the maintaining commerce, secret intelligence in
Toulon and Marseilles: of the capitulation of the Venetian with the grand
Turk, and the means whereby they drew the Turk to assent to their demands,
and the little security the Turk had from them: all which I invented, feigned
and contrived; together with many more letters, Ciphers, Papers, etc. without
any intelligence, correspondence, or amity with any officer or Minister of
state of this kingdom, but that I alone without the help or assistance of any
other have feigned and invented all the foresaid designs, whereof I gave
information to the Nuntio and his secretary, to the said Ambassadors, and to
Monsiuer de Penny with whom I have kept correspondence in France since the
breaking forth of the war: the which as a truth I swear before God, and
declare it for discharging my conscience; I ask of God forgivenes, also of the
King our sovereign (whom God preserve) of the Emperor, of the Lord Duke,
against whom I directed most of those forgeries, of the Duke of Medina las
Torres, of the Marquis of Leganes, of the Duke of Villahernosa, of the Count of
Oniate, of the Marquis of Villa Franca, of the Marquis of Mirabel, of the most
illustrious Lord Inquisitour General, the father Confessor of the most
Eminent Cardinals, the Cardinal Borgia, and Cardinal Spinola, and Cardinal of
Sandoval, of the Lord Don Geronimo of Villanueva, Pronotary of Arragon and
secretary of state, of Don Andrew de Rojas secretary of state, of the
Ambassador of Genoa, and of all the rest whom I have falsely defamed by these
forgeries and Impostures; and also I ask pardon of all the faithful and
loyal subjects of these kingdoms, charging them to take example by me. And to
the end that it may be manifested to all times, I thus make declaration, that
God may pardon me, and for the satisfaction of this, and all other Nations
which I have disturbed with the wickedness of my inventions. In witness whereof I
have hereunto set my name, Dated in the Placa Mayor, and place of Execution in
Madrid, the 3 of August 1641. Thus ended Michael de Molina, in whom the Refran
or Spanish proverb was verified.

Quien en un ano quiere ser rico al medio le ahorcan, He that will be rich in
one year, shall be hanged at half years end.

FINIS.
THE RIGHT and TITLE OF The present KING OF PORTUGAL: Don John the Fourth.

With the most Memorable Passages of his Reign.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Heath, 1653.

THE RIGHT and TITLE OF The present King OF PORTUGAL Don John the fourth: With
the most memorable Passages of his reign.
FOr the more clear discovery of the Title whereby the present King of
Portugal, holds that Crown, it will be necessary to know the fundamental
constitutions of that Kingdom, as well as the pe^igree of that King.

In the year of our Redemption 1139. an Army of four hundred thousand Moors
under the conduct of five Kings, threatening as a vast deluge, to overflow at
once all the Country of Portugal were totally discomsited by a small handful
of Christians, in the plains of Ourique, where immediately before the battle the
people chose their General, Don Alfonso for their King: (for before they were
under the protection of the King of Castile and Leon) who after the fight
called an Assembly of the three Estates in the City of Lamego, where was
solemnly enacted as follows.

In the name of the most holy Trinity Father, Son, and holy Ghost, Amen.

I Alphonso son of Count Henry etc. by the grace of God lately advanced to the
Royal Throne have called together the Bishops, Nobles and Deputies of Cities
in the Church of Saint Mary Almacave in Lamego; where sitting upon my Royal
Throne without any ensigns of Royalty my Deputy Lorenzo Venegas stood up an^
spoke thus. You are assembled by the Authority of King Alfonso, to see the
Popes letters, and resolve to confirm him for your King, whereat all with one
voice cried, We will that he be our King. The Deputy demanded, shall he only be
King and not his sonns after him? They answered he, so long as he lives, and
his sonns after his death, then said the Deputy give him the Royal ensigns:
we give them, answered they, in the name of God: So the Archbishop of Braga,
placed the Crown upon the Kings head; who drawing his sword said; Blessed be
God, that has been my helper, with this sword have I delivered you and
overcome our enemies, and now that you have made me your King, let us make
laws, for the government of the Kingdom, they answered, so will we dread
sovereign, we will make such laws as shall seem good to you, and we and all
our children and posterity are wholly at your command, we will first make laws
for the succession of the Crown as follows.

1 God save King Alfonso let him be master of the Kingdom: and after him (that
there may be no trouble of choosing a King) let his son reign, after him his
grand child, and so from father to son in secula seculorum.

2 If during the fathers life the eldest son die, the next brother shall be
King, and so forward.

3 If the King die without sonns having a brother, he shall succeed, but not
his son after him unless the Parliament will have it so.

Then Lorenzo Venegas, the Kings Deputy, desired the States, to ask the King,
if the daughters should enter into the Succession, of the Kingdom: after some
debate thereon it was resolved. Because the daughters are of the Royal stock
as well as the Sonns, they should succeed on this manner.

4 If the King have only Daughters, the eldest shall be Queen, after her
father, upon condition that she be married to a native of the Kingdom, and
that he be a Nobleman, who shall not take upon him the name of King, until he
has a son born: nor wear a crown on his head, nor take the right (...) of his
wife.

5 Lastly which most concerns the ensuing discourse it was thus enacted.

Sit is it a Lex in sempiternum, quod prima filia Regis accipiat maritum de
Portugale, ut non veniat Regnum ad extraneos and si casaverit cum principe
extraneo, non sit Regina, quia nunquam volumus nostrum Regnum ire for de
Portugalensibus, qui nos sua fortitudine Reges fecerunt sine adjutorio alieno
per suam fortitudinem and cum sangine suo. That is,

Let it be a law for ever, that the Kings eldest daughter marry a native of
Portugal, that so the Crown may never descend to strangers, and in case she
should marry to a Prince that is a stranger, let her not be Queen for we will
never have our Kingdom, go out of the race of the Portugals, who have made us
Kings, by their own valor, without foreign assistance, by their own valor,
and with the effusion of their own blood.

This law was put in execution after the death of D. Fernando the 9 King of
that race, whose daughter, Donna Beatrice, being married out of Portugal to the
King of Castile: D. John, the first was excluded from succession, and a new
election made; from which new election, (that we may hasten to our purpose)
lineally descended, D. Emanuel, the fourteenth King of Portugal, who had six
sonns and two daughters in this following order.

1 The Prince D. John. 2 The Infanta Dona Beatrice, married to the Emperor
Charles the fifth, by whom she had Philip the second. 3 The Infanta Dona
Beatrice, married to Emanuel Duke of Savoy, by whom she had Philip Duke of
Savoy. 4 The Infanta D. Lewis who left only, Don Antonio illegitimate. 5 The
Infant Don fernando died without issue. 6 The Infant D. Alfonso Cardinal
Archbishop of Lisbon, and Abbot of Alcobaza never married. 7 The Infant D.
Henry, Cardinal and Arch bishop of Braga. 8 The Infant D. Edward, who left two
daughters, the eldest was Mary, married out of the Kingdom to Alexander Farnese
Duke of Parma, the younger was Catherine married in the Kingdom to John Duke of
Braganza.
After the death of King Emanuel succeeded his eldest son Don John, called
King John the third: whose only son, that had issue called Prince John,
dieing before his father, left D. Sebastian who succeeding his Grandfather was
slain before he was married, in that Signal battle in Africa; famous for the
deaths of three Kings anno. 1578. where were unfortunatly lost with their King,
most of the Nobility, and Flower of Portugal, Upon the death of King Sebastian,
the crown returned to the eldest survivour of his Granfathers brothers which
was D. Henry, the Cardinal, whose function; (for he was a priest) rendered him
as incapable of marrying as his age, (for he was 67. years old) rendered him
unable for generation, so that during his reign which lasted not two years,
the chief discourses, and debates not only of Portugal but of all Christendom
was: who rightfully and who probably should succeed King Henry. There were some
pretended right but wanted power, others had power, but wanted right, and there
were some pretenders that had neither right nor power.

First, The People claymed jure Regni, to have the right to elect their own
King.

Secondly, the Pope challenged jure Divino, to be the arbitratour, (if not
donour) in all controversies for Crowns, and that Alfonso, the first King, to
obtain the title of King, became Tributary to the sea of Rome.

Thirdly, Don Antonio illegitimate son to the Infant D. Lewis, pretended that
his mother was lawfully wedded (as well as bedded) with his father.

Fourthly, Catherine de Medicis widow of Henry the 2. King of France as
descended from the King of Portugal D. Alfonso, the 3. and for that all since
that King have reigned unjustly.

Fifthly, Philbert Duke of Savoy son to Beatrice, younger daughter to Emanuel,
would not lose a Crown for want of laying claym thereto, knowing that of all
the pretenders that were not natives he was looked on as the fittest to resist
King Philip not only for his personal valor but also for his dominions,
bordering on the Duchy of Milan which in case of need he might invade by the
assistance of the French, his neighbors upon the other side.

7 Reinuce the young Prince of Parma laid claim to this Crown in right of his
Mother Mary, lately deceased; alleging that jure primogeniturae the male line
was to be served before the female; so that until the line of his Grandfather
the Infant D. Edward, were wholly extinct, neither Philip the 2. nor the Duke
of Savoy could have any right

Seventhly, Catherine Duchess of Braganza pleaded that in all successions there
are to be considered these four qualityes, in the persons pretending; viz, the
line, the degree the sex, and the Age, that the better line is first to take
place, although others should have advantage in the other three qualities. That
in succession of Crow^es the last possessour is to be succeeded jure hered
latis which allow^s the benefit of representation, that she representing the
Infant D. Edward, the better line did by her representation, precede Rainuce
(for the law allows not a Grandchild that benefit,) and by her better line
exclude King Philip who descended from a daughter, lastly by the fundamental
Laws of the Kingdom, she was to be preferred before all other the pretenders,
for that she was both born and married within the Kingdom.

Eighthly, Philip the 2. after all resolved that so fair a Crown, lyeing so
conveniently for him should not escape him; yet (because force is of harder
digestion) first to make trial of the most gentle means to effect his
proposed ends, to this purpose, he employes the best wits of all the
Vniversityes in Christendom to prove his, and disprove all other claymes.

After much bickering, it was alleged in favor of King Philip, first against
the Prince of Parma and the Duchess of Braganza, that successions of Crowns
were to be decided by the Law of Nations not of the Empire, upon which only
her jus representandi patrem was grounded, that the nearest male in degree to
the last possessour ought to succeed, that the Infant D. Edw. being deceased
before his brother Henry was King, could have no right in himself, therefore
could derive none to his posterity; for nemo dat quod in se non habet: That it
was very unreasonable that Catherine should be less prejudiced in her self for
her sex, then King Philip should be in his Mother.

Next, it was alleged against the Queen of France, that prescription of above
300 years (whereas Lawyers allow 100 years a sufficient Title for any Kingdom)
lay most evidently against her.

Against the people it was answered, That until the Royal Line of a Kingdom
be quite extinct, there can be no right of election in them.

But the main Argument whereby King Philip confuted these and all other
pretenders, was his sword, wherewith like another Alexander, he cut that
Gordian knot; wherefore not to lose time nor opportunity, whilst the University
invented the most powerful Arguments, he made all preparations possible for a
powerful Army to be ready, in the mean time wrought so effectually with Father
Leon Henriques, a Jesuit, and Confessor to King Henry, and Friar Ferdinando
Castillo a Dominican, that all intentions prejudicial to King Philips designs
were craftily diverted, as from declaring the Duchess of Braganza next heir,
whereunto King Henry was most inclinable; also from marrying in hopes of issue,
whereto he was once so far persuaded, as to endeavor a dispensation from
Rome; but his hopes and intentions were soon after cut off by death: the news
whereof arriving to King Philip, he marched away immediately with an Army of
above twenty thousand old Soldiers toward Lisbon, where he found no other
resistance but Don Antonio, one of the forementioned pretenders in the head of
a popular tumult, rather then a regular Army, which being soon discomfited, and
the suburbs of Lisbon sacked, to gratify the Soldiers, he easily made himself
Master of the whole kingdom: But before this could be brought about, Pope
Gregory the 13 had sent Cardinal Riario Legate into Spain, with order to
dissuade the Catholic King from raising Arms, and so to pass into Portugal,
there to arbitrate the right between all pretenders. Philip to avoid this, and
yet to approve himself (as he always professed) a most obedient son of the
Church, he gave secret order in all places where the Legate was to pass, that
he should be entertained with all respect and magnificence possible, and
thereby be so dexterously detained, that the kingdom might be possessed by him
before the Legate could arrive at Gourt, which was acted accordingly, and the
Legate well satisfied in his entertainment, though not in his negotiation.

When the Nobility and people of Portugal saw themselves thus unawares yoked
by the Castilians against whom above all other there was ever a certain
antipathy of nature, they were exceedingly discontented, but seeing there was
no hope to withstand so great a Potentate as Philip the second, reputed at that
time not only the most prudent (or rather crafty subtle man) but the most
puissant Monarch that later ages have produced, they all submitted to the King,
who the better to win them, condescended to meet that submission, and be sworn
in an Assembly of Estates, to these capitulations following,

1. That his Majesty should observe all Laws, Liberties, Privileges and
Customs granted to the people by former Kings of Portugal. 2. That the Vice
King, or Governor, shall always be the Son, Brother, Uncle, or Nephew of the
King, or else a Native of Portugal. 3. That all chief Offices of the Church
or State shall be bestowed upon the Natives of Portugal, and not upon
strangers. Like wise the Governments of all Towns and Places. That all
Countries now belonging to Portugal, shall so continue to the commodity and
benefit of that Nation. 5. That the Portugal Nation shall be admitted to all
Offices in the Kings House, as well as the Castilians. 6. That because the King
cannot conveniently be always in Portugal, he shall send the Prince to be bred
up amongst them.
At the end of these Articles was adjoined a blessing to those Kings that
should observe them, and a curse to those that should violate them; adding
moreover, That in case (which God forbid) that his Majesty which now is, or his
Successors, should not observe this agreement, or should procure a dispensation
for this Oath, the three States of the Kingdom might freely deny subjection and
obedience to the King, without being guilty either of perjury or treason. This
clause, although it was not printed with the Capitulation made in the first
Assembly of Estates, yet is rehearsed by diverse Authors, amongst others by the
Author della Leg Regia di Portogallo stampata in Madrid.

After this accord, the Cardinal Albert, Archduke of Austria, son to the
Empeour, and neph^^ (...) King Philip, was placed as Vice-(...) of Portugal,
yet durst not his Majesty leave the Kingdom so soon; for he perceived a
general discontent to continue amongst them, insomuch that the Preachers would
ordinarily in their Sermons vent speeches clearly tending to sedition, which
made the King often complain, that the Portugal Preachers had waged the hardest
war with him; but yet that he looked upon them as cracked brained, adding
sometmes with much mildness and patience, Pues dexaldos por que usan a los
privilegios que han los locos. Once Father Lewis Alvarez a Jesuit preaching
before the King on St. Philips day, (about the time that it was argued by some
Lawyers, that the Duchess of Braganza in the succession of this Crown, did
fully represent her Father) turned toward his Majesty saying (as it runs in
the Gospel for that day) Philippe, qui videt me, videt patrem meum, making a
discourse thereon in favor of the Duchess Title; whereat the King not
seeming to be moved at all, keeping his wonted gravity, said, If the Pope, who
had Christened this Father another Saint Paul (for so he was esteemed) had known
him better, he would have styled him rather a Spiritual mad man. Another time
the same Father preaching before the Arch. duke, took his Text, Surge, toll
grabatum tuum, and ambula, turning to the Duke, said, Sir, the meaning hereof
is, Arise up, take up your pack, and be gone home. Moreover in the Chapel of
the Duke of Braganza, they were wont to sing the Lamentations of Jeremy
(wherein the Prophet represents the oppression and scorn which the Israelites
suffered while they were without a King of their own) applying all to
themselves and the Castilians, as Aquam nostram pecunia bibimus, because of the
Excise upon their Drink, and most other necessaries imposed by King Philip; and
Servi dominati sunt in nos. And again, Cecidit Corona capitis nostri, always
ending with Recordare Domine quid acciderit nobis: Intuere and respice
opprobrium nostrum; Haereditas nostra versa est ad alienos.

In the mean time some comforted themselves with expectations of a change by
the return of D. Sebastian whom they would not yet believe to be dead; others
believing that he was indeed killed in the battle of Africa, yet that he
should be restored miraculously. Some gave great credit to old Prophesies,
especially to that of an Hermit to King Alfonso the first, that he should
overcome the Moors with their five Kings, and that in the sixteenth Generation
his line should fail for a time, but that then God should have compassion on
them. And to a letter of St. Bernard wrote to the same King Alfonso, the
original whereof was by the last King of France given to the Ambassador of
Portugal, 1641. the tenor of it was, that he rendered thanks for the lands
bestowed upon him to build a Monastery, that in recompense thereof God bad him
declare unto him, that there should not fail a native of Portugal to sit upon
that Throne, unless for the greatness of their sins God would chastise them
for a time: but that this time of chastisement should not last 60 years. Other
Prophesies there were of one St Gil a Dominican, and Simon Gomez, both living
and reputed for Saints. But whilst the people busied their heads with these
expectations, King Philip proceeded sensim sine sensu to establish and confirm
his right and power over the kingdom, and to break those shackles of
Sovereignty wherewith he was fettered, whose footsteps his son King Philip the
third followed exactly, though not with that craft and dissimulation as his
Father had done; yet during their reigns it must be acknowledged that of many
Articles some were observed; but as soon as Philip the fourth at present King
of Spain, was warm in his Throne, it was resolved by the Count de Olivarez,
Duke of Saint Lucar, that the best way to continue that Nation in subjection
and peace, was to abolish all their privileges, which were but so many
encouragements to oppose the Kings designs; in pursuance whereof the Duchess
of Mantua was made Governor of Portugal, although she was neither Daughter,
Sister, Aunt or Niece to the King; the great Offices were bestowed upon
Castilians, Italians, and other Foreigners; pensions out of the Bishoprics,
and other Ecclesiastical promotions, were also given to strangers; the
governments of Castles and Towns were put into the hands of Castilians: new
Impositions were laid upon the people, the Revenues of the kingdom were
employed for the use of the Court at Madrid, etc.

And that this design of Olivarez might be no way hindered, the Nobility, and
ablest men of the Kingdom were drawn forth some to Court, some to employments
in War, and some to prisons, where they were destined to slaughter, as
appeared by a Letter written from Madrid to Vasconzellos his Agent at Lisbon,
where he says, por los cuernos de los Fidalgos que ya stan aqui, bien puede V.
M. rezar un pater noster por sus almas; mus por aquellos, que no han querido
venir, me recomendo. As for those rascally Gentlemen of Portugal which are here
already, you may bid God have mercy on their souls; but commend me to those
that would not come. But this hard dealing with the Nobility already called
forth of forth of the kingdom, and the calling for more gave the first
occasion to some of the Noblemen to assemble together where they resolve Not
only to stay at home, but to have a King at home; whereupon the Duke of
Braganza, Grandchild of the forementioned Katherine, by the name of Don John
the Fourth now reigning, was advanced to the Crown, as is at large related in
the life of Olivarez, and therefore needs not here to be repeated: Only
hereunto shall be annexed the most memorable passages that have happened since
he came to the Crown.

The Kingdom of Portugal having been possessed by three Kings of Spain,
successively from the year 1580. until the year 1640. not full sixty years,
according to the prophecy of St Bernard; for before Philip the second was
received and sworn their King, it was April, 1581. whereas the present king of
Portugal, Don John the fourth was proclaimed on the first of December, 1640.
being then at Villaviciosa his Country House; upon the fifth of the same Month,
without any pomp or guard, he entered into Lisbon, yet with so great security,
as if he had been guarded with a most invincible Army; whereupon he said, That
to be King and Sovereign of the Portugal Nation, there was no neeed off any
other Guard or Arms then the hearts of the people. So soon as it was known in
Lisbon that the King was arrived, the concourse of People was so great before
the Palace, and the joy so extreme, that for a time they seemed to be
transported out of themselves, some leaping, others dancing, some kissing the
Kings hand, others throwing themselves down at his Foot; all shouting and
crying, Viva viva el Rey Dom Joam el quarto nosso Senhor; God save the king D.
John the fourth, our Sovereign Lord. That Evening all the Cannons were
discharged, and so many Fireworks and Lights, that the Night was turned into
Day, whereat a Spanish Gentleman said, Es possible que se quita un Reyno a el
Rey D Felipe con solas Luminarias y vivas sin mas exercito in poder. Gran senal
y efeto sin duda del brazo de Dios todo poderoso. Is it possible that king
Philip should be deprived of a whole kingdom with only Lights and Fireworks
without a powerful Army. Certainly this is an evident token of the Almighties
power.

Upon the fifteenth following was the King solemnly crowned, in the great place
before his Palace, upon a Theater, whereon was raised a great Scaffold, and upon
that a lesser, whereon was placed three steps higher a Chair of State under a
Canopy all covered over with cloth of Gold; about Midday came forth his Majesty
in a Suit of Chesnut-coloured Velvet embroidered with Gold and Buttons of
Diamonds; about his Neck a Collar of great value, whereunto hung the habit of
the chief order of Knighthood, called, El Orden de Christo; He was girded with
a gilt Sword; his Robe was cloth of Gold lined with White, wrought with Gold
flowers; his Train was born up by the Lord Chamberlain D. John Roderiguez;
before his Majesty was the Sword borne by D. Francis de Mello Marquis of
Ferreira high Constable of the kingdom; and before him the kings Banner
displayed by Fernando Tells de Meneses as knight Marshall, and before him the
Marquis of Govea D. Manrique de Sylva Steward of the kings House, with all the
Grandees, Nobility and Gentry; before all went Portugal king at Arms, with the
Heralds, Pursevants, etc.

His Majesty being sat in his Chair with a Crystal Scepter in his right
Hand, whereon stood the high Constable, and behind the Chair the Lord
Chamberlain: There was placed before him a Table covered with cloth of Gold,
with a Cushion thereon, and upon the cushion a Cross of Gold with a Missall;
then the Archbishops of Lisbon and Braga, with the Inquisitor-Generall,
kneeling down upon a Cushion, made his Oath to the kingdom as follows:

WE swear and promise by the grace of God, to Rule and Govern you well and
justly, and to administer unto you Justice as far as Humane frailty will
permit; to maintain unto you your Customs, Privileges, and Liberties granted
unto you by the Kings our Predecessors. So God help Us, and this his holy
Gospel.

After this taken by the King, the three Estates, Clergy, Nobility and Commons
swore Allegiance to his Majesty in these words; One for every Estate said:

I Swear by this holy Gospel of God touched corporally with my Hand, that I
receive for our King and lawful Sovereign, the High and Mighty King Don John
the Fourth our Sovereign, and do Homage unto him according to the use and
custom of his Kingdom.

This Ceremony being past, Francis de Lucena, Secretary of State, standing in
the middle of the Scaffold, with a loud voice declared, That his Majesty
accepted the Oath and Homage which they had made. Then the King at Arms having
cried O yez thrice, Ferdinando Tells de Meneses, knight Marshal, with a loud
voice said, Royal, Royal, Royal, for the high and mighty Lord King John the
fourth our Sovereign; and the Heralds with all the people ecchoed, Royal,
Royal, Royal: Then all the Drums, Trumpets and Fifes sounding, his Majesty
came off the Theater, and mounting on Horseback, rode under a most rich Cloth
of State toward the great Church, with all his Grandees and Nobles before him
bare headed on foot. By the way in a great open place were presented unto the
King, together with an eloquent Harangue, the keys of the City; which being
returned, his Majesty rode forward with incredible acclamations and applause,
the Ladies out of the Windows throwing down Flowers and sweet Waters upon
their heads with a thousand benedictions, etc. In this pomp his Majesty was
received at the Cathedral Church by the Archbishop in his Pontificalibus;
whence (his devotions being ended) he returned to his Palace with the like
solemn magnificence.

The kingdom of Portugal being thus established, care was taken to give
timely notice hereof to all places under their subjection in all parts of the
world, so that not long after the King was with unexpressible joy proclaimed in
the Island Madera, in Porto Santo, in Mazagan and Aer upon the coast of Africa,
in the Island of St Michael, in the kingdom of Angola, in the Tercera Islands,
(although the Governor there made some resistance at first) in Brasile, in all
the East Indies, and as far as China.

On the 8 of January following, with the like pompous solemnity the three
Estates took an oath to the Prince in these words: We acknowledge and receive
for our true and Natural Prince, the high and excellent Prince D. Theodosio,
Son, Heir, and successor of our sovereign Lord the King, and as his true and
natural subjects and vassals, we do him homage in the hands of the King; and
after the death of our sovereign Lord the King, we will acknowledge and receive
him for our true and natural King and Sovereign of those kingdoms of Portugal
and Algarbe, and beyond sea in Africa, Lord of Guine, of the Conquests,
Navigations, and Commerce in Ethiopia, Arabia, Persia, India, etc. we will obey
his Commands and Decrees in all and through all both high and low, we will make
war and maintain peace with all those that his Highness shall command us. And
all this we swear to God upon the holy Cross, and the holy Gospel.

Next day the King being placed on his Royal Throne, there was an Assembly of
the three estates in their rich Robes, where D. Emanuel de Acugna, Bishop of
Elvas, made a most eloquent speech, the substance whereof was, That one of the
first Laws of Nature was, the uniting of men together, from whence Cities and
kingdoms had their original, and by which they after defended themselves in
wars, and maintained themselves in peace; that for this cause his Majesty had
called this Assembly to consult for the better service of God, defense in
war, and government in peace, that there could be no service of God without
union in Religion, no defense without union amongst Men, no Regular government
without union of Councels: That his Majesty did expect to be informed by his
loyal subjects, what was for the good of the State; That they were to render
thanks to the Almighty, who had given them a King that would govern by the
known Laws: That his Majesty did not esteem those Tributes lawful that were
paid with tears, and therefore did from this present take off from his subjects
all tribute that ever have been imposed by the kings of Castile; because his
Majesty will not reign over our goods, nor over our heads, nor over our
privileges, but over our hearts, hoping that you will find out a more sweet
expedient to defend your Country against your potent enemy, who threatens to
make us all slaves, and to destroy and annihilate our Nation. Let us therefore
considering his Majesty's goodness, and our own honor, manifest at once unto
the whole world, that as never subjects had such a gracious king, so never king
had such loyal subjects.

Then standing up the most ancient officer of the Chamber of Lisbon, in the
name of the three Estates (who all stood up likewise) returned humble thanks to
his Majesty for his gracious bounty, professing withal, that they did not
only offer up their goods, but consecrate their lives to his Majesty's
service, that his Majesty might freely dispose of the one and the other to his
service, according to his pleasure, etc.

In pursuance whereof they voted, that two millions should be presently levied
by the kingdom; but his Majesty not being willing that any money should be
imposed upon the subject as a tax, all men strove who should advance most
freely, so that in few days, there were brought in 4 millions of gold, not to
pay soldiers (for all offered their service to pursue the war gratis at their
own charges) but to maintain the splendour of the King and Kingdom.

The next resolution of this Assembly was to dispatch Ambassadors to all States
of Christendom to enter into confederations for the better establishment of the
Kingdom, and reputation of the King.

In the first place his Majesty considering how much it did import to
correspond with Catalonia, that so they might jointly not only defend
themselves, but also molest Castile, which being as it were between the two
arms of Portugal and Catalonia, must needs be easily incommodated by them both
at Sea and Land; thither was sent Ambassador Father Ignatius Mascarenas a
Jesuit, with another Father of the same Order, to offer them all assistance and
supplies for their maintenance and defense against the Catholic King, which
Ambassy did so incredibly rejoice and encourage the Catalonians, that the very
next day they obtained a most signal victory by courageously defending
themselves against the Spanish Army of 25000. men under the conduct of the
Marquess de los Veles.

The next was a most solemn Embassage to the most Christian King Lewis 13. for
which high employment were chosen two personages of great worth, D. Francisco
de Mello and D. Antonio Coello de Caravallio, the one for his exquisite
judgment and experience in State affairs, and the other for his noble spirit
and eminent knowledge in the Civil Law, most fit to undertake so important a
charge. These two personages attended with a magnificent train landed at
Rochel, and upon the 15 of March made a most solemn entrance into Paris, being
met and conducted by 134. Coaches, besides much Nobility on Horseback unto the
Palace appointed for Extraordinary Ambassadors, where they were entertained in
a sumptuous manner at the Kings charges, from thence were they carried by the
Duke of Cheureuse and the Count of Brulon in the Kings Coaches unto his Majesty
then at St Germains to receive their first Audience, which was performed with
extraordinary respect, for upon the Ambassadors entrance into the presence
chamber his Majesty rose out of his Chair and came forward three steps to
receive them, nor would the King suffer them to deliver their Ambassy
uncovered, or to kiss his hand at their departure, but instead thereof embraced
them in his arms with a cheerful countenance, promising them all the
assistance that lay in his power: From the Kings presence they were conducted
to a Dinner provided for them, and after that to the Lodgings of the Queen, who
sitting in a chair without arms rose up, and coming forward two or three steps
received them most courteously, not permitting them to speak until they were
covered: Amongst other discourse, D. Francisco de Mello told her Majesty, that
he feared his Embassy would not be acceptable, for that his Master had deprived
her brother of one of his Kingdoms, whereto her Majesty replied, that although
she was sister to the King of Spain, yet she was wife to the King of France,
and thereupon began to speak Spanish, which the Ambassador observing, demanded
wherefore her Majesty had not vouchsafed them that favor sooner, it being a
language better understood by them? the Queen answered, for fear they should be
daunted to hear her speak Spanish; the Ambassador to improve the jest replied,
Como a tam grande Senora, si, pero como a Castillana, no. It was true
considering her greatness, but not her Country, whereat her Majesty smiling
went on promising them all favor, and wishing many happy days to King John
and the Prince his son: thus having delivered to her Majesty a Letter from the
Queen of Portugal, they took leave to go visit the most Eminent Cardinal
Richelieu, who being advertised of their coming, came forward to the third
chamber to meet them, and there received them with expressions of great
affection, after which he conducted them into his own Chamber, where all three
being sat his Eminence (a personage for his most admirable abilities worthy to
live many ages) discovered diverse affairs of importance to the Ambassadors, and
they o^ the other side made his Eminence understand how highly it imported that
the two Crowns of France and Portugal should be united by an indissoluble
league and amity, considering that the primary and principal aim of the house
of Austria (whose branches were spread over Europe) was not only to be the
greatest, but the only Monarch of Christendom, for which end it never made
scruple to usurp Kingdoms and States upon the weakest pretenses imaginable, as
have appeared in the Kingdoms of Naples, Sicily and Navarre, the Duchy of
Milan, and several other States more lately in Germany, the seizing upon the
Valtelline, that so (being Master of that passage) he may upon any opportunity
lead an Army of high Germans into Italy: Moreover considering the vast power
and interest this Family has, not only in all the other States of Italy and
Germany, and in the Low Countries, but also in almost all America; it must be
confessed that they have a large foundation of their imaginary universal
Monarchy, yet no one thing gave them so great hopes as the possession of
Portugal: First because by the addition of that Kingdom, they became absolute
Masters not only of all Spain, but of all the East Indies, of all the Eastern
Trade, of Ethiopia, Persia, Arabia, China, Iapan, and all that incredible
wealth that was raised out of the Portugal Traffic, whereby the Austrian
greatness (if not their Monarchy) was principally sustained, therefore that it
much concerned all States to endeavor not only to put a stop to the growth of
that monstrous tree, but to cut off some arms thereof that it may the less
damnify and annoy the lesser trees that grow by it: that to do this none was
more concerned or more able then the Kingdom of France united with the Kingdom
of Portugal, which having bin reputed the right arm (as Catalonia was the left)
of that huge Austrian Colossus and now separated from it and joined with
France, will be able to do as great service against it, as ever it has been
forced to do for it, not only by assaulting the Spaniard at home in his own
house but by intercepting the Plate-Fleet which coming from the West Indies,
must necessarily pass by the gates of their Enemies (the Tereera Islands) and
so run a hazard to be lost, or else be at the charges of an extraordinary
Convoy. Having thus discoursed with his Eminence of those and other weighty
affairs, he was pleased to offer not only all the assistance of the most
Christian King, but that he would disburse of his own for the Service of
Portugal, that he would presently send thither a Fleet of twenty Sail with his
Nephews Admiral and Ambassador extraordinary: whereupon the Ambassadors taking
leave, they were accompanied by his Eminence as far as the stairs, which the
Ambassadors endeavoring to hinder, the Cardinal told them that the Ambassadors
of Portugal were to be treated with no less respect then those of the Emperor
or Pope. Some few days after in the house of the Grand Chancellor, there was
appointed a Junta of the Ambassadors with his Majesty's Commissioners, together
with the Secretary Chavigny, where was soon concluded a peace and league
between the Crown of France and Portugal, and the Ambassadors with much
courtesy and satisfaction dismissed.

It very much concerned the kingdom of Portugal to maintain amity and peace
with the Crown of England, not only for the Navigation and Commerce of both
States, but also for other particular ends in the present conjuncture of
affairs, principally to break the good correspondency that was at present
maintained between the Crowns of Spain and England: For this purpose in March
1641. were dispatched for England Don Antonio de Almada, and Dr Francisco de
Andrada Leiton, personages of great abilities, who arriving safe (in spite of
the Dunkerkers that chased them) in England, were received with demonstrations
of great courtesy (notwithstanding the earnest laboring of the Spanish
Resident to the contrary.) It is true, that his Majesty of England was so
tender of his honor and conscience, that he answered Dr Antonio de Sosa,
Secretary to the Ambassadors sent before to make way, that he would be first
satisfied by what right and title his Master was made King of Portugal, before
he would accept of the Embassage. Whereupon the Secretary (being one of the
most exquisite wits of this age) in the space of twenty four hours, drew up and
presented to his Majesty a writing, which declared at large what here in
substance ensues.

Upon the death of King Henry the Cardinal without issue, many pretended
(together with the Infanta Donna Catherine, Duchess of Braganza, and
Grandmother to this present King) to the Crown of Portugal, but all their
pretenses wanting foundation, soon fell, except that of Philip the second, King
of Spain, who propt up his with force.

King Henry was Uncle, equally near to both, but with this difference,
Catherine was the daughter of a son named Edward, and Philip was son of a
daughter named Isabella, brother and sister to King Henry.

King Philip pleaded, that he being in equal degree with Catherine, was to be
preferred for his sex.

Catherine replied, That the constitution of that kingdom allowing females to
succeed; and withal, the benefit of representation in all Inheritances, she
representing Edward must exclude Philip by the very same right that her Father
(if he were living) would exclude Philips mother.

This conclusion is infallible in jure, whereto Philip answered, That
succession of kingdoms descending jure sanguinis, there was allowed no
representation.

Catherine destroyed that foundation, alleging, That the succession by the
death of the last King, was derived jure haereditario, and non sanguinis,
because the succession of Kingdoms was to be regulated by that ancient way
whereby all things descended by inheritance. The other way of succession being
not known until later Ages, nor ever practiced either in Spain or Portugal in
such cases.

Briefly, in behalf of Catherine it was urged (which by the Castilians can
never be denied or answered) that she was no stranger, but a Native of the
kingdom, to whom alone (according to the Laws of Lamego) the Crown of Portugal
can appertain.

This is the simple Title of the House of Braganza, against which the
Castilians have forged a thousand Titles for the House of Austria, as being the
tenth or twentieth Grandchild of such a King, or such a Prince, etc. which if
sufficient Title against the next allies, certainly the King of Castile is not
only King of Portugal, but all Europe (for there is scarce a Prince from whom
he is not descended) and happily this is the ground whereon he builds his hopes
to be universal Monarch, unless perchance he may esteem himself so by Will
from Adam, as some have imagined.

When the King had received and deliberated upon the writing, he gave order
that they should be conducted to London with all solemnity convenient, and
disposed of in a Palace ready prepared for them; after which with great
ceremony they received audience of his Majesty in a most stately fair Hall,
where his Majesty was placed on a Throne raised two steps, on each side
Latices, within which stood his Nobles; at the Ambassadors entrance, as they
made their reverence, the King uncovered himself and would not be covered
until the Ambassadors were so too: To the Proposals made by Don Antonio de
Almlda, the King answered he should be very glad to find out a way to be friend
to the King of Portugal, and to renew the an^ient amity of the two Crowns
without (...) with Spain.

Some days following the Ambassadors went to visit the Queen, who being placed
under a cloth of State (upon the entrance of the Ambassadors) rose up and came
forward down as far as the Carpet extended, making a low reverence at all
three times, that the Ambassadors bowed, and being come nearer, her Majesty
made them be covered; then uncovering themselves again, they spoke with their
hats in their hands; which ended, the Queen told them, that she much desired to
keep strait amity with her Majesty the Queen of Portugal, etc.

Don Alon so de Cardenas, Ambassador Ordinary in the Court of England for the
King of Spain, labored still by friends, by moneys, by promises even to to the
restitution of the Palatinate, so that the peace might not be made with
Portugal, but in vain; for upon the 13 of June 1641 the peace was concluded.

The Commerce and correspondence that have always been between the kingdom of
Portugal and Denmark, induced King John to send Ambassadors thither; but the
greater correspondence with the House of Austria, and some dependence upon the
Emperor, hindered the reception of that Embassage,; yet the King, and all the
principal of the kingdom, desiring not to break with Portugal, gave all other
satisfaction possible by extraordinary courtesies and respect to the
Ambassadors, who from thence went into Swethland, where they were received with
much solemnity and rejoicing by the whole kingdom. Their reception at the
young Queens Court at Stockholm, was very magnificent, where a league was soon
concluded, and the Ambassadors dismissed) as the manner is there) with chains
of Gold, and her Majesty's portrait in a Medall of Gold. With the like
readiness did the States of the Low Countries receive the Embassage brought
thither by that worthy personage, Tristano de Mendoza Hurtada, and a Truce of
ten years made with Portugal; not a peace because the Hollander having
conquered many places in Brasil, Angola, etc. whilst those countries were under
the King of Spain, that neither side might be prejudiced, the King of Portugal
would not approve of the conquests, because they were places depending on the
Crown of Portugal; nor could the States promise restitution, because they now
belonged to their West Indy Company, who since have often violated the Articles
of this Truce, to the great dishonor of the States, to whom (so long as they
neglect to punish the transgressors of their own Capitulations) no State will
treat or trust for the future, seeing them so shamefully break their word
without the least occasion given

It was long debated in the Court of Portugal, whether an Embassage should be
sent to his Holiness at Rome, or else a more opportune conjuncture of time
expected. Some were of opinion that an Embassage was to be sent thither without
further delay, because thereby they clearly testifying their duty and respect
to his Holiness, as he was Head of the Catholic Church, Portugal should gain
his good favor, and an acknowledgement that his Majesty Don John was rightful
King of Portugal, which would be of very much importance to the affairs of the
Kingdom.

But these considerations seemed to others rather things desirable then
feasible. First, because the King of Spain was at present powerful at Rome to
oppose the reception of their Ambassador. Secondly, because the Pope, although
he was never in heart a Spaniard, yet he would never yield to show himself an
enemy to the Catholic King. Moreover, the Spaniard cunningly fomenting the
opinion which all the world had entertained, That his Holiness did in all
things incline to the French interest, would from such a reception draw as much
as they could ever ask or desire; for this cause the Pope (that he might not
seem their enemy) always granted them what ever they demanded: Therefore it
was alleged, That it would be better first to sound the mind and inclinations
of his Holiness, then to run the hazard of some disgrace and afront to his
Majesty and the whole Nation. And in case the Pope should resolve not to
receive the Embassage, to whom could they appeal for the injury done to the
Crown? We see many Popes so bewitched with the interest of their own families,
as to give occasion to the world to believe, that their aim is not what is
absolutely the best, but what is best for themselves. An example hereof we have
in Pope Gregory the thirteenth, so affectionate to the kingdom of Portugal at
first, that he employed the utmost of his power to hinder King Philip the
second from usurping it; yet shortly after, for the interest of his own family,
approved all that was done by the same King. Who has more to give, or at least
to promise, then the Catholic King? Therefore in any business of competition,
he must necessarily have the advantage against all others.

Nevertheless the French promising their assistance at Rome, and their
intercession with his holiness, it was at length resolved by the major part,
that an Embassage should be speedily sent to Rome.

His Majesty hereupon made choice of D. Michael de Portogallo, son to Count
Vimioso of the blood Royal, Bishop of Lamego, and Pantableone Rodriguez Bishop
of Elvas, personages of abilities suitable to so high an employment. Upon the
news of their landing in Italy, the Spaniards in Rome on the one side,
provided to oppose their entrance, at least hinder their reception; the French,
Portugals and Catalonians on the other side, resolved to venture their lives in
the Cause: His Holiness fearing a petty war should be kindled in his own bosom,
and the dishonor that would accrue to him in case that the person of an
Ambassador should be violated as it were in his own house, gave order to all
his Officers and Guards to prevent al intended violences. Whereupon the
Spaniard openly protested, that if his Holiness received the Portugal
Ambassador, they with their Ambassadors, would immediately leave Rome.
Notwithstanding all oppositions, in Novem. 1641, the two Portugal Ambassadors
being met by diverse Cardinals, Princes and Cavaliers well armed, entered into
Rome, and were conducted to the palace of the French Ambassador, who with much
courtesy received them at his gate, always giving them the precedence.

Hereupon the Spanish Ambassadors, the Marquess de los Velos, and D. John
Chiumazzero, scattered abroad their Manifestos, wherein they labored to prove
that his Holiness ought not to receive the Ambassadors of the Duke of Braganza
(as they styled him) First, because he was a tyrant and usurper of a kingdom
that had been in the quiet possession of the Catholic kings the space of sixty
years: Secondly, because the Duke was a Rebel, and a perjured person, having
before sworn allegiance to the Catholic King: Thirdly, that the reception of
these Ambassadors would be very much prejudicial to the Catholic King, by
giving encouragement to others to attempt the like Rebellions, etc.

The Ambassadors in the mean time lost no time in endeavoring by themselves,
and by the French Ambassador (who had express order for the same from his
master) to incline his Holiness to admit their Embassage; but his Holiness, who
had ever showed himself very timorous to give any disgust to the Spaniard, lest
they should take occasion to do his Holiness a displeasure, or revenge
themselves hereafter upon his Nephews, resolved to refuse the Embassage,
pretending certain violations of the Church Rites in Portugal, and that he was
much unsatisfied in their King, for his detaining in prison the Archbishop of
Braga, and other Ecclesiastical persons, although his Majesty had most just
cause so to do, as shall hereafter appear. So soon as the Spaniards
understood this resolution of his Holiness, (whilst the Portugals were
laboring to prove their cause by Declarations, Allegations, and Arguments, as
well Political as Legal) they resolved to make a quick dispatch of the
business, and for that purpose had drawn together above two hundred Banditi
with intent o seize upon the Bishop of Lamego, and carry him away to Naples, as
they had done the Prince of Sans, who was there put to death: but the Marquis
de lo^ Veles was understood by some of his servants, that it would be better
taken to give the Portugal Ambassadors some high affront upon some encounter in
the streets which being communicated to the rest of the Nation, (whereof there
are always many in Rome) some to obtain dispensations of marriage, others to
get spiritual livings) they flocked to the Spanish Ambassadors Palace well
provided of Army and (that they might not be looked on a Soldiers) went under
the name of Foo^ men to the Marquess, whereof the Po^^ taking special notice,
made it known the Marquess that these proceedings in peaceable City, were much
distasted; an at the same time sent a Messenger to assure the Bishop of Lamego
that he should not fear any thing, for that upon the word of his Holiness, he
should walk the streets untouched: yet upon the 20 of August 1642, the Bishop
going to visit the French Ambassador, was followed by a Spy of the Marquess to
see whither he went; which being observed by some of the Bishops retinue, they
sent a counter-spy to see what they did at the Marquess House; and finding
there great preparation of Coaches and Men, news thereof was brought to the
French Ambassador, whereupon the French, Portugals, and Catalonians were soon
assembled with their Pistols and Firelocks to convoy home the Bishop, who by
the way after Sun set was met by the Marquess guarded with ^bove sixty Footmen
and eight Coaches, full of Captains and Officers called hither from Naples,
besides diverse others, and subjects of that Crown. So soon as they spied the
Bishops Coach, the Spaniards ^ried aloud, Si fermassero all* Ambasciatore ^i
Spagna, that they should stop for the Ambassador of Spain, whereto the
Portugals answered, che si fermassero loro, that they should stop: whereupon
all leaped out of their Coaches with their naked swords, and making a stand,
discharged one Gun, which was followed by both sides with a most gallant volley
of shot: There were slain on the Portugal part, a Knight of Malta, and one
Lacky that belonged to the French Ambassador, together with one Italian and a
Portugal Page, besides diverse wounded. On the Spanish part there were eight
slain in the place, and about 20 wounded, the Marquess leaving his Coach and
Horses dead, crept forth not by the Boot, but behind the Coach, between the two
wheels, and fled into the next shop without his hat, without any color in his
face, or spirit in his body, and from thence was carried to the Palace of the
Spanish Cardinal Albornoz, his Coach standing upon the place till the next day.
The Bishop of Lamego went back to the house of the French Ambassador, and
thence to his own House. His Holiness much disquieted at these insolences,
commanded a guard of Soldiers to be presently put upon the house both of the
Marquess and the Bishop, who not long after was by the King of Portugal called
home, after he had again pressed and urged the Pope (by a large memorial of the
reasons wherefore he ought to be received) and had been again refused.

About this time was with much artifice contrived and most shamefully effected
the imprisonment of that most gallant Prince, the Infant Edward, called by the
Portugals Don Duarte brother to the King now reigning, who for diverse years
(before his brother had any thoughts of a Crown) had served the Emperor in his
Wars with eminent gallantry, and as eminent success. Upon the news of the
revolt of Portugal, this Prince was in the Emperors service, being resolved
there to continue until he was betrayed by Don Francisco de Mello a Portugal
then Ambassador in the Emperors Court for the Catholic King, who
notwithstanding all his obligations to the house of Braganza, yet with intent
to build his fortunes upon their ruin, most earnestly sollicites the Emperor
to seize upon his person and deliver him up to the King of Spain, alleging
how much it concerned the Interests of the Catholic King, that the person of
Don Duarte should be secured, and how much it behoved his Imperial Majesty in
this particular, to show his affection to the Catholic King his brother, and
to the whole house of Austria, showing that this Prince was the main prop of
the house of Braganza, that God had left this only remedy in the hands of the
house of Austria whereby Portugal may be reduced to obedience, that it would be
a great error not to make use of this opportunity, that if he should escape out
of their hands, he might by his great insight in Warlick affairs assist his
brother, and thereby much infest the Catholic King.

The Emperor having heard this discourse of Mello, was at first so far from
being persuaded, that he answered him, he abhorred the breach of public Faith,
and the violation of Hospitality, that this would be against the Liberties of
the Empire, and against his own honor to imprison a Prince for no fault; but on
the contrary, that had deserved so well of the Empire, and to whom his Majesty
confessed himself very much obliged.

The Archduke Leopold, brother to the Emperor, did so far detest the motion,
that he said he washed his hands of so foul and shameful an act, yet Mello not
at all discouraged pursues his design, corrupting with sums of money the Count
of Tratmansdorff, and some other pensioners to the Crown of Spain; but they at
length ashamed of the employment, Mello resolves upon a more subtle invention,
which was to persuade the Emperor to hearken to one Father Diego de Quiroga,
who of a Soldier turned Monk, and was now Confessor to the Empress; this
Father being wont to give his opinion of such actions as these according to the
rules of Interest of State, would persuade the Emperor not only that with good
conscience he might secure the person of Don Duarte, but that for divirs
reasons of State he ought to do it: His Imperial Majesty at first very
unsatisfied in the business, was resolved not to do it, but by the importunity
of Mello and the ghostly persuasions of Quiroga, he was at length induced to
alter his resolution, and to give order to D. Jews Gonzaga that he should go
to Leipen the Princes quarters, and to summon him to Ratisbon: in the mean time
to prevent the ill impression that this would cause in the minds of all men of
honor and honesty; it was reported abroad that D. Duarte was fled for some
misdemeanor, and thereupon proposal was made of sixteen thousand crowns to any
man that could bring him alive or dead; of which the Prince being ignorant
escaped very narrowly the hands of some of those people that went searching for
him in hopes of the proposed reward; when he was com to Ratisbon he was cast
into a vile prison appointed only for persons of mean quality, and all his
Servants imprisoned, D. de Francisco de Mello not content herewith, now
sollicites the Emperor afresh that he may be delivered into the Spaniards
hands, and sent prisoner to Milain, whereto his Majesty would not hearken, but
on the contrary sent a message to D. Duarte, promising upon his word not to
deliver him into the hands of the Spaniard, but to procure speedily his
liberty. But his ill usage increasing, D. Duarte made all the means possible to
get audience of the Emperor, which would never be granted, nor was it any
wonder, for there is no face mere ugly or more terrible to the offender tehn
the face offended; hereupon the Infant made his protestation, calling God and
man to witness the wrong and injury done unto him by the Emperor, to whom he
was neither subject by any obligation or birth, that when his brother was made
King of Portugal he was in the Emperors service, wholly ignorant of any design
of his brothers, that if the King of Spain was offended, he might revenge
himself upon the person offending that that business no way concerned the
Emperor: All which particulars were acknowledged by his Imperial Majesty, by a
messenger sent to Don Duarte in prison, assuring him again that he should not
be delivered into the hands of his enemies, yet that his liberty could not be
granted for some reasons of State, whereupon D. Francisco de Sosa Coutigno
Ambassador extraordinary from Portugal to Swethland in the name of the King his
Master, represented at large to the Diet at Ratisbon the whole proceeding,
requiring justice and libirty for the Infant; But nothing can prevail against
Interest, the effects of all Manifesto's, Petitions and Intercessions were that
the Infant was removed from place to place, and sent farther off where he had
still harder usage, only the Emperor seemed yet immutable in his resolution not
to deliver him into the hands of the Spaniard until the most powerful means
in this world to conquer all difficulties was used, which is money; for upon
promise of forty thousand crowns the Emperor (contrary to the immunities of the
Empire, to the rules of hospitality, to the privilege of free Princes, to the
Law of Nations, and contrary to his word and promise so often reiterated)
yielded that the most innocent Prince should be sent whether the Catholic King
should think meet: so he was hurried away toward the State of Milain to remain
prisoner in that Castle; by the way as he entered into the Spanish Territories
he was received by the Count de Siruela the Governor of that state, wherethe
Commissary of the Emperor took his leav to return, to whom D. Duarte said
openly, Tell thy Master that I am more sorry that I have served so unworthy a
Prince, then to see my self a prisoner sold into the hands of my enemies, but
that the just Judge of the World will one day suffer the like dealing toward
his children, who are no more privildged for being of the house of Austria,
then my self that am of the blood royal of Portugal, and that posterity will
judge of him and of me.

The Emperor in his instructions to those that convoyed the Infant, gave
express order that in case their prisoner made any attempt to escape, they
should kill him upon the place. Being arrived at Milain, he was clapped up in the
prison where all the Rogues and Banditi are to be kept, with a guard in the
same chamber so rude that he could hardly take any sleep.

Any man of honor would have been pierced to the very soul with this harsh
treaty, how much more a Prince of so high blood, who knew himself descended
from so many glorious Kings, and allied to the greatest Princes of Europe, for
which cause the Kings ever treated the house of Braganza much different from
the Grandees of Spain, giving them the respect due to sovereign Princes, in so
much that Philip the second who desired to a base that Family, always received
the Duke of Braganza under the same cloth of State within the Royal Curtain in
all public Assemblies, allowing him always a chair with a cushion, and as often
as he went to visit his Majesty, he would go to receive the Duke as far as the
middle of the chamber: Besides, the Princes of this Family had always a guard
of their own to wait upon them even in the Kings Court.

This then was the reward of that unfortunate prince, for having left his
Country, Kindred, Friends, Interest, fot having served the Emperor eight
years at his own proper charges, for having ventured his life upon all
occasions with the foremost, expecting no other pay then thanks, and no other
recompense then honor.

Yet there wanted not some to defend the Emperor in this action, alleging
that it was no new thing, for that Charles Duke of Burgundy had in the same
manner delivered up the Count de St. Paul to the King of France, who put him to
death; whereunto it was answered, That all the misfortune of that Prince is by
Philip de Comines, and others, attributed to that foul fact, Ex isto tempore,
says one, nihil Carolo prospere successit, sed calamitati accessit calamitas,
donec victus ab Helvetiis ad Nanecium miserrime trucidatus est.

When D. John the present King of Portugal, had been fully informed how his
brother was treated, he was resolved to revenge himself by Arms; but the
Castilians beginning to make incursions upon all the borders of Porougal,
diverting his thoughts, made him look nearer home to put the kingdom into a
posture of Defense, to fortify his chief Towns, and to train up all the
people to the use of Arms.

The Castilians in the inroads that they made into Portugal* laid all waste
before them, spared neither sex nor age upon the taking of any place, which so
enraged the Portugals, that to revenge themselves, they did the like in an
incursion into Galitia.

During these extremities of Barbarism upon the confines of the kingdom,
there was wonderful tranquillity and unanimity at home; only some few thought
themselves so far obliged to the Catholic King, as to re-establish him in
his Throne, amongst whom D. Sebastian de Matos Archbishop of Braga, a creature
of the Count de Olivarez was the principal, who at the beginning of the revolt
opposed himself so much, that diverse Gentlemen were once resolved to send him
after Vazconzellos. This Prelat having imparted his design to D. Lewis de
Meneses Marquess de Villa Real, an ambitious man, and to his son the Duke de
Camigna, both discontented because they thought themselves not preferred
according to their merits, persuaded them that it was a most unworthy thing to
suffer themselves to be subject to a fellow-subject, but rather return to the
obedience and loyalty of their ancient Sovereign, who is able to bestow upon a
deserving man more in one day, then the Duke of Braganza in an hundred years,
etc. Insomuch that they were soon gained. Next, the Archbishop draws in D.
Augustine Manuele, a man of noble blood, excellent parts, necessitous, and
never yet employed in any business; all notable motives to make a man embrace
desperate designs. After him was assaulted Pietro de Baeza, an upstart
Christian (as they call those Christians whose ancestors were once Jews: this
Gentleman famous for his vast riches and his great intimacy with that eminent
Favorite, the Count Olivarez, was wont to say, That Olivarez favor would one
day advance him either to high honor or else to a high gallows; which proved
precisely true, as will appear anon.

These, with some few other Conspirators, often assembled themselves privately to
consider how their designs might be speedily put in execution; for which
purpose some were of opinion, that many more were to be drawn into the plot:
But then it was feared on the one side, that thereby the design might be
discovered; on the other side that there was a necessity thereof, for that
without communicating to others, the business rested only in the Idaea. Others
advised that the assistance of the King of Spain was to be got in readiness;
but that then the King of Portugal would make as great preparations, and so
render that way difficult; yet some replied, that thereby the Spaniard by way
of intelligence might be the more easily let in, but that seemed as difficult,
because the whole Militia was in the hands of persons most trusty to the King.
Another time they had thoughts of taking the King out of the way by some sudden
violent death, which by some more moderate was opposed, and that rather some
way was to be invented to cause his Majesty to renounce his title to the Crown,
and to retire himself out of the danger represented unto him. In this wavering
condition most of them inclined to a mediocrity, although the same in all
eminent attempts is the very stepmother of good success. Moderate resolutions
are the most of all pernitions where a design is to begin with execution: Yet
some more valorous and less wary then the rest, were of opinion that they
should presently set upon the the work, and leave the success to the
disposition of Fortune, insomuch that of many Irons that were in the fire, none
was yet hot.

Amongst the conspirators, diverse of them (notwithstanding his Majesty's
express prohibition) kept secret correspondence with the Court at Madrid by the
means of diverse persons much suspected. The King of Portugal (who had always
an eye upon the Archbishop of Braga, and the Marquess de Villa Real, knowing
their disaffection from the beginning) at length intercepts some of their
Letters, wherein was discovered the names of the conspirators, and the whole
treaty; wherefore his Majesty desiring to secure all their persons at once,
without any noise, gave order that by sound of Trumpet and Drum (as the custom
is) it should be proclaimed, That his Majesty intended to go abroad forth of
the City; whereupon all the Nobility (out of their great affection to his
Majesty) were soon assembled to wait upon him. When the King saw them all
ready, he commanded first to call a Council of State, where some of the
conspirators assisted; being there sat, he caused them all to be arrested one
by one without the least disturbance, which certainly could otherwise have been
hardly prevented; for if the conspiracy had been known before the persons were
in custody, there would not have been so much danger of their escape, as to
have been immediately (without expecting the course of justice torn in pieces by
the people. Besides, the wisdom of his Majesty would, that by the usual forms
of Justice their crime might be as manifest to the world as their punishment.

So so on as these were safe in prison, his Majesty proclaimed a pardon to all
accomplices of this conspiracy that should come in within four days and confess
their fault, but the diligence of the King had been so exquisite, that there
was not one man left to take the benefit of that grace.

Not many days after, they were all solemnly arraigned, found guilty of high
Treason, condemned and executed in manner following.

Upon the last of August 1641. the Marquis de Villa real, the Duke de Camigna
his son, the Count de Armamac and D. Augustine Manuele were led along a Gallery
made of purpose to the Scaffold, whereupon were built two stories one above
another, upon the uppermost there were placed two chairs, upon the second story
one chair, and upon the Skaffold it self another.

First was led forth the Marquess in a long black baies cloak, and his servants
in mourning, who after he had prayed for a good space upon his knees, rose up,
and having made a long speech, demanded if there were no hopes of pardon; upon
which all the people cried out, let him die, let him die for a Traitor, then
the Executioner according to the manner, with a loud voice proclaimed, This is
the Justice that the King our Sovereign Lord commands to be executed upon the
person of Don Jews de Meneses sometime Marquess of Villa Real, that his throat
be cut as a Traitor to his Majesty, Nobility, and people of this Kingdom, that
for his crime his goods be confiscated, and his memory banished out of the
world. Whereat all the people cried Justice; which the Marquess hearing, with
much gravity demanded pardon of all the spectators, desiring them to assist him
with their prayers to God for a pardon of this and all his other sins, then
turning to a father Jesuit his Confessor, prayed him that in his behalf he
would present himself at his Majesty's feet, and beseech him out of his
goodness that he would vouchsafe to forgive him this heinous offense committed
against him and the whole Kingdom: after which, sitting down in the chair, his
arms and legs were tied to the arms and legs of the chair, then leaning his
head over the back of the chair, the Executioner with a knife cut his throat,
after covering him with a black silk.

In the same manner upon the same Skaffold appeared his son the Duke of
Camigna, attended with all his servants in mourning: passing by his fathers
corpse, he kneeled down and several times kissed his feet, begging of the people
the suffrage of one Pater noster for his fathers soul; then sitting down in the
other chair after the proclamation of the Executioner, received the same
punishment. The Judges would have had both their necks to be cut behind, but
his Majesty would not give way thereunto, being a punishment too ignominious in
Portugal for persons of their quality.

After these appeared the Count of Armamac attended with one only servant, who
in the chair placed in the lower story received the same punishment: as also D.
Augustine Manuele upon the skaffold below.

The same day Pietro de Baeza, and one Melchior Correa de Franca being drawn at
an horse tail to the place of execution, were hanged upon a gallows
extraordinary high.

Upon a lower gallows in the same place were hanged Diego de Brito Nabo, and
Antonio Valente: the quarters of these four last mentioned were hung up at the
gates of the City, and their heads set up near the frontiers of the Kingdom.

In September following, for the same crime, were likewise executed, Antonio
Cogamigno, and Antonio Correa, the later of which, all the time of his
imprisonment was an example of penitence, feeding only upon bread and water,
and whipping himself every day, with continual prayers to God for pardon of
that and his other sins.

The Archbishop of Braga, the Bishop of Martiria, and the Bishop of Malacca,
and Friar Emanuel de Macedo (although they were accomplices in the same
conspiracy, yet because they were Ecclesiastical persons) were not put to death
as they deserved, but reserved in prison until the Popes pleasure were known
concerning them.

The Archbishop during his imprisonment, did often acknowledge his offense by
Letters to his Majesty, desiring that himself might suffer, so that the others
might be spared, in regard that what they had done was rather in obedience to
him, then ill will to his Majesty. Upon his deathbed in prison (which happened
about three years after the fact committed) he gave order that so soon as he
was dead, his last Will and Testament should be carried to the King, wherein he
besought his Majesty that he would vouchsafe of his goodness to pardon him the
Treason committed by him against his Majesty and his native Country, and that
he would let his body be buried without the Church of any parish of Lisbon,
without any inscription or tombe*stone, that so there might remain no memory of
a man that had been a Traitor to his King and to his Country. A good example of
Christian humility, and of admonition to others not to meddle with the like
affairs; for attempts of this nature are like hot irons, which instead of
heating, scorch the hands of those that handle them. This so exemplary
punishment and rigorous justice inflicted upon the forenamed delinquents, did
not only establish the Kingdom, and secure the Family and Person of the King,
but also struck a terror into all the Kings Enemies (if there were any left)
and excited the Kings friends to love him and watch over him the more
diligently.

The mutual incursions upon the frontiers between the Castillians and Portugals
still continued with great animosity and violence.

About this time (although there was a truce concluded, between Portugal and
Holland as before expressed, and a great Navy sent from Holland to assist the
Portugal against the Spaniard) yet there passed high acts of hostility between
the two Nations in Africa and America beyond the Line; for the Hollanders
seeing the disunion of Portugal from Castile, made all possible haste to finish
the conquest of those parts before a perfect peace should be concluded with
Portugal, that so in the Treaty they might pretend reason that all things
should continue in the state they were then found: to this end during all quiet
and peaceable commerce between the two Nations in the Kingdom of Angola, the
Hollander surprised the Portugals that were Governors of the place, killing
diverse and robbing all of the great wealth there found, of which
perfidiousnesse, and of the barbarous usage toward the prisoners there taken,
complaint was made to the States at the Hague, but without any satisfaction.

In the mean time the Catholic King was very sollicitous for the recovery of
Portugal; for the effecting whereof, he did not consult only with his greatest
Statists at home, but also with those abroad, from one of whom he received this
ensuing Letter

By the Letter which your Majesty was pleased to write unto me on the 6 of
March past, I am commanded to deliver my advice touching the best expedient for
the recovery of Portugal. Sir, the Clemency used by King Philip the second,
your Majesty's Grandfather toward the Kingdom of Portugal, was a fatal presage
of the present calamities, and future destruct on not only of Spain, but the
whole Spanish Monarchy, because that Kingdom was only in name, but never really
Conquered, remaining rich and abundant with the same, if not greater
privileges then before. The Grandees and Nobles at home, the people not at all
crushed, and (which is more then all) the Government in the hands of natives,
and all his Majesty's other Subjects excluded from all places of power, honor
or profit. Sir, the holy Scripture which is the mirror and rule of our actions,
teaches that when Salmanasar conquered the Kingdon of Israel, he did carry
away not only the Royal Family, but transported all the Nobility and People
into diverse Provinces of his own kingdoms, and into the new Conquests sent new
inhabitants; yet the Israelites were never such inveterate enemies to the
Assyrians, as the Portugals with Divellish madness have showed themselves
against the interest and conveniences of this Monarch.

Moreover, in the same Scripture it is read, That Nebuchadonosor having
conquered Jerusalem, transplanted all that he found in that kingdom, leaving
only a few miserable inconsiderable people to remain there.

So Athalia Queen of Judah, saw no other way to preserve a kingdom newly
conquered, but by extinguishing all the generation upon whom the Jews could
cast their eyes in hopes of revolt.

And Jehu King elected by God, extinguished all the family of Ahab, together
with all his dependents, friends, and acquaintance, not sparing so much as the
Priests.

These, Sir, are the Rules that the holy Scripture teaches to be practiced
upon the Families and People that abhor the dominion of their own Sovereigns.

It was, Sir, very fatal to stand expecting and hoping for better times and
opportunities for the securing of Portugal.

In the year 1638. observing the ill affection of that Nation, my advice was,
that without any delay that kingdom was to be secured by force of Arms:
others were of the same judgments, but Fate would have it that (for fear of
new troubles) by delays way should be made for a Rebellion, then which there
could not have been a greater, although that form of Government which was
expedient for the Spanish Monarchy, and was always held necessary for
preserving that Crown, had been put in execution with the greatest violence
imaginable.

But when a Jewel is gone, the main inquiry should be by what means it may be
found again, not how it came to be lost.

The first means then of recovering that Crown, may be (what your Majesty's
Grandfather made use of) to buy your rights of your own subjects by Gifts and
Promises, wherein your Majesty is to be as prodigal as the Portugals are
insolent in expecting and demanding; and indeed experience teaches, that that
Nation is so addicted to their own interest, that more may be effected this way
then by a powerful Army; to him will they be subject who will give most, or
from whom most can be expected; herein prodigality will be good husbandry: For
when Portugal shall be returned to the obedience of your Majesty, all that
wealth which has been bestowed amongst them, will return likewise.

The second means is by force of Arms; but this will be difficult at present by
reason of the several engagements of this Monarchy elsewhere. I suppose, Sir,
that in case Portugal should be conquered by force, all their conquests in the
Indies, etc. will remain in their hands; for thither will they all fly, and from
thence they will be always ready to assist our enemies: wherefore it would be
very expedient for your Majesty's service, that a Truce were first made with
the Hollanders upon condition that they make war upon the Portugal in the
Indies, and have what ever they can conquer: Whence will arise this commodity,
that they will want the wealth of their conquests; your Majesty being
disengaged with the Hollander) will the sooner conquer them at home, and the
Hollander will only come to receive to day at the hand of your Majesty, what to
morrow the Portugal must deliver up unto them. At the same time the Hollanders
and Flemings may scour the Coasts of Portugal, and the English be invited to a
more frequent navigation into the East Indies and China, whereby the Portugal
Trade there may easily be ruined.

The third way is, That the Pope be persuaded to thunder his Excommunications
against the House of Braganza, and against the whole Kingdom as perjured, and
perturbators of the public peace, animating all Christian Princes to assist in
the regaining that kingdom, upon pretense of advancing the Catholic Faith.

Moreover, diffidencies and jealousies between the Duke of Braganza and the
people, may easily be fomented by the means of Merchants, strangers, and by
Flemings and Burgundians, under the name of French. And to effect these
diffidencies the better, a Treaty may really be begun with the Duke, which
being discovered by the people (though it be before the Duke could know thereof)
they will destroy him and all his Family; and in such case the civil
dissentions will open a way for your Majesty to recover your right: Desperate
evils must have Desperate remedies, the kingdom of Portugal is the canker of
the Spanish Monarchy: therefore,

Ense recidendum est ne pars syncera trahatur. Let not your Majesty defer the
right remedy: the greatest rigor is here the greatest charity, and to have no
charity is to have much prudency: to bury this Hydra in its own ashes, will be
triumph enogh: to live without this arm is better then to have it employed
against its own head: Let your Majesty never believeor hope better of that
nation, then you have seen these 60 years past; never think to keep that
Country if not planted with other people, the detestation against your
Majesty's government is hereditary.

The interest of the King, Sir, it very ample, and has no bounds against
Rebels, every action is just and honorable that tends to the recovery of the
Kings right.

Moreover, a Truce is to be made with the Catalonians, whereby they being freed
from the tumultuous courses of war, will have time to take notice of the
French insolences, and growing weary of that yoke, will at length easily
embrace the next opportunity to return to their obedience; which once effected,
will make the whole people of Portugal waver between hopes and fears, and
beget variety of opinions amongst them, which for the conquering of kingdoms
(the Emperor Julian was wont to say) is much more advantageous then the power
of an Army, as the Grandfather of your Majesty found in the succession of
Portugal. To this may be added, that it will be very expedient, that your
Majesty name Bishops to dispose of all Governments and Offices of that Crown to
the the most confiding persons in that kingdom; for this will beget distrust
amongst them all, and the ignorant people not knowing whom to trust, will put
all into confusion, whereby your Majesty's service will be more easily advanced.

Thus in obedience to your Majesty's Com* mands, I have imparted my weak advice
wherein if I have erred, your Majesty's goodness will attribute it to my want of
abilities, not of affection. God preserve the Catholic and Royal person of
your Majesty, as the Christian world, and ^e your Majesty's subjects have need.

But to return to the affairs of Portugal, which were at this time a little
discomposed by the general discontent and distaste taken at the Secretary of
State, Don Francisco de Lucena, who having lived long in the Court of Spain,
was at length by Olivarez means made Under-Secretary to Vazconcellos, and for
his readiness to proclaim King John, and his abilities in that place, his
Majesty continned him there, relying upon him with so great affection and
confidence, that although some had advertised his Majesty that he held
correspondence with the Court at Madrid, yet he would not suspect his
integrity, until the whole three Estates being again assembled upon urgent
occasions, openly fused all Acts that should pass the hands of Secretary
Lucena, and gave his Majesty to understand, That until Lucena were brought to
trial, there should be no further proceeding in the Assembly of Estates:
whereat his Majesty was much moved; yet out of his prudency resolved to give
satisfaction to his subjects by delivering his Secretary up to justice; but
that he might have a fair procceding, the King sat in person during the
examination of witnesses: in the mean time by the Post came secret information
to his Majesty, whereupon were imprisoned the brocher and three servants of the
Secretary, together with an English Monk, and a Cavalier of the habit. Not long
after Lucena was arraigned and found guilty of betraying his trust,
intelligence with the enemy, negligence of timely advertising the Infant Don
Duarte to retire out of Germany, etc. for which he was condemned and executed
in a public place in Lisbon, where he protested to the very last his innocence
touching any treachery toward his Majesty.

With the death of the Secretary the three Estates were satisfied, and
according to his Majesty's command had assembled themselves Septem. 18. 1643.
taking their places in their wonted manner, the Dukes upon velvet Chairs
without Arms, the Marquesses upon Forms covered with red Cloth, the Earls upon
Forms covered with ordinary Cloth, the Prelates apart upon Forms covered with
velvet, and all the Deputies of Cities and Towns upon plain forms, in order on
both sides; with a passage in the middle. Being all sat, Don Emanuel d^
Acugna, Dean of his Majesty's Chapel, rose up, and after reverence made to
the King placed upon his Throne, delivered an elegant speech, the sum whereof
was,

That in the space of 60 years that the Kingdom was under the power of the
Kings of Castile, there had been but two assemblies of Estates, the first to
enslave them, the next to abuse them. But since they were under the obedience
of the present King (whom God preserve) within the space of two years, they
have had two Assemblies, the former to settle their liberties, the present to
beget a right understanding between the King and his people, wherein they had
all freedom to demand what ever was necessary, that the world might see that
they are now no longer slaves but children, no longer strangers but natives,
and that they are under rather a loving father, then a severe sovereign.

In the former Assembly (said he) his Majesty took all the Customs, and left
the defense of the kingdom to your hands, you ordered what seemed good unto
your selves, you made choice of a general assistance by way of contribution;
but in the levying thereof the first payment was found uneffectuall, the second
unequal, the third unsufficient, whence arose some complaints, some imagining
that the fault procceded from the unequal division of the contribution; others
from the change of value in money and commodities; and others from the
disorderly gathering and disbursing the whole. I may easily say, if there were
any error committed, yet it might be excusable for that, Never had any weighty
affair its conception and perfection at once; Then shall errors cease to be in
Government when men shall cease to be in the world. These things are to be
endured with the same patience that Drowths, Dearths, Inundations, and such
other disorders in Nature; for the wit of man cannot hold forth a remedy for
all diseases: But certainly there will be no ground of reprehension (though
much of admiration to him that shall consider how his Majesty entered upon a
Kingdom exhausted by the Castilians of money and other necessaries for offense
or defense, and yet how in less then one year and a half we should want
neither shipping nor Artillery, nor Horse nor Arms, nor Fortifications nor
Armies upon the Frontiers. Three powerful Fleets put to Sea, diverse honorable
and extraordinary Ambassages, besides many other secret (yet necessary)
expenses, all which will astonish any understanding man. Now to^ the end that
the people may have full satisfaction, his Majesty commadded that (before
farther proceeding) it be made appear particularly how all the money received
has been laid out, and then it is expected, and the present state of affairs
requires, that we all contribute liberally, considering that these charges are
but for a time, but our liberties are for ever, that we shall never have a
better opportunity to destroy our enemy, that Nature teaches to hazard an arm
to save the whole body; the Merchants at sea cast away one part of their goods
sometimes to save the rest; we are now on shipboard in a storm, our goods, our
lives, our liberties, our honor, our Country, are all in danger.

Moreover, the barbarous usage of the King of Castile toward the Infant Don
Duarte, calls upon this Assembly for revenge, that we spend not only our money,
but our blood in affection to him, and that we make our enemies spend theirs in
satisfaction for him, etc.

The three Estates encouraged by this Harange, took a good order for the
redressing of all grievances, and advancing his Majesty's service, that soon
after an Army of twenty thousand Foot, and three thousand Horse were upon their
march with the King in the head thereof, resolved to make the feat of war in
Castile, which was performed with much gallantry, and as much success. In the
mean time news was brought to his Majesty of the birth of his second son, but
first child after he came to the Crown, for which cause he was baptized with as
great pomp as could be devised, and was named Alfonso.

About the same time there arrived from the Indies some rich Galeons, that
brought news with what general applause and excess of joy his Majesty was
proclaimed throughout all those Countries.

But because all men understand not how considerable the several dominions
belonging to the Crown of Portugal, and now in the possession of King John are,
I thought fit here to make a brief narration thereof.

The Crown of Portugal at this day enjoys considerable estates in the East
Indies, that they may be called a mighty Empire; for, to say nothing of Madera,
Tercera, and St Michael Islands, so long time possessed by the Portugal nation,
they have made themselves masters of many strong places in Africa, as in
Guinea, in the kingdom of Congo and Angola, the great Island of St. Laurence,
of Soffala, and Mozambique on the Continent, thence passing the mouth of the
red Sea, they have settled a Trade with Socatra and Calaiate; thence passing the
Bay of Persia, and the mouth of the great river Indus, which gave occasion of
the name to those countries, they subdued Calecut, Cochim, etc. the Island of
Goa, Cial, Daman, etc. thence toward the river Ganges, they conquered Ceilam,
Malacca, Sumatra, Solor, Larantuca, etc. thence farther forward they entered
into the kingdom of Pegu, into Juva major and minor, into the kingdom of
China, where they held a strong place called Macao. In sum, the Kingdoms,
Provinces, Islands Cities that the Nation of Portugal has conquered abroad,
may be compared to the ancient Roman Empire; nor has their valor been much
inferior to that of the Romans if we consider the war they have made with the
King of Cambaia, who for puissance, riches, and military courage surpaspassed
Xerxes, Darius, or Pyrrhus, the war they have made with Isamalucco and
Idalcam in the kingdom of Decam, both equal to mighty Kings, whose Armies
consisted of Persians, Turks, Janissaries; Arabs, Moors, and the best warriers
of all the East: the war they have waged with the Moors of Malacca, Sumatra
and Molucco, who were as well provided of Artilry, as any of the Princes of
Europe; also with the Kings of Bengala, Peug, Siam, and many other formidable
powers. It is true, that during the time that Portugal was under the Catholic
Kings, many places were lost, yet there remains to this day under the command
of K. John the fourth, above fifty Towns and Forts accounted impregnable, as
Mozambique, Cuama, Monomotapa, Mombaza, Mascale Diu Damam, Bazain, Chiaul,
Onor, Barcelor, Mangalor, Cananor, Cranganor Cochim, Coulam, Negapatan,
Meliapor, the Isle of Ceilam, the kingdom of Jafanapatan, the Cities of Manac
and Nombre de Jesu; then more Northward, Azarim, Danu, Agazim, Maim, Trapor,
and many other places: in all which are maintained Governors and Soldiers,
besides in the head City Goa, there is a Viceroy with all Courts of Justice,
whither many Kings of the East send Tribute and Ambassadors to maintain amity
with the King of Portugal, insomuch that the Portugal Trade extends itself
into the East near four thousand leagues, by which are maintained all the
Garrisons, all the ships (whereof there are oftimes two or three Fleets) and
much wealth sent home every year. Upon the coast of Africa the Crown of
Portugal yet possesses diverse places so well fortified, that the neighboring
Moors could never yet recover them.

In America; the famous country of Brasile belongs to the King of Portugal,
one thousand four hundred leagues on the coast thereof containing 14.
governements whereof the head City is Saint Salvadar.

But to return to the Frontiers of Portugal, where we left the Portugals and
Castillians making inrodes, wasting the Country, surprising the Towns, ofts
kirmishing, but never yet in any set Battle, until the year, 1644. where both
Armies met upon the borders of Portugal, in a plain called Campo-Mayor. The
Spanish Army consisting for the most part of strangers, was under the conduct
of the Marquess de Torrecusa, and the Portugal Army, consisting of Natives,
with some few Hollanders, were under the command of Matthias de' Albuquerque:
The batail was fought with as much order as courage on both sides, but the
Spaniard being more numerous, especially in Horse, after several furious
charges put the whole Army of Portugal into disorder, seized upon all their
Artillery and Baggage, killed Albuquerques horse under him, and took many
prisoners; yet after all, the General being mounted upon another horse,
rallied some of his best Soldiers, and charging afresh, recovered all, put to
flight the whole Army of their Enemies, and chased them above 3 miles. Of the
Spanish Army there were slain 1600 men upon the place; amongst whom was the
Lieutenant General, the General of the horse, and the General of the Artillery,
5 Campmasters, 2 Adjutants of horse, 3 Sergeant-Majors, 23 Cornets, the Count
de Montixo, together with very many Cavaliers of the Orders of Saint James,
Calatrava, and Alcantara; there were taken 4000 Arms, and above 1000 Horse. Of
the Portugal Army were slain not above 300. amongst whom 2 Campmasters, and one
Sergeant Major, one Captain of horse, and eight of Foot; but there were taken
prisoners diverse Noblemen, Commanders, and Officers, which were hurryed away by
the Castillians in their flight.

Not long after was imprisoned in Lisbon, the Marquess de Montalban, D. George
Mascarenas, Lord Treasurer, President of the Council of the Indies, and a
Councellor of State; together with some others, upon suspicion of a conspiracy
against his Majesty; but upon Examination it being discovered that the
suspicion was cunningly raised by the Castillians, with intent to deprive his
Majesty of the service of his most able Ministers, and to make the World
believe that the Portugal Nobility were discontented with their King, they
were set at liberty, and their honors repaired by his Majesty's Proclamation.

In this condition stood the King and Kingdom of Portugal in the year, 1644.
and in this condition it may probably continue for many years:

First, because the Catholic King will not probably quit his pretenses here,
sooner then he has done in the Netherlands.

Secondly, because the Nation of Portugal bears such extraordinary affection
to the whole Family of their present King, and such exceeding hatred to the
Castillians, that they will choose rather to be extirpated and destroyed, then
be brought again under the yoke of the Catholic King.

Thirdly, because the Catholic King is not able (during the war with France)
to gain any thing upon that Kingdom either at home or abroad, as has bin
evident ever since King John the Fourth came to that Crown.

Fourthly, because it is so much the interest of France to keep the Crown of
Portugal apart, that the peace with Spain will never be concluded without
including Portugal.

Lastly, supposing that by all the States of Christendom, contrary to their
own interest, the Kingdom of Portugal should be abandoned to the fury of the
Spaniard, and granting that Philip the second made himself master thereof by
force; yet if their then impuissance and distractions be remembered, and their
present power and unanimity be considered, it must necessarily be concluded,
That the Reunion of Portugal with Castile is morally impossible.

FINIS

