THE CURSED FAMILY; OR, A Short Tract, Showing the Pernicious Influence of
Wicked Prayer-less Houses, upon this Church and Kingdom. Humbly Tendered By way
of Subserviency to His Majesty's Royal Proclamations, and Acts of Parliament,
for Preventing and Punishing Immorality and Profaneness.

The Curse of the Lord is in the House of the Wicked, But he Blesses the
Habitation of the Just,

Prove. 3. 33. Pour out thy Fury upon the Heatben that know thee not, and upon
the Families that call not on thy Name, for they have Eaten up Jacob, and
devoured him, and consumed him, and have made his Habitation Desolate,

Jer. 10. last. (...).

Ign. Ep. ad Ephesians. Pietas est cognoscere Deum, cujus cognitionis haec summa est,
ut eum colas: Nec tantum hoc in Templo putes tibi else faciendum, sed and domi,
and in ipso etiam cubili tuo.

Lact. By Thomas Risley Master of Arts, and sometime Fellow of
Pembrook-Colledge in Oxford.

With a Prefatory Epistle by the Reverend Mr. John How.

London, Printed for John Lawrence at the Angel in the Poultry. 1700.

A PREFACE TO THE Reader.
THE Author of this Discourse (Christian Reader) is a Person though of real
Value, who yet has so very Low an Esteem of himself, as to think my
Recommendation may give some advantage to this his Performance. They are indeed
very Accidental Circumstances, that make this difference, very often, between
some and others, in the Eye of the World. Otherwise, that might well be said,
which was in that great Instance; I have need to -- come to thee, and come
thou to me? It is evident to those who know him, that the many years,
heretofore, wherein he drew Academick Breath, and lived an Ornament to the
Society, whereof he was long a Member, were not trifled away. There he past his
time as a Recluse; more acquainted with his Study, than the Theater. He closely
pursued his design; more to acquire solid, useful Knowledge, and Learning, than
Fame. And since, in his long Rural Recess, his design has been the same; and
his way of Living has little differed, in a Chosen Obscurity; contented rather
to Shine to Himself, than the World.

Yet the Urgency of Conscience, and a desire to do good to the Souls of Men,
has wrung from him this short TREATISE. An Offspring that has much of the
Parents Image; appearing with no Ostentation of Learning. (But wherein may be
seen a Pious Mind, tinctured by much Study, and Converse with Books, an
Acquaintance with the Literate World, which begot an habit, that is, rather by
his Speech, unwarily bewrayed, than designedly shown. The Scope and Drift of
the Discourse, shows him a Man of Thought, and Prospect: discovers thoughts
intent upon the present Age, but not confined to it: making, from it, an
Estimate of the sad Tendency of things, and their gloomy Aspect upon the
future. While Christian Families, Baptized in so great, and venerable Names,
and that should, if any, be Seminaries of Religion, and Virtue, are so commonly
the Seedplots of all Impiety and Wickedness; and the Numerous Fountains whence
Miseries and Curses are diffused among a Christian People!

My little leisure allowed me not thoroughly to peruse it: But its scope, and
the Spirit wherewith (by glances) I perceive it is Writ, makes me hope,
(Reader) it may be of much use.

Thine, in our common Savior, John How.

THE AUTHOR'S Epistle. To all Heads of Families from the Father of Mercies,
through Jesus Christ, in whom all the FAMILIES of the Earth are blessed,
Holiness here, and Happiness hereafter.
My Brethren, Hearers, Neighbors and Relations,
CHrist has taught us (who is our Mediator) how far to extend our Prayers, not
only to our Fiends, but to our Enemies and Persecutors. And will Christ (who
also is ordained Judge of the World) take it well at the Great Day, That
Parents make not continual Prayers, Morning and Evening for, and with their
Children, and the rest of their Families? Are not Children the divided pieces
of your selves? Will not that same (...), or Natural Affection (a tie spun out
of your own Bowels) move you to take care of their Souls as well as their
Bodies? You are not only Parents Natural, but Christian, and have Promised in
the Presence of God and his Church, that your Children should be Virtuously
brought up to lead a Godly and Christian Life. O remember your Promise made at
their Baptism, and do not Unchristen them by your Breach of Covenant! O Pray,
That God would make you instrumental for their Spiritual well-being, as he has
for their Natural being. Beware of Poisoning the Souls of your Children, whose
Bodies you have nursed at your breasts, and fed at your Tables. How can such
Parents answer it at the great day of Appearance, who, by wicked Examples,
teach their Children to Curse and Swear, Lie, Cheat, Break the Sabbath, and to
make no reckoning of Religion? Be not deceived, for if you be not Christians in
your own Houses (whatever profession you make in the House of God) your
Christianity is unsound. Assure your selves, that if Christianity were possessed
of your Hearts, it would be Practiced in your Houses. Is not Sin the Plague of
the Heart? Is it not of an active, infecting, prevailing nature? Is not Sin
allways with us, and diffuseth it self into all places where we live? Doubtless
Sin follows Men whithersoever they go, to Church, Market, and home again. What
would you have Religion to be? What is Christianity? Must Religion be a
Stranger, or some soft Guest, who comes but seldom to see you, whose company,
after a while, becomes fastidious? What would you make of true Piety, What
would you have Christianity to be? A despised Inferior, to stand or fall, to
come or go at your pleasure, taken in, cast out, used a little, and then laid
aside? It cannot be such a Thing. But true Religion and Christianity is That
Thing, which breaths Heavenly, Regenerating, Renewing, Recreating Influences:
It is, That same Ancient, Sacred, Awsom Thing, which pierces the Soul, the
Heart, Conscience, and by the Power of God, changes the whole Man-Lastly, (O
all you Heads of Families) be not deceived, if you and your Households be
Religious, and Christians Indeed, that Religion will Bear the Image of Holiness
and Righteonsness, making not only your Houses, but your Souls and Bodies,
Temples for the Holy Ghost to dwell in. If what is here written in this Short
Tract [By Way of Motive] prevail with any One Family in a Parish, or any one
Member of a Family (so Precious is the Souls Salvation) to become Practisers
of Piety in their Houses, I shall rejoice that I have not Run in vain, nor
Labored in vain, through Jesus Christ or Savior, to whom be Glory for ever.
Amen.

T. R.

THE Cursed Family
CHAP. 1.
The General Nature of Families, and of Christian Families Relatively
considered as Members of the Church.

AMong the very Beasts of the Field, Natural Instinct of the Dumb Creature
teaches Moral Duties in Families.
Fowls of the Air, and Fish of the Sea, some obscure Resemblances of
Government, greater and lesser Societies, Kingdoms, Cities, and Families, the
great Searchers into Philosophy have discovered. By God's Ordination at first
they keep their Places, observe their Times, do their Work, Build, Furnish,
make Dens, Caves, Burrows, Nests, set up House, break up House, breed up their
Young, help, and dispose of them abroad for Common Good. True it is, these
Patterns are but imperfectly drawn in these Creatures, yet they point at
Excellent Education, Laws and Virtues, and Teach the Wisest, Sobriety,
Fidelity, Chastity, Amity, Gratitude, Vigilance, Diligence, and unwearied care
of themselves and those belonging to their Charge.

After the Almighty had finished his Work, The foundation of Families God's
Institution.
created Adam, and Placed him in Paradise, he was pleased to say, It is not
good that Man should be alone, I will make him an help Meet for him.

Although the Word [Family] strictly How the Word Family is taken here.
taken, signifies that Order of Mankind which is United in Marriage,
signifying the Terms of Husband and Wife, Parents, Children, Master, Servant,
yet here it does include Households made of kind Friends living together for
their mutual Benefit, as Men and Christians: And also, it does Include the
Superior Societies of Academical Discipline, and the Inferior of Country
Schools. Both which as they be of great use for Magistracy and Ministry, so
they ought to be of Special Influence to Maintain Religion and Christian
Government in Church and State.

That Famous Orator, whose Name is The Formal and final causes of Families
turned into a Surname of Eloquence, (as Quintilian has it) speaking of the
Union of Families, has Written, that there is a more Noble Principle of Human
Societies then Sense, to wit, the Attractive Power of Reason, which by
Counsels, Precepts, Converse, Decisions, and Judgments, Cements and
Strengthens Societies. But God's Word speaking hereof, strikes an higher
Note, no less a Union for Marriage then [In the Lord] with the exclusive
Particle [Tantum] in Domino, Only in the Lord. If this Union were observed, How
much more Happy would Families, Relations, Parishes, Magistrates, Ministers,
Kingdoms and Churches be?

It is a most Dangerous Design, to think of Multiplying Vice and Impiety by
gathering into Societies, as if the Lesser Sins of Single Life, Married into
Company, might take Liberty to swel into a Flood, Genesis 6. 25. We may not think
that Families and Societies were Constituted for Natural and Secular Ends, but
for Political and Ecclesiastical Ends, the Good of Country and the Church of
God. Therefore that was an Excellent Plut. Conv.
Answer made to one admiring a Fair House, to wit, Thou look upon the
Glorious Outside of the Building, and call that an House, not looking
within, how well Children are Governed and Educated, Marriage Honored, the
Family and all belonging to it prudently managed. He (says the Author) that
has such an House, lives in a Palace, though in a Pismires Hill. From what
has been said, it is evident, how much good or hurt may proceed from Families.
For although this Capacity must not Danger of great States from Wicked Families.
contend with greater Societies for Precedence of Honor, yet for Priority of
Nature, and Eldership of Time, it carries it from all Societies on Earth. It
being (without Dispute) that of Families, Towns and Cities, great States are
Embodied. Therefore as in Natural Bodies, if the first Concoction be Imperfect,
it is hardly Corrected in the latter; So in Civil Bodies if Families and
Villages (through want of Good Government) abound in Vicious Manners, the
Malignancy presently infects Kingdoms and Churches, to which they do belong. It
may be, at the first, that the Narrowness of Private Walls and Households, send
Evil Manners into the World, with some kind of Pusillanimous Dullness, which
coming into Places of Public Concourse, grow Impudent and refuse to be
ashamed. Hence it is, that Swearing, Swilling, Debauchery and Immorality,
Contempt of Religion and Sobriety, become (in a while) Popular and all in
Fashion. If Parents give not Check to Family Sins in their Children at Home,
when they go forth, they meet with Temptations and Patrons, which turn their
Youthful Exorbitances, into Immovable Habit. It is easy to observe, that the
want of Family-Religion is the Cause of the Visible Decay of the Welfare of
Church and State.

CHAP. II.
Concerning the Church of God.

THE word [Church] is vulgarly taken The Significations of the word Church.

And how it is taken here.


for the Material place, where the People Assemble to Worship God, sometimes
for the Juridical Power of Church Officers, and sometimes for the
Church-Revenues. But here it is taken for, The Visible Church of Christ,
Militant upon the Earth, as it Comprehends Believers of All Places and Times
from first to last; And as it is made up of Particular Churches or Societies of
Believers; And these made up of Believing Families. A Christian Family should
be the Epitome and Nursery of the Church, But (alas) it is far otherwise at
this day. A Minister may go into diverse Families in the Parish and Chappelry,
and not a Word of Scripture Read, nor a Prayer made in the Family all the Week
long, as if Religion were An Enemy not A Friend to their House; or, That
Religion were a Duty Only on the Sabbath Day, and not on the Week day.

The Church of God, at the first, was Domestical, not National, till the Holy
Line grew Strong and Populous from Good Families; As from Adam, Seth, Enoch,
Noah, Shem (who lived till Isaac was 50 years old) Abraham the Father of the
Faithful, by Promise, etc. And so it came to pass in Aftertimes, that as
Posterity in Families Degenerated, so the Church Degenerated, as in Cain, Ham,
Ishmael, Esau. The Cause of the Churches Decay in our days.
Thus it is in our Days, Ungodly Families are the Decay of God's Church; they
make Thin Congregations, they bring a VVast upon the Solemn Assemblies. What an
Odious Thing is it to Loiter away the Lord's Day? What an Absurdity to Indulge
the Flesh upon the Lord's Day, and give the Flesh no Rest upon the Week Day?
What a piece of Wickedness is it, to go forth all the Week to Serve the World,
and Refuse to go forth on the Lord's Day to Serve him? Who would think that
Sabbath-Profanation were so shameless in Families called Christian? Why should
a poor excuse hinder Men and Women from the Church, which must not from the
Market? How many Halts do some Make, when they should Go to the Church, to
Sanctify the Lord's Day in their Conscionable Attendance upon God's Ordinances?
What an Unseemly Thing is it to Skulk at Home, or at a Neighbors House, to
Chatt and Talk away, to Feast away, Sleep away, Surfeit away, Bibb and Fiddle,
Smoke and Pipe, for Carnal Pleasure; to Visit away, and, for Profit, to Travel
away the Lord's Day, when they should be waiting at the Gates of Wisdom. O
what pity is it, that obscure Tippling-houses should pick and pilfer any one
Member of a Congregation from the House of God? These profane Families do break
Covenant which they made in Baptism, whereby they were Solemnly Admitted into
the Church of God, Engaging to Renounce the Works of the Devil, the World and
the Flesh and to continue in the Communion of Saints, to love, fear, and
worship that God, who made them for that end, and into whose Name they were
Baptized, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Are not these the notorious Enemies to
Christianity, whose Life is a Flat Contradiction to their Baptism? Are they not
Enemies to the Church, as well as to themselves, who wilfully and wickedly
Uniformity of Religion in Public requires Family Cnformity in Divine Worship
and Service in Private.
Excommunicate themselves from God's Ordinances? All Ungodly Families do
contract the guilt of that Foul Sin of Separation by their Sabbath-breaking.
For if they be for Real Membership with the Church of Christ, why do they not
hold fast their Christian Profession in Public? Why do they not Keep their
Baptismal Covenant, to holy and constant Fellowship with Christ and his Church
in their Families? Why do they not set up Religion and Christianity in their
Houses, that they might partake of Heavenly Promises and Blessings of the
Spirit of Christ, by Prayers and Praises, Reading the Scriptures and
Catechizing? All which Duties stand Obliging them, as they be the genuine and
proper fruits and Evidences of that Mystical Union and Holy Communion, which is
between Christ and all sound Christians and Church Members. For, He is not a
good Churchman, that is not a good Christian at Home. He is not a Jew, which
is one outwardly, neither is that Circumcision, which is outward in the Flesh:
But he is a Jew which is one inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the Heart,
in the Spirit, and not in the Letter, whose Praise is not of Men, but of God,
Romans 2. two last Verses.

What profit will there be at the Day of Judgment, of Names of Christians, and
live like Insidels and Heathens? What? Shall God's Grace abound to us in this
Age of his Church, by breaking down the Middle-Wall of Partition between Jew
and Gentile, to make his Church Catholic: And shall we set up a
Partition Wall, between God's House and our own, and not permit Religion to
dwell there? O let not any Professor confine Religion within Church-walls,
seeing, That the Congregation of the Faithful is made up of Believing Families,
and seeing, That a Right Belief in the Church-Assembly, will bring forth the
Fruits of Holiness in thy Family. And all Parents and Masters of Families now
under the Gospel, ought to be more Useful for the Spiritual concerns, of all
under their Care, then those Parents under the Law; And that because of clearer
discoveries, and more plentiful Effusions of Grace. I will pour out my Spirit
upon all flesh, and your Sons and your daughters shall Prophecy, your old men
shall dream dreams, your young men shall see Visions, also upon the servants
and the handmaids, I will pour out my spirit, Joel 2. 28, 29. To rule and keep
House, as Christians, presupposes,

(1.) The [Natural] Ruling of Houses; i. e. to do that which Nature dictates,
namely, to Feed, Cloth, Harbor, and defend those under their Charge, 2 Cor.
8. 21.

(2.) It presupposes the Ruling of Houses in a Moral sense, as Reason
commands, i. e. to Govern in a deliberate way, by imparting ingenuous and
virtuous Education, that Children be taught to Read, to be Just, Dutiful,
Modest, Diligent, Temperate: that Servants partake of Free, not Servile
Government, as Reasonables, not as Animals, which labor in another kind; to
pay Wages, not only truly, but equally, in a fit proportion to their
particular Employ. For Nature teaches Rewards in General, but Reason enjoyneth
an equal distribution of Rewards.

Therefore,

(3.) To Govern Families in a Christian manner is most Excellent; even as
Reason is above Sense, and Faith above Both.

Christian Family-Discipline, must Instruct, Discipline of Christian Families.
Correct, and Govern like it self; namely, to attain unto, promote, and
persevere in all Christian Duties toward God and Man, wholly devoting
themselves to Instituere, Corrigere, Regere.
[Christ] to be his Faithful Servants for ever. And this will cast out two
great Enemies to all Order, as well as Domestic, i. e. Anarchy and Tyranny, O
that it might be considered, that God will reckon with all Governors of
Families, both for not Using and Abusing their Talents of Authority. Then the
Blind Heads of Families, who put out their own Eyes, wilfully refusing to know
their Duty, both in Single and Married Life, then the Prodigal Sensualist, and
Covetous Mammonist, who have wanted no knowledge of their Duty, must come to
Account, for taking no Care for the Souls of their Children. O that Parents
would consider, whether there be any thing in this World, which deserves their
Care and Diligence more, then their own Salvation, and their settled and
constant Prayers to God, for the Salvation of their Childrens Souls. O ye
Parents, Would you be Blessings or Curses to your Families? Would you have your
Children prosper in this World, and for ever perish in the next? Would you
dispose well of them here upon Earth, and not be afraid least they miss of
Heaven through your Carelessness? The Lord in Mercy awaken you, to set up
Religion and Christianity in your Houses, to Instruct, Correct and Rule your
selves first, and then your Families, as becomes Christians, least God's
Curse, denounced against Wicked Men's Houses, pursue you here, and Rest upon you
for ever hereafter: The NATURE of which CURSE is handled in the next CHAPTER.

CHAP. III.
Of the CURSE of the Lord on Wicked Houses.

TO Curse (according to the General What it is to Curse, and what is Cursing.
Sense of the Hebrew and Greek) imports to Abandon, Renounce, Abdicate, and
Abhor, as a Detestable Thing; to Excommunicate, and Cast out of God's Church
from his Ordinances, as a vile Profane Person. Cursing and Execration, does
not only signify a Substraction of God's Blessing, but an Infusion of his
Curse upon Wicked Persons and Families, (as they have deserved for their sin)
both in this Life, and in the Life to come. To Bless, is with God to make
Blessed, and to Curse is to make Cursed; To Say, Cursing and Blessing only from
the Lord.
and to Do is all one with God, to Speak a Curse and Inflict it, a Blessing
and Confer it. And as it is God's peculiar to Bless; so to Curse. How shall I
Curse, whom God has not Cursed; or, how shall I Defy, whom the Lord has not
Defied, Numb. 23. 8.

No Heathen Gods, nor Evil Spirits, nor the Devil himself (whom they Invocate
as Chief) can send Curses upon any one, without Commission from the Allmighty.

For Wicked Houses to be under the What it is for Wicked Houses to be under the
Curse of God.
Curse of God! Is to be without his Gracious Keeping and Fatherly Care, to be
obnoxious day and night to his Wrath and Vengeance for their Sins. Or thus, It
is to be Excommunicated, Banished, and Rejected from God's Love and Saving Grace
here on Earth, and hereafter to be shut out of Heaven. Among the Jews we read
of, Cutting off Souls from the Congregation, Levit. 17, 18, 20 Chapters. This
Abscission, or Cutting off, denotes an Excommunicating not only from the
Privileges of the Saints here, but from their Company in Heaven.

When Cain was banished from God's Presence, it was not only, an Exile to him,
but an Execration upon him, as one Bereaved of his Gracious Protection and
Mercy for ever. This is called by the Apostle, Maranatha, Rendered an
Excommunication to Death; Or, till the Lord himself come to Judgment, 1 Cor.
16. 22.

O sinking Families, O Houses separated to Final Destruction! Will it not enter
into your hearts, will you not awake to consider, That the Fire of God's Wrath
is entered into your Houses? Will you not tremble to bring God's Curse upon you
and your Children? God is angry with the Wicked every day, Psalm. 7. 11. Upon
the Wicked he will rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an horrible Tempest,
this shall be the portion of their cup, Psalm. 11. 6. Woe unto the wicked, it
shall be ill with him, for the reward of his hands shall be given him, Isa. 3.
11.

Quest. Who are these Wicked? And What is meant by Wicked Houses in Scripture.
what do you mean by Wicked Houses?

Answ. Wicked Houses are plainly described in Scripture, that none in the
Neighborhood be deceived, and that none take it to be Uncharitable, and so
offended with what follows.

And, (1.) Dark, Blind and Ignorant Houses, are Wicked Houses, Psalm. 53. 4. 2
Cor. 4. 3. Ephesians. 4. 18. (2.) Houses full of Deceit, Injustice, Swearing,
Cursing, Lying, Sabbath-breaking, Filthy Speaking, Slandering Jer. 7. 8, 9.
Zach. 5. 3, 4. Neh. 13. 17, 18. Coloss. 3. 8. Psalm. 15. 3. (3.) Covetous and
Oppressing Houses, which have their Wiles to Entangle the Estates of Decaying
Neighbors, which buy and sell them for filthy gain, Mic. 2. 1, 2, 3. (4.)
Malicious, Treacherous and Bloody Houses, 1 Romans 29. 2 Timothy 3. 3, 4. 2 Samuel 21.
1. (5.) Persecuting Houses (whether secretly or openly is all one in the sight
of God) under what pretense soever of Religion, color of Law, Justice, and
Obedience to Governors, Acts. 6. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Acts 14. 5. 1 Thessalonians. 2.
15, 16. 2 Timothy 4. 14, 15. (6.) Voluptuous Houses, Whose God is their Belly,
whose Glory is their Shame, who mind earthly things, Philip. 3. 19. (7.) Such
Families as corrupt, and entice others to sin, in Towns and Villages, Hab. 2.
15. (8.) Houses of Whoredom, Prove. 7. last. (9.) Houses of VVorldly Pride and
Ambition, Jesurun-like, waxen fat, to such an Impious Greatness, that they
forsake God that made them, and lightly esteem the Rock of their Salvation,
Deuteronomy. 32. 15. And, Psalm. 10. 4. They will not seek after God; God is not in all
their Thoughts. (10.) Prayer-less Houses, who open and shut their Eyes, and
their Doors, without Scripture Read, or Prayer made all the days of the Week;
whose Ptactice, says, What is the Allmighty that we should serve him? And what
profit should we have, if we pray unto him? Job 21. 15. (11.) And, Lastly, (to
name to more) such as have a Form of Godliness, but deny the Power thereof, 2 Timothy 3. 5. Gross Hypocrites, who profess (in the Creed) That they know God, but
in Works they deny him, being abominable and disobedient, and to every good
Work Reprobate, 1 Tit. 9. Last.

Now to return to the Description of [God's Curse] on [Wicked Houses] viz.

To be Excommunicated, Banished, and Rejected from God's Love and Saving Grace
here on Earth, and hereafter to be shut out of Heaven.

The Greatness of this Curse is Manifest, The Greatness of God's curse (...)
Wicked ^ouses.
in Three respects, viz.

1. In respect of Persons Governors, Governed.
2. In respect of Things Temporal, Spiritual.
3. The Greatness of this Curse appears from its Duration, Which is to Time
here, Eternity hereafter.

1. This Curse is extended to Persons: And, 1. To Governors, Parents, Masters,
From the Extent of it on persons Governing.
Guardians, Trustees, Tutors, which Three last are in the room of Parents. Now
all these, if Profane, Careless, Ignorant, and Wicked Governors, are liable
to God's Curse upon their own Persons. Every one shall have as his work shall
be, Rev. 22. 12. And every one shall bear his own Burden, Galat. 6. 5. You that
do no Good, do Hurt, in your Places of Trust and Government over others;
What then shall be said of such Parents and Heads of Families that are still
doing Evil? Every Tree that brings not forth good fruit, shall be cut down
and cast into the fire, Matt. 3. 10. What then shall be done with those Trees
that bring forth evil fruit? Parents stand bound, by their Baptism, to promote
the Spiritual, as well as Temporal good of their Posterity, and it were a
Righteous thing with God, to Turn those out of his Benediction, who have turned
Religion out of their Houses, or never suffered it to come in. You would do
nothing for God's Blessing upon your Family, therefore God's Curse is like to
Fall upon you. You have Unchristen'd your Children for want of Godly Education,
and Excommunicated your Servants from God's Public Ordinances, either
straitening their Christian Liberty that way, or not taking care by your Pious
Commands upon them, that they might enjoy it. And were it not just with God, to
pluck off the Abused Cognizance of your Christianity, and disown you, as not
within his Gracious Protection, nor True Members of his Church? Think upon In
what respect Governors of Families are liable to Gods Curse.
it, and tell me what is Dear to your own Persons; Is it any, or all of these
particulars that I shall speak of?

O all ye Parents, and all you that are in the Room of Parents,

1. Is it your Name and Reputation that is dear to you? 2. Is it Health? 3.
Long Life? 4. Friends? 5. Parts and Endowments? 6. Is it your Vocation or
Employment? Or, 7. and Lastly, Is it your Posterity?
1. Is it your Name? A Wicked Man is 1. In their Names.
loathsome, and comes to shame: But by humility and the fear of the Lord, are
Riches, Honor and Life, Prove. 13. 5, and 22. 4 If the Parents Fear God, and be
faithful as Christians toward their Children, their Names are Precious.
Conscience toward God and Man is the true Foundation of Honor: Where the Life
is holy and righteous, the Name is sweet and comfortable. He is an ill Husband
of his Name that is a Wicked Liver at Home: And though he stands much upon
his vulgar Honesty for his Reputation, yet he acquireth no Better Name thereby,
then what a Pagan or Heathen may easily attain unto. As for Secular Honors
among Men, by Blood, Riches, Friendship, and Preferments, they weigh not in
God's Balance. That Man, that is a Real Christian in his Family* bears the
Image of his Maker, and therefore Raised to the Highest Pitch of Honor in this
World: The Righteous is more excellent then his Neighbor, Prove. 12. 26. Tell
me, can there be a greater Reproach to Heads of Families (in the best part of
Christendom) than to be Profane and Irreligious in their Dwellings? What a
Cursed shame is it, that thy House should be an Increase of a Sinful
Generation? that Wickedness should Survive in thy Posterity, when thou art
turned to Dust, and that it should be alive in thy House, and in Hell too? How
great is thy Stain, and Stench left behind thee? What a Plague Sore is this,
which neither Long-lived-Time, nor Ever-abiding Eternity can wear away? What? a
Parent, a Christian Parent, and yet Ungodly, Careless of Heaven, Covetous of
the Earth, and Prodigal of thine own, as well as thy Childrens Salvation? This
is to be Parent to the Bodies of thy Children, and Destroyer of their Souls.
Let the World Honor Parens Corporum Pernicies animarum.
its own with Monuments and Golden Letters, Yet know, that the Name of the
Wicked shall Rot, Prove. 10. 7. What can be more for the Raising of thy Name (O
Christian Parent) then to serve God in thy Family; whereas Vice and Ungodliness
is the Blot of True Honor, and Reverse the Coat Armor of every Dignified
Person in our English Church and Kingdom. If it were possible to be Wicked
alone, without Infecting others, it would not be so Infamous, as to make others
to Sin, as do all Wicked Families. That Jeroboam made Israel to Sin is the
Standing Monument of his Infamy. God threatens Baasha to make his House like
the House of Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, i. e. A Base, Ruined, and Vile House, 1
Kings 16. 3. And may not all Wicked Heads of Families fear, least the Lord
punish them and their Posterity after them for their sins, and make them as
vile in Ages to come, as they have been wicked in times past?

2. Is your Health dear unto you (O ye 2. In their Health.
wicked Prayer-less Families?) Is it better then your Goods? It is not in Mercy
to wicked Men, it is liable to God's Curse. Thy Body (O wicked Man) is a Fair
House, but the Plague is in it, even the Plague of thy own Heart, 1 King. 8.
38. Can thou say from thy heart, thou art in good Health, and wast never
sick of Sin, Nusquam pejus quam in Sano Corpore, Aeger Animus habitas.
and never knew the Physician of Souls, Mat. 9. 12? Ah! It were better that
thy Bodily Health were turned into a lingering Consumption, Palsy, Dropsy,
Stone, Colic, Gout, or any painful Disease, having health in thy Soul, then
to live without it, in Swearing, Cursing, Lying, Stealing, Sabbath-breaking,
Pride, Covetousness, Idleness, Uncleanness, Oppression. Questionless there is a
Secret Curse running in the veins of an Healthy Body which is spent in the
Pursuit of Sensual Contentments.

Health, the Best Thing, next to Grace, for want of the Blessing of Allmighty
God, is the Worst Thing in the World, next to a Life in Hell.

How many give the First Fruits of their Youth to Vanity and Wildness? How many
at Ripe Age (for want of God's Grace) run out of Prodigality into Covetousness,
thinking to make Amends by a Thrifty Sin for an Unthrifty Life, or mistaking
Exchange of Sins, to be Amendment of Life? What Comfort in that Health which is
the Undoing of the Soul to all Eternity? What Comfort in that Health, that
cannot, that will not be at leisure, nor spare time, nor a little of its
strength and vitals for Holiness and Heaven? What Comfort in that Health, which
is subject to the Inordinacy of Sense, and thereby denies the Soul its Rational
and Religious Liberties, for God's Worship, either in his House, or in their
own Houses? What Comfort in that healthy Body, which is made a sink of Sin, and
slave to every noisome Lust? Certainly this Corporal Health and Strength is
worse then brutish, for the Beast Feeds, Works, Resleth, Plays for the
benefit of Man; but a Wicked Healthy Man, is not only an Enemy, but a Curse to
himself, and to all that partake with him in his Sin. And now speak, What
greater Curse then thus to abuse Corporal Health, for the sake of which (in
time of Sickness) so many Friends and Relations stand Weeping and Sighing, and
so many Messangers and Doctors are employed?

What a Curse is it? What an Absurd piece of Wickedness and Folly, to part
with That, at any vile Rate, for the Recovery of which, thou art VVilling to
Have Every thing, though at the Highest Rate? What a Curse is it, to Sacrifice
That to the Devil and the World, which in Holy Baptism thou have solemnly
Dedicated and Devoted to God's Worship? What a Bitter Curse is it, to Work
out thy Damnation with that Health, wherewith God has commanded thee to work
out thy Salvation?

3. The Wicked Man's prolonged Life 3. In Long Life.
is a Curse to him. The sinner being an hundred years old shall be Accursed,
Isa. 65. 20. As he fills his days and years, so he fills up the measure of his
sins. His bones are full of the sins of his youth, which shall go down with him
into the dust, Job 20. 11. Solomon says, A wicked Man prolongeth his life in
his wickedness, Eccles. 7. 15. Such a Life will prove like it self, as Heavy of
Curses as it has made Light of Sinning. O what a misery is it for an Old
Sinner to begin to Live, when he is ready to Dye? What a woeful thing is it,
to find Governors Quidam tunc incipiunt vivere cum desivendum est, etc. Sen.
Ep. 23.
of Families in their Gray Hairs taking pleasure to discourse of the sins of
their youth? Do they not hereby, recommend those sins to be committed by their
children, which they, by reason of their Impotency, cannot commit? And is not
this a sign of God's Curse, impending over their Families, in respect of Long
Life? O what a Judgment is it, That Long Life is still growing Riper and Riper
for Destruction to all Eternity. The Amorites were not cut off, because their
Iniquity was not yet full, Genesis 15. 16.

O what a Curse is it, to be an Old Grayheaded Sinner, a Swearer, Drunkard,
Sabbath-breaker, Scorner of Religion! O what a sad thing is it to see strong
sins in feeble Age, Sins in the Meridian when Life is Setting? What a
deplorable thing is it, That Gospel-time (the most precious time in the World)
should have ever have suffered so Great a Loss by thee, and, Thou so great a
Punishment: When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty
Angles, in flameing fire taking Vengeance on them that know not God, and that
obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall he punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of
his power, 2 These. 1. 7, 8, 9? What a misery is it, that thou have lived to see
so many Gospel-years, with Rain and Sunshine, have been partaker of the Labors
of God's Husbandmen, and of their Seed, and should have come into the Barn
as a Shock of Corn in his season; yet now at last thou provest no better then a
Bundle of Tares. Ah what a Curse is it to be thus long-lived! Is it not a sad
Spectacle to see Governors of Families in Gray-haires, and without the Leaves
of outward Religious Duties in their Houses, Matt. 21. 19? It may be said of
such, that they have unhappily improved the Stock of Sin, as long and as far as
they could, and that a longlived Eternity of Punishment is their desert, Matt.
25. 41.

4. The sweetness of Friends shall be taken 4. Their Friends.
from the Wicked, God withdraws from them Spiritual, and they have no better
then Carnal Friends, who are willing to please them in their sins. Although
this is accounted (in Scripture) to be Hatred to their Friends and Neighbors,
Lev. 19. 17. Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thy Heart, thou shall in any
wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him. O what a Curse is it,
to make choice of such Friends, as are hurtful to our Souls, to wit, of loose,
jovial, vain Persons! O what a Curse is it, to have no better Friends then such
as be Friends to our Sins, and Enemies to our Souls! Admit, that a Worlding, or
a Loose Liver may carry Friendly, from a Principle of common honesty, and the
Interest of his Reputation, yet they do not, they cannot, and (whilst such)
they will not show a Christian Care over the Affairs of greatest moment,
namely, the Education of the Posterity of the Deceased in Virtue and Piety.
Compute then, what comfort a Wicked Man finds in his Friend; or, rather come
and lament the Misery of all such Persons and Families; considering, that for
the want of this faithful Christian Friendship and Trust, the Children of
Irreligious Worldly Families, are in apparent danger, to follow the steps of
their Parents and Friends, and so perpetuate (and as it were entayl) God's
Curse upon the House still. How should Families, in matters of Trust for
Posterity, be careful in Choosing Feoffees! I mean chiefly about Religion, that
it may not Dye in a Pious Family of Children, when their Parents Dye. If Seneca
esteemed at an high Rate, Civil or Moral Friendship, it teaches us to esteem at
an higher rate Christian Friendship. Non judicabam me, cum illos superstites
relinquerem, mori, putabam (inquam) me victurum, non cum illis, sed per illos,
etc. Ep. 78.
I (says Seneca) esteemed my Friends so much my Self, that I thought my Self
never Dead while they Lived; that although I lived not on Earth with them, yet
being Dead I Lived by them; so that I seemed rather to Deposit my Life (as well
as my Cares) with them, then to Depart this Life. Not unlike one of our late
English Senators Expressions, viz. L. Bacon's Essays.
A Friend is far more then a Man's Self. Men have their Time, and Dye in the
desire of some things, which they principally take to heart, the Bestowing of a
Child, the Finishing of a Work, or the like. If a Man have a True Friend, he
may rest almost Secure, that the Care of these things shall continue after him.
So that a Man has as it were Two Lives in his Desires.

Obj. But Solomon in one place, says, That the rich has many friends, Prove.
14. 20. And in another, Wealth makes many friends, Prove. 19. 4, What matter
then, Money is my Friend, my Estate is my Friend.

Ans. Solomon, in both places, discovers the Covetousness and Partiality of Men
in the World, who, for Advantage-sake, sell the Truth in Witness-bearing, and
accept Persons in Judgment. And who knows not how apt Men are to be drawn with
Silver and Gold Twist. Utilis amicitia ultimum habet locum, and quas amicitias
utilitas conglutinat easdem resolvit. Cic. in Laelia.

Amicitia non est, nisi inter bonos. Ibid.


Of all sorts of Friends, Money-Friends are the worst-Friends to the Purse, not
to the Person. Hence it is, that if they Judge the Gift or Fee too little, then
they conclude their Service and Trust too cheap, and they will do far less, or
quite neglect their Duty. The truth is, A Real Substantial Friend is the
Conscientious Man, Neh. 7. 2. Daniel, Chap. 6. 4, 5. Verses. It is a True
saying, Friendship cannot be there, where Goodness is not. He that loves
pureness of heart, for the grace of his lips, the King shall be his friend,
Prove. 22. 11.

Parts and Endowments of Wicked Men 5. Parts and Endowments.
are liable to God's Curse; And what a sore evil do Parents and Masters of
Families bring upon themselves, and those under their Charge hereby? What a
Cursed thing is it, to have their Intellectuals poisoned, infatuated and
corrupted, with Atheistical Principles, dangerous Opinions, and Damnable
Practices? What a Judgment is it to have their Gold and Silver Cankered, and
their choicest Endowments vitiated? Let no Wicked Person conclude and presume
of God's Love to him from Gifts: It is not Distribution, nor Receiving of Gifts
no true sign of Grace.
Talents, but Grace to employ them well, which is an Evidence of God's Love,
Matt. 25. 30.

What great pity is it to see Men of Breeding and Quality in the World (whose
Time of Education has been as Expensive, as the Lives of most Men) to strip
themselves of their Ornaments, and trample upon them in the Vomit and Sink of
Luxury and Surfeting? And how sad is it afterward (in stead of Ingenuity to
acknowledge) to Prostitute their Gifts and Parts to make Defenses for their
Enormities? Is not this Treason against Heaven, to Clip God's Coin, his Gifts,
to Guild their own Dross, their Sins, to make them Current in the World?
Namely, to call Healthing and Carousing, Good Fellowship, Loyalty, or Civility;
To call Swearing, Hectoring, and Duelling, Gallantry, or Manhood; to call
Covetousness, good Husbandry, and Prodigality, Generosity.

Ah, What a Curse is this, to become Panders, and Devils, to draw themselves
and others into Hell more securely? Is it not Cursed for knowing Persons to
hide, extenuate and plead for Sin? Is not this to Justify that which Christ
came to Condemn, than which what is more vile and abominable? Woe to them that
call evil good, and good evil, that put darkness for light, and light for
darkness, that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter, Isa. 5. 20. These
are wise to do evil, but to do good have no knowledge, Jer. 4. 22. The light of
the body is the eye, therefore when thine eye is single, thy whole body is full
of light; but when thine eye is evil, thy body is full of darkness. Take heed
therefore, that the light which is in thee be not darkness, Luke 11. 34, 35.

6. The very Works of Wicked Men's 6. Their Vocation and Employments.
Callings are liable to God's Curse.

1. His Natural Actions, when he eats or drinks, he feeds a Body of sin,
and makes provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof. Every creature
of God is good, etc. It is sanctified by the Word and Prayer, 1 Timothy 4. 4, 5.
The fruit of his Body is cursed, etc. Deuteronomy. 28. 18.

2. His Civil Actions, The Ploughing of the Wicked is sin, Prove. 21. 4. He is
cursed in the City, and in the Field, Deuteronomy. 28. 16. His Buying and Selling is
cursed, His Building and Planting, Deuteronomy. 28. 30.

3. To be sure his Religious Actions are no better. The Prayers of the wicked
are abomination to God, Prove. 15. 8. He that-turneth away his ear from hearing
the Law, even his Prayer shall be abomination, Prove. 28. 9.

2. God's Curse is extended to Persons 2. God's Curse extended to Persons
Governed.
Governed in Wicked Houses. In the Second Commandment, Exodus 20. 5. Visiting
the iniquity of the Fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth
generation of them that hate me, And show mercy, etc. And God justly punishes
Wicked Parents, and Wicked Children of Wicked Parents. There be many instances
hereof in Scripture, both in private Persons and Families, and in whole
Kingdoms and Churches, Ahab and his House, Jeroboam and his Posterity, 2 Kings
9. 7, 8, 9. compared with the 1 Kings 14. 10, 11. Gehazi and his Seed, 2 Kings
5. last. The Egyptians were plagued in their Firstborn, Exodus 11. 5, 6. The
Jews and their Children are under the Wrath of God to this day, Matt. 27. 25. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 16. The Wrath of God is come upon them to the uttermost. Achan's Sin
brought punishment upon himself and Family, Joshua, Chap. 7. Yea, all Israel
fares the worse for his sin. And there were three years Famine in the end of
David's time, for Saul and his bloody House, 2 Samuel 21. 1, 2.

How this may consist with the Justice of God, Is thus Resolved, (1.) A great
Question Answered in many Particulars
The Punishments which God brings upon the Children for the Fathers sins, are
only Temporal and Outward Punishments. See Bishop Sanderson 's Three Sermons,
ad pop. p. 372, 373, etc. 380, etc.
Sometimes they are smitten with Infectious Diseases, as Gehazies Posterity;
some come to untimely ends, as Ammon and Absalon, and the little Children of
Dathan and Abiram. Posterity may fare better or worse, for the Virtues, or
Vices of their Ancestors, i. e.. Outwardly and Temporally, but Spiritually and
Eternally they do not: For as never yet any Man went to Heaven for his Fathers
Goodness, so not to Hell for his Fathers Wickedness. (2.) Children most times
tread in their Fathers Steps, and continue in their Sins, and so draw upon
themselves their Punishments. Certain it is, that most times sins pass along
from the Father to the Son, and so downward, by a kind of Lineal Descent from
Parents to Children, whole Families being tainted with the special Vices of
their Stock; either by Nature, Example, or Education. Aetas parentum pejor avis
tulit nos nequiores; mox daturos progeniem vitiosiorem.
Therefore Parents ought to beware of Constitution-Sins in themselves, which
follow the predominant humors of their Bodies and Souls, and of showing bad
Examples for want of good Education. If we should observe some Families for
several Generations Descending, we may see Whole Generations of Ryotous,
Drunkards, Swearers, Sabbath Breakers, Worldlings, Persecutors, Oppressors,
Unclean and Filthy Persons, Superstitious and Idolatrous Families, and such
like. And thus the Curse of God descends upon Posterity. (3.) It is to be noted
(for our better understanding, how justly God punishes Children for sins of
Wicked Parents and Governors) that between Head and Members, Governors and
Governed (whether in Kingdoms, or Churches, or Families) there is such an
Union, that whereas we look upon them severally, they are but One, as One Body,
Magistrates are Civil Fathers, Ministers are Ecclesiastical, and Parents of
Families (over and besides) are Natural Fathers. Now, where there is Union,
there is Communion, suited to the Relative State of Things and Persons, in
respect of Rewards and Punishments. The whole Person of Man is Punished for one
part, Tongue or Hand; for, as they Act for the Whole, so they make it
obnoxious. And so it is with Magistrates and Rulers, in respect of those under
Government. For, as in the Body Natural, there is a Locomotive Faculty, guided
and commanded by Superior Principles of Sense and Reason, to go forth and bring
home those things which are suitable to it: So in every Body Politic, there
are Inferior Instruments guided by Superior Powers, which, by doing their
part in an Evil Work, whether in their own Persons, or in their
Representatives, become guilty, and so liable to punishment. (4.) Observe, That
Achan's sin was publicly and solemnly prohibited, and the Punishment
threatened fully known to all of his Family, in which, if there were Infants,
or Children short of years of Discretion, yet they cannot be said to suffer
unjustly, because of that natural contagion of sin drawn from the Loins of
their Parents, and because of some actual sins committed. (5.) In Answer, This
Punishment, which involved the Posterity of Achan, ought not to be looked upon
so properly the Punishment of Children, as the Punishment of Parents, because
the suffering of Children, (being so near and dear to them) rendered this
Dispensation more notable and exemplary to all Israel, and smart and afflictive
to Achan, which was the intent of it. (6.) God sometimes turns that into a
Fatherly Chastisement, which was a Punishment in the Predecessor. Innocent
Posterity sometimes suffers for Guilty Ancestors, but such Visitations may have
kindness in them. (7.) We must beware of questioning God's Judicial Judicia Doi
occulta sunt nulla injusta.
Proceedings, or examining them by our own Measures, of Man's Reason, Laws, or
Tribunals.

And now having, in Seven Particulars, showed; That it is consistent with the
Justice of God to punish Posterity for Predecessors sins, with Temporal
Punishments; let all Parents take heed of showing Evil Examples to their
Children, of Swearing, Cursing, Sabbath-breaking, Cheating, Stealing,
Oppressing, Coveting, least they, by following their steps (as they are in
danger) suffer Eternal Judgments. O let all Parents beware, of Breaking their
Baptismal-Covenant, and causing their Children to break it, thereby undoing
themselves and their Children to all Eternity, unless Mercy prevent them.

2. The Curse of God on Wicked Houses, 2. General Thing, the Extent of God's
curse on Things Temporal, piritual.
falls upon Things as well as Persons. Things are Twofold,

1. Temporal. 2. Spiritual.
Which are in order to Eternal.

1. On Things Temporal. God is highly displeased when he punishes sinners with
Prosperity. The Rich Man's full Table, served up with his Music and Songs;
Soul, Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years, take thine ease, eat,
drink and be merry, could not make way for his comfortable departure out of
this World: But God said to him, Thou fool, this night thy Soul shall be
requered of thee, then whose shall those things be which thou have provided,
Luke 12. 19, 20? Let it not seem strange, that Wicked Families prosper in the
World, and increase in Riches, and yet be Cursed in their basket and their
store, Houses, Lands, Livings, Cattle, Corn, in City and Country. We may not
judge of comfort in Temporal Things, from the Quantity thereof. A Man's life
consists not in the Abundance of the things which he possesses, Luke 12. 15.
Non donum sed animus dantis.
Look not at the Gift so much, as the Good Will of the Giver, not at the Bulk,
but at the Blessing. In the revenues of the Wicked is trouble, Prove. 15. 6.
What profit or pleasure in that abundance which will not suffer the Rich to
sleep? And what comfort to Feast and Surfeit thereby? A little that a righteous
man has, is better then the riches of many wicked, Psalm. 37. 16. Magnas inter
opes inops. been est cui De us obtulit parca quod satis est manu. Hor. Carm.
Lib. 3. Ode 16.
If it were possible, that all the Delights of Men did run into the Wicked
Man's Cistern, yet a Frown from God's offended Countenance would make all
bitter to him. The Handwriting set before Carousing Belshazzar, made him
Astonished, and his Heart sunk in the height of his Mirth. What made Cains
Countenance fall, the Second Man, and Heir Apparent to the World? Was it not
because, God had not respect to him and to his Offering, Genesis 4. 5. If we come
nearer, and view the Wicked Man's Life in his Wealth and Prosperity, we shall
find him obnoxious to God's Curse in Temporal Things,

1. By his Desire. Three Things bring God's Curse upon Temporals.
2. By his Use. 3. And his value of Riches.
1. By his Inordinate Desire, which, as it is without Measure, so it is without
Content with his Condition. It is an Heathenish temper to be set upon the
World. It Inordinate Desire of Riches. Sed quae reverentia legum, qui^ me ius
pudor est unquam properantis avari. Juv. Sat. 14.
wants neither Sin nor Misery to have to be Rich. They that will be rich fall
into temptation and a snare, 1 Timothy 6. 9. And he that hastes to be rich, has
an evil eye, and considers not that poverty shall come upon him, Prove. 28.
22. What a Curse is it to make the Mammon of this World a Christians God? Ah
what a Curse is this Projecting for thick Clay, and wearying himself for very
vanity, Habb. 2. 6. 13. What a Curse is it, to be a Friend of the World, and
the Enemy of God, James 4. 4? What a Curse is it to prefer the Creature before
the Creator, things seen before unseen, Temporal before Eternal, the Body
before the Soul, and Earth before Heaven? Were it not just with God to
disinherit all these Worldlings of True Happiness, who place it here below?

Wicked Men are neither well full nor 2. The Use of Riches.
fasting, they provoke God, not only in Desiring, but in Using, and Having
Riches. The truth is, Wicked Men do not use Riches, but their Riches use them:
And how? why for Wantonness, Luxury, Pride, Oppression, Pleasures, Riot, or
Ostentation. Thus that which God appointed to Apud me divitiae aliquem locum
habent apud te summum: Ad postremum divitiae meae sunt, tu divitiarum es. Sen.
de Beat. Vita. cap. 22.
Help, Maintain, and countenance Virtue and Piety (among Men and Christians) is
usurped to cherish and entertain Vice and Ungodliness, to prefer themselves to
high Places, and make room for them in the World to commit greater sins.
Whereas Riches are the Servants of Good Men, they are the Masters of Wicked
Men. The good Man makes his Riches subordinate to the Glory of God; but the
Wicked Man is in servitude, to the Lusts of the Elesh, the lust of the Eyes,
and the Pride of Life. Wicked Men (in the sight of God) have not a Sanctified
right to these Temporal Things, while they are out of Christ. And although they
have an Indulgence, from the common Bounty of Divine Providence, to use
Temporals and become Rich, yet they want a comfortable Title to them. And what
comfort in the Having, or in Using of these Temporals, without the Grace and
Blessing of God? Is it not a Sigh of God's Wrath and Curse upon Men's Houses and
Families, when they suffer the World to Lord it over their Consciences, Time,
Education, Office, Reason, Souls and Bodies and all. When the World has Men's
Knees, Prayers, Oaths, Strength, Wit, Parts, Memory, when the Love of the World
has seized on God's Worship, Sabbaths, Ordinances, and Ministry, Is there not
a Curse upon such abused Riches? Is it not a sign of God's Displeasure, when
the World usurps Power over Spiritual and Heavenly things? Is not this the
Fruit of the Forbidden Tree, Genesis 2. 17. compared with, Chap. 3. 17? Every Good
Man makes use of his Riches, as Joshua did of the Gibeonites, makes them
hewers of wood, and drawers of water, for the House of God, Joshua 9. 23. When
as Wicked Men prefer the World to chief honor, as Ahab did Benhadad, who
caused him to come up to his Chariot, 1 Kings 20. 33. O what a sad The Abuse of
Riches.
account is every Wicked Man like to make? How will his abused Riches rise up
in Judgment against him? Many were his costly sins which he maintained, many
needless Visits, many Chargeable Curiosities and Fancies, many extravagant and
uncomely Fashions in Apparel, in Meats and Drinks; all which are followed,
attended and waited on with many Temptations to Wantonness, and many more
Vices, potent Enemies to the Life of Nature, and much more to a Moral and
Christian Life. But what little good has this Wicked Rich Man done to Church
or State, to Strangers or Relations, or to his own Family, where Cbarity should
begin? Have not Wicked Families (of no small quality) Adopted their sins (as
Riot, Oppression, Pride, Covetousness, Uncleanness) to Inherit their Estates,
and Disinherit their Posterity? Where there is more Wealth, without more Grace
to manage this increase, it will prove a Curse in stead of a Blessing.
Therefore our Savior exhorts, To make to our selves Friends of the Unrighteous
Mammon, Luke 16. 9. i. e. to get Grace to use Riches to the honor of God, not
to maintain Intemperance and Ungodliness. For the Day is coming, when God will
summon all such Persons and Families to give an account of their large portion
of Worldly things, and misimprovement thereof, Luke 16. 11. Hos. 2. 8. 9.
Riches are abused one of these two ways, They are either Over-valued, or
Under-valued; the Covetous are guilty of the one, and the Prodigal of the other
sin. And this brings me to the next Particular, viz.

3. And Lastly; Wicked Men provoke 3. The value of Riches.
God to Curse them for the Value they make of Riches: God placed Man over those
Sublunary things, and now sinful contemptible Man, will stoop as low as Hell
for them. How strangely are Men Infatuated, to Dote upon Dirt and Dross! Who
would think that a Reasonable Creature, placed his Happiness on Thick Clay, on
Wind, on that which is not, Habb. 2. 6. Eccl. 5. 16. Prove. 23. 5. Yet so we
find it, Luke 12. 19. Soul, Soul, take thine ease, etc. To place God and the
Creature in the same Rank and Order, and to Worship the Creature jointly with
the Creator, is no less sin, then Idolatry; but to set the Creature above the
Creator i^ Atheism. If this were not so, the Worlds Trinity would not have so
many Votaries and Sacrifices of Souls and Bodies. How can such Men and Women as
these be in God's Favor? Can that Man or Family have the Blessing of God upon
them and theirs, which bow down to the Gods of Silver and Gold? Ah, What is Man
without Divine Grace? How sensual, how Sad Effects of over valuing this World.
base, how brutish in choice and affection? This Rate which Carual and Forthly
Men set on Temporal Things, opens a wide door to all manner of sin, Bribery,
Oppression, Dissembling, Lying, Perjury, Flattery, Oppressive Tyrannical
Lawsuits, Temporizing, and Unhappy Disposing of Children, to Services, to
Trades, to Preferments, and to Marriages.

But is this all? No, worse is behind; 2. Wicked Men and their Houses liable to
God's Curse in Spiritual Things.
for, Wicked Men, and their Families, are subject to God's Curse, not only in
Temporal Things, but in Spiritual Things, that is, when they perform the
Outward Duties of Religion; As Prayer, Hearing the Word, coming to the
Sacrament, Reading God's Word, Reading Good Books, and Conference about matters
of Religion.

1. When Wicked Men Pray: Their Prayers are an Abomination; He that turns In
respect of Prayer.
away his Ear from hearing the Law, even his Prayer shall be an Abomination,
Prove. 28. 9. The Sacrifice of the wicked is abomination to the Lord, but the
Prayer of the upright is his delight, Prove. 15. 8.

That the Actions of Wicked Men, whether Natural, Civil, or Religious, are
obnoxious to God's Curse, has been mentioned before, Under another Head,
namely [The Vocation or Employments of Wicked Men.]

Now, as to the Matter in hand, concerning outward Religious Works, of
Unregenerate Men, whether public upon the Lord's Day, or private in the
Family; take notice of these following Particulars, to prevent mistakes, least
any harden their hearts in Omission of outward Duties.

1. That those Persons sin more, who Pray not at all in their Houses, then such
as make Prayer. It is better to do that which is Materially Good, then that
which is both Materially and Formally Evil. It is better to have a Form of
Worship and Religion, then Atheistical Profaneness. It is better to have
Leaves of Profession, then nothing but the Cursed Fruits of a Corrupt Tree. It
is more Eligible (ex natura rei) to exercise Common Gifts and Operations of the
Spirit, and some Feeling in the Conscience, than to be Barren of All Gifts, and
Dead to all outward Duties of Religion, Isa. 43. 23. Amos 5. 25. Thou have not
brought me the small Cattle of thy burnt-offerings, etc. Have ye offered unto
me sacrifiee and offerings, etc?

2. That God is pleased to Reward, with Temporal Blessings, such as Pray, and
Humble themselves for their sins, though they be not true Believers, and
sincere therein.

God is pleased to Encourage all sort of sinners to observe and set up Outward
Duties of Religion, and they shall fare the Better. It is not without Reward to
perform some Formalities of Worship, though done in Hypocrisy, 1 Kings 21. 29.
See thou how Ahab humbles himself before me, etc. Here is a Great Temporal
Mercy given to Ahab during his Life [I will not bring the evil in his days.]

3. Consider, That none be hardened in their Omission of the Externals of
Religion: I say, let them know, That sin is in the Person, before it Infect the
Performance; In the Subject, before it corrupt the Action. Therefore let the
blame be laid where it ought, not upon Religion, nor the Duties thereof, but
upon the Professor and his bad Life.

4. Seeing the condition of Unregenerate and Wicked Men, is so contagious, that
it pollutes all their Outward Religious Actions, let them make have to get out,
by the use of all means of God's appointment, in order to their Conversion: As
by Prayer, Hearing the Word, Reading the Word, Reading Good Books, and, by Good
Company, as beforementioned. For although the Prayers of the Wicked and
Unregenerate be unpleasing to God, yea, an abomination, yet it is their Duty to
Pray, that they may be turned from their Wicked ways, that so their Persons and
Performances, may find acceptance through Christ.

O let all sorts of Prayer-less Families Pray, that they may Pray in Faith, and
that they may become sincere, and downright Christians. If you have any Bowels
of Compassion for your own Souls, and the Souls of your Children, get out of
the Cursed Condition of Wicked Men. Who would lead a Wicked Life, if he were
sensible of his Misery, and the Curse of God upon the House of the Wicked?

2. Wicked Men are subject to Gods Curse, In hearing the Word. They are the bad
2. In respect of Hearing the Word.
ground, which receives seed among Thorns and Briers, Such Earth as bears
Thorns and Briers is rejected and nigh unto Cursing, whose end is to be burned,
Heb. 6. 8. As they come unprepared to hear, so they depart without profit. The
fault is not in the Seed but in the ground, which receives it. The life of the
Wicked is compared to untilled, rough, thorny, fallow ground, Jer. 4. 3. What
Fruit can be expected from it, How can the Seed of the word and a wicked heart
agree? Who would live in the condition of a wicked Man? Who trembles not, to
be under Gods Ordinances without a blessing; what heart dreads not to be
subject to Gods Curse? Who would not be afraid to hear the blessing pronounced,
and have no share in it? Come then to the word for Grace, to make thee a
New-man, to reform thy wicked course of Life. Come to Bethesda, there is hope
of thy cure, of thy conversion, though thou have a long time been in this case.
If thou art willing to be made whole, if thou art willing to become a New
Creature, the work will be done, Jo. 5. 6. Let nothing hinder or discourage
thee because of thy wickedness, or being Obnoxious to Gods Curse in hearing the
word, but let it much more persuade and quicken thee, to a constant and
conscionable attendance upon the word. There is hope of Grace in the use of
means of Grace, but by refusing the means, thou art sure to Perish. Take up
then such a like resolution, as the Lepers before Samaria did, 2 Kings 7. 3, 4.
And there were four Leprous Men at the entering in at the Gate, and they said
one to another, Why sit we here until we dye, etc? Let the wicked forsake his
way, and the unrighteous Man his thoughts, etc. Isa. 55. 7.

3. Wicked and Unconverted Men are liable to Gods Curse in Reading the Holy 3.
In reading Gods word and good Books.
Scriptures, and good Books. For they are in the dark, and without faith the
Eye of the Soul. They have Eyes and see not, they have Ears and hear not. They
want a right End, Gods Glory, the good of their own Souls, and of their Family,
whereunto God has commanded his word and good Books to be read in Families,
Deuteronomy. 6. 1, 2, 3, etc.

Particularly, Wicked Men deprive themselves of Gods Blessing in reading his
word and good Books, 1. For want of Prayer to God for it, Psalm. 119. 18. Open
thou mine Eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy Law. It may be
that some Wicked Men are of good Natural Parts to discourse of Religion; But
what is that without Grace in the heart, to relish the Spiritual matters
thereof? What is a Golden Head and a Stony Heart? 2. By reason of Ignorance,
The Natural Man, receives not the things of the Spirit of God, etc. 1 Cor. 2.
14. 3. Wicked Men in reading Gods word, and good Books are upon uncertainties,
for they fix upon no Duty, they are all in Generals for want of the applying
Act of Conscience. They as Men read Maps of Foreign Countries, without
Knowledge of the Globes. 4. Wicked Men expose themselves to Gods Curse in
Reading Scripture and good Books, by converting their Knowledge into empty
discourse or unprofitable Disputes. And Seculum quo nullum anquam seracius
Religionum fuit, Sterilius Pietatis. Lisius De Constable. Ep. ad Lect.
what more vain and carnal in these Opinionative times? What Lipsius said of
his Contrymen, is as true of our selves, i. e. Never any Age more abounding
with Religions, and Barren of Piety. We have cause to fear, that Interest is
the Religion of many Professors, whereunto they sacrifice their Cares, and all
their Abilities, Acts 19. 28. Great is Diana of the Ephesians. Ah, what
confusions have Opinions wrought amongst us in England. And, no wonder, seeing
they Lodge in that Wild and Restless faculty of the Soul, Namely, Imagination,
from whence all perturbations of Church and State proceed.

4. Hereunto in the last place, may be 4. In receiving friendly Reproof and
Advice.
added, Friendly and Neighbourly Reproof and Advice, which (though it be the
best of Christian Charity, Levit. 19. 17.) Is made the worst use of by Wicked
Men.

1. They either make a mock of it. Or,

2. Snuff at it as a piece of Censoriousness and Impertinency. Or,

3. Count their Friend their Enemy, and at the next meeting can hardly afford
him an Ordinary Salutation. This is the Cursed condition of wicked Men, even in
respect of spiritual things. He that reproves a scorner, gets to himself
shame, and he that rebukes a Wicked Man, gets himself a blot, Prove. 9. 7.

3. The Third Thing in opening the former Description of Gods Curse on wicked
Men, 3. General. Gods Curse is extended to Time here, And to Eternity hereafter.
is the extent of it, in respect of the Duration of it, which is, 1. To Time
here, 2. To Eternity hereafter.

1. To Time here, in all the forementioned particulars, with relation had to
Persons, Governors and Governed, and to things Temporal and Spiritual, with
many particulars under both Heads. I come to speak of the latter part of the
Duration of the Curse of God on wicked Men, which is extended to Eternity
hereafter. There is not a day free, nor an hour (so long as they be out of
Christ) from the justly deserved Curse; God is angry with the Wicked every Day,
Psalm. 7. 11. Upon the Wicked he shall rain snares, Fire and Brinstone, and an
horrible Tempest, this is the Portion of their Cup, Psalm. 11. 6. Who could
sleep quietly in his Bed, with a drawn Sword hanging over his Head by a twine
thread? But ah, poor Creatures, Hell Fire (for ought they know) is kindling for
them; while they are Treasuring up unto themselves wrath against the Day of
wrath, and while they say, Peace and Safety, sudden destruction is coming upon
them, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3. But is this the worst of their misery? Can it end with
time, can Death and the Grave put an end to it? No, no, Evil pursues sinners;
The Curse is extended to Eternity. O woeful State of Wicked Families! O that
they would consider of it, before they come out of the Low Ebb of Time, into
the vast Ocean of Eternity!

2. Therefore, this Curse is extended to The Ext^^me Malediction.
the longest line of Eternity. This is the amazing sentence full of horror;
Depart ye Cursed into Everlasting Fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels,
Mat. 25. 41. Will not this word [Eternity] pierce the hardest heart? Will it
not awaken the most presuming sinner, out of the [Mare Mortuum] or Dead Sea of
Security? O the dreadful thoughts of Eternity, Eternity in the Lake that
burns with Fire and Brimstone! Eternity is not made up of Millions
Quibusannis potest saturariaeternitas, cui nullus est finis? Lact. lib. 1. Cap.
12.
of Years. You may as soon Gird the expanded Heavens, or Drink up the Ocean, as
Measure Eternity. Which made one cry out, What years can sotiate endless
Eternity. Men would not live in their Houses as they do, if they did truly
believer, That (except they repent) Gods Curse, after this wicked life is
ended, will abide upon them for ever, Romans 6. Last. The wages of sin is Death,
but the Gift of God is Eternal Life through Jesus Christ our Lord, i. e. Of sin
Indefinitely taken, any sort of sin, every sin, unrepented of.

Quest. But sinful Man's time upon Earth, is but for a while that he sins,
compared to Eternity. Why should he suffer Infinite and Eternal Punishment,
for Finite and Temporary sins?

Answ. Sin and Punishment may be considered three ways.

1. In respect of themselves. 2. In respect of Duration. 3. In respect of their
Object.
1. In respect of themselves. Sin considered in it self, as it is a Privation
of Holiness and Righteousness, is finite not Infinite, because that Holiness
and Righteousness, wherein Adam was at the first Created, was Finite suitable
to the Creature. And Punishment considered in it self [Intensive] is Finite;
But if Punishment be considered [Extensive] it is Infinite; that is to say,
Punishment for its Entity (or its Being) is Finite: And for its Duration in
that Being, It is Infinite; Or, thus in short, Sin is of Infinite Continuance
in Hell, and Its Punishment is Answerable. Were the life of sinful Aequm est ut
ille, qui nunquam desinit esse Maelum nunquam desinat esse Miser.
Men prolonged for ever upon Earth, they would sin for ever; The guilt and
filth of sin descends into Hell with the Impenitent, and the Damned are ever
Living and ever Sining, therefore it is Just, that their Punishment run Parallel
with their sining.

2. In respect of Duration, sin and punishment may be considered, and in this
respect they both are Infinite, i. e. the malignity, emnity and contrariety of
sin to God's purity and goodness remains for ever, and the punishment is
inflicted for ever. Gods word has placed Rewards and Punishments one against
another, Mat. 25. Last, And these shall go into everlasting Punishment, but the
Righteous into Life Eternal. The wages of Sin is Death, but the Gift of God is
Eternal Life through Jesus Christ our Lord. As Rewards are Eternal, so
Punishments are Eternal, As Life is Eternal, so Death is Eternal. By the Rule
of Contraries these Illustrate one another.

3. Sin and Punishment are considered in respect of the Object, or against whom
sin is committed, i. e. against the Majesty of Heaven and Earth, the supreme
Lawgiver, of Infinite Justice and Holiness. Sin in this respect may be said to
be Infinite, being the Transgression of the Law of an Infinite Majesty. For
more full Answer to this Question.

1. Observe, That although Man's Time of sinning be but short compared to
Eternity of suffering, yet this does not appertain to the Nature of sin, being
[Extrinsecal] to it, for the sin of Apostate Angels, presently after the
Commission, was in it self, (abstractively taken, for that Malicious defection
and deformity from the chief Good) as hateful and contrary to God, as it was
afterward and farther on. In like manner, the sin of our first Parents,
deserved Eternal Punishment, the very first Day, as well as in future time. The
Reason hereof is this, We ought in this matter enquire into the Moral Evil,
Internal principles, and roots of sin, the formality of it, emnity, privation,
separation, and aversation from Man's chief end, the enjoyment of God himself,
the Being of Beings, and Fountain of Happiness.

2. Quest. But seeing that there be some that 2 Quest.
dye in their Infancy, some in their Childhood, others in Youth, ripe Age, old
Age. And seeing there be Greater and Lesser sins, as they admit of
aggravations, against the Light of Nature, and against the Gospel, How can it
be said that they suffer Justly, in case all suffer Eternally?

Answ. Punishment hereafter, is proportionable The Answer.
to Wicked Men's sins committed in this Life, and all sorts shall have their
Just Deserts. Christ Jesus the Judge of all the World, will reward every one
according to his work, Mat. 16. 27.

The greater and lesser sins, shall have greater and lesser Punishment, but all
shall have Eternal Punishment. There are Degrees of Punishment in Hell, as of
sinning on Earth, but Eternity of suffering is the Portion of all.

The least sin deserves Eternal Death. [There are not Physical Degrees in this
Death; There is no Diminution in Infiniteness, nor Brevity in Eternity].

O let every Wicked Man be upon his Knees, and pray for true faith in Christ
and Repentance of his sins, let him give no sleep to his Eyes, nor slumber to
his Eyelids till he partake of the Mercy of God, and Infinite merits of Jesus
Christ, the Son of God, who alone delivers, from this dreadful wrath to come,
1 Thessalonians. 1. 10.

CHAP. IV.
The Pernicious Influence of the Sins of Wicked Families, upon this Church and
Kingdom, from seven Aggravations.

1. THere was never any Nation well 1. Aggravation of Family Impiety. It
depopulates Kingdoms. Sir W. R. Ghost.
and peaceably Governed, in the which Religion, and a Persuasion of a Divine
Providence, was not well and soundly planted in the minds of Men. And the more
that any one was privately devoted to Religion, and the Reverencing of a Divine
Spirit, the more Illustrious and Famous he became in all innocence and probity
of Life. As the secret Atheism of Men's Judgments, so the known Atheism of their
Practice, opens the Door to all Wickedness, Injustice, Pride, Perjury, Tyranny,
Sacrilege, or any other Villainy, Psalm. 14. 1, 2, etc. Titus 1. Last. They
profess they know God, but in works they deny him, being abominable and
disobedient, and to every good work reprobate. It is observable, that the Book
called the [Practise of Piety] was Dedicated to King Charles the First, then
Heir Apparent of these Kingdoms; Intimating, that, true Religion, is, the best
Crown Imperial, the undoubted Glory and Safety of Church and State. Wisdom is
better then Weapons of War, but one sinner destroys much good, Eccles. 9.
Last. The good of the Commonalty depends upon the Exercise of Religion. If thou
have true Loyalty in Una custodia Pietas. Char. of Wisdom.
thy heart, live with an Awe of Religion in thy Family, the want whereof will
render thee unjust abroad, as well as at home. Those that are without Devoted
Service to God, will not be subject to Rulers for Conscience sake.

He that is subject only upon the account Bp. Wilkins Sermon before the King
1670.
of wrath, and the Power of the Sword which is over him, will be no longer so,
when he has an opportunity of escaping or resisting that Power. Nor is there
any possible way, to secure Men in their quiet subjection and obedience, but by
their being obliged for Conscience sake. And therefore such kind of Persons as
by their open profaneness and contempt of Religion, do endeavor to destroy
Conscience from amongst Men, may justly be esteemed, as the worst kind of
seditious Persons, and most pernicious to civil Government.

Was it not hence, that the Roman Empire suffered so much, namely, from their
Cateline, Brutus, Cassius, Sylla, Marius, and such like wicked fellows?
Righteousness exalts a Nation, but sin is a reproach to any People, Prove. 14.
34. It is the observation of Josephus in his Antiquities, that the Jews were
grown very profane and careless of Religion, before the destruction of
Jerusalem by the Romans. The Lord has a controversy with the Inhabitants of
the Land, Because there is no Truth, nor Mercy, nor Knowledge of God in the
Land. By Swearing and Lying, and Killing and Stealing, and Committing Adultery,
they break out, and Blood touches Blood. Therefore shall the Land mourn and
every one that dwells therein, etc. Hos. 4. 1, 2, 3. The abominable
wickedness of Canaan, provoked the Lord to visit the iniquity thereof upon it,
and the Land vomitted out her Inhabitants. Ye shall therefore keep my Statutes
and my Judgments, etc. That the Land spue not you out also, when ye defile it,
etc. Levit. 18. 25, 26, 27, 28. Personal sins quickly become Popular, and as
sin goes not alone, so it goes not without its Contagion: It is a Plague, and
infects others when we see them not, it is as diffusive as the air which we
breath in. There is much danger in a Contagious Conversation. One Bp. Hall, In
a Sermon at Hampton Court, before King James the First. 1624.
person infects a Family, one Family a whole Street, One Street a whole City,
One City a whole Country, One Country a whole World. If sin begin with one
Angel it infects Legions, If with one Woman, it inserts all the Mass of
Mankind. Thou sit at home, and think that thou do no hurt to the
Kingdom or Church, but sure is, that thy Familysins will abroad, and as its
said of those that are infected with Plague sores, so it may be said of
sinners, that they strive to infect others. Sin never goes alone whether
considered as Criminal or Penal.

Thy Sabbath-breaking, Idleness, Pride, Prodigallity, Backbiting, Drunkenness,
Coveteousness, and such like, breed more sins first at home, then in thy
Neighbors House, then afterward, both thou thy self, thy untoward posterity
and thy corrupted Neighbors, carry them into Company, in Villages, Market
Towns and Cities, and in process of time, the whole Land where thou live, is
defiled thereby. This fire of Family sins, being once kindled, finds more fuel
among sinful Men, and so going from one to another, at last, it breaks forth
into consuming Flames. A whole Tribe was corrupted with Idolatry, which first
came from Micha's Family, Judges 17, and 18, Chapters. Achan's sin brought
God's hand, not only upon himself and Family, but all Israel smarts for it,
Josh. 7. 13. And a long time after, Achan is called the [Troubler of Israel] 1 Chronicles. 2. 7. But especially the Families of Great Persons, as of Princes,
Magistrates, Nobility, Gentry, Clergy, bring Judgments upon whole Nations and
Countries. As in Readiness time, Jeroboam's, Baasha's, Ahaz's, and Manasseh's
time. The sins of Nobility, and Gentry, are of a more spreading Infection, then
the sins of Inferior Persons. And as to the Contagion of the sins of the
Ministry; It is said, From the Prophets of Jerusalem, is Profaneness gone
forth into all the Land, Jer. 23. 15. There be some sins which are Domestic
and Private, which grow quickly into National and Politic sins, as
Sabbath-breaking, Whoredoms, Murder, Perjury, Rebellion against Parents
whether Natural or Civil Parents, Oppression, Idolatry, Heresy, Deuteronomy. 13. 19,
and 21. Chapters, Showing the Punishment of Idolatry, Murder, Rebellion
against Parents. And touching the Punishment of Whoredoms, see Deuteronomy. 22. 21,
22, ver. All which Texts show the National Epidemical malignity of those sins;
And therefore all Israel must hear and fear, and do no more any such wickedness
as this among them.

2. Consider, That Ungodly Families, 2. Aggravation of Family Impiety. It
Overthrows Churches.
Overthrow Churches. Profane hands in Parishes pull down Gods House. It is
Unbelief, Impeuitency, Sabbath-breaking, common prodigious swearing, revelling
at Wakes, Merry Nights, Greens, May Games, Healthing; Inlets to Debauchery and
all Impiety, to Atheism, Blasphemy, Whoredom, Contempt of Religion and
Morallity. These are the Boars of the Wood, and Beasts of the Field, which
waste and devour the Lords Vineyard. These are the sins, which the Prince of
Darkness, and his Infernal Rabble, strive to maintain and propagate, to the
Overthrow of Christianity, yea, and (I had almost said) Humanity it self. The
Tabernacles of Edom, and the Ishmaelites, of Moab, and the Hagarens, Gobal, and
Ammon, and Amalek, the Philistines with the Inhabitants of Tire (I mean wicked
Families) say, Come, let us cut them off from being a Nation (a Church) that
the Name of Israel (the Name of the Reformed Church of England) may be no more
in Remembrance, Psalm. 83. The General, Ignorant, and Scandalous sins of too
many called Christians, Is like unto the Abomination of Desolation in the Holy
Place, Dan. 11. 31. Parochial sins, which rise out of Irreligious Households
(as Persecuting Readiness) make Havoc of the Church. And are (in effect) the
Bloody Hamans against Gods Church: Family-wickedness of Princes, Priests, and
People brought Destruction upon Jerusalem, and demolisht the Temple, the wonder
of the World for Building, a Type of Christ in the flesh, and of his Church
upon Earth. Joshua a Good Ruler, (at a full and honorable Assembly of Elders,
Heads, Judges and Officers) delivers this weighty charge in his Speech,
Namely to fear the Lord and serve him in Sincerity and Truth: And not only in
Cities and Towns, but in all Families, as the Principal Means for the
Prosperity of Church and State, Josh. 24. 1, 14, 15, 20. Go ye now to my place
which was in Shiloh, where I set my Name at the first, and see what I did to
it. For the wickedness of my People Israel, Jer. 7. 13. It is most certain,
that the Church cannot flourish, unless the parts and members of it, perform
Holy Duties and Offices in their Capacities, both in Church and Family. The
want of Religion in Families, is the Decay of Churches. The difference between
a Christian Family and a Church, is that of Parts and Whole, if the parts be
wicked and profane, the Constitution of the whole is Vicious and Depraved (more
or less) according to the proportion of the parts.

Is it likely, That Heads of Families should be truly Devout in the Church, and
Exercise no Religion at home? How shall we Judge of the Churches increase, if
not from Parochial Religion in Families? Wickedness of. Families, makes the
Glory of Jacob thin, Isa. 17. 4. Wicked Families eat up Jacob, devour, consume,
and make his Habitation desolate, Jer. 10. 25. As by appearance at Musters we
Judge of the military Strength and Population of Kingdoms; so from Piety in
Families the Strength and Prosperity of the Church and Christ's Kingdom.

The Life of Religion, and the Welfare Mr. B. Gildas, Chap. 2. Sect. 5. And his
Account of the Reason and Use of his Paraphrase on the N. T.
and Glory of Church and State, depends much on Family Government and Duty.
If there be any hope of the amendment of a Wicked, Miserable, Distracted World,
it must be mostly done by Family Religion and the Christian Education of Youth.
What Country Groans not under the Confusions; miseries and horrid wickedness
which are all the Fruits of Family neglects, and the careless and ill Education
of Youth?

In the Preface to the Record for Dissolution Dr. Fullers Chapter Hist. lib. 6. p.
310.
of Lesser Monasteries, the Reasons returned were, The Vicious Living of those
Houses.

Another says, That Fornication, Adulteries, Treachery, Soddomy, Incest, were
Committed and Brooded in those Houses. And the Reverend Author goes on,
saying, An Hundred Thousand Whores made by Bp. H. In his Occa. Med. 76. On the
Ruins of an Abbey.
the Unmarried Clergy. Every stone has a Tongue, to accuse of Superstition,
Hypocrisy, Idleness, Luxury, the Late Owners.

How soon would the best part of the World Decay, upon the Corruption of
Families? As in the Body Politic, so in the Mystical, it thrives or wastes,
according to the Good or Bad Temperament of the Parts constituent. If Families
of Nominal Christians, were Real Living Members of the Church, succeeding
Posterity would increase it. But we have cause to lament the weakness of it by
reason the wickedness thereof. It is most He is no good Churchman, who is not
good Christian at Home.
evident from Scripture, that such Professors are not True Members of Gods
Church, which are not Living Members of Christ. He is not a Jew which is one
outwardly neither is that Circumcision which is outward in the Flesh: But he is
a Jew which is one inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the Heart, in the
Spirit, and not in the Letter, whose Praise is not of Men but of God, Romans 2.
two last verses, He is not a sound Christian that is Baptized, except he be
inwardly renewed and sanctified by the Holy Ghost. The real Christian Is a New
Creature, Old things are past away, behold all things are become New, 2 Cor. 5.
17. And the New Creature has put off his former Conversation, the old Man
which is corrupt according to the Deceitful Lusts, And is renewed in the Spirit
of his mind, And has put on the New Man, which after God is Created in
Righteousness and true Holiness, Ephesians. 4. 22, 23, 24. It is for want of
Religious Government in The mischief of irreligious families.
Households, that the Lords Day is not better observed, that few profit under
the Word, and that there are so few prepared Communicants at the Lords Table.
It is from hence, That Ministers have slender Congregations, and that Taverns,
Alehouses, Walks, Fields, Gardens, Tatlinghouses in the Neighborhood, are more
resorted to, then the places of Gods Worship.

Oh! All you Careless, Ignorant, Worldly, and loose Heads of Families, let not
this Aggravating Consideration (Namely, That your Family-wickedness overthrows
Churches) pass out of your thoughts, till it please God to change you, and
reform your Families. Are you Friends to the Church? Set up the Practice of
Piety in your Families, which are the Nurseries of the Church. This Duty is of
Great weight and Importance to the Interest of Reformed Religion, and of the
Church of England. If professing Christians, live in their Si ita Singuli id
faciant quod pietatis est, totum corpus facil^ Sanabitur, etc. Synop. Bodini de
Repub. lib. 1. c. 1. que 24.
Houses, in due Conformity to their Covenant in Baptism, this (through Gods
Mercy) will render our Church Beautiful as the Garden of the Lord; And our
Land, as the smell of a Field, which the Lord has Blessed. The Romans were as
Careful to maintain their Vestal Fire, as to preserve the Palladium, as Pledges
of Felicity to the Empire; Signifying to us Christians, that, If Religion and
Virtue, Piety and Policy, be Countenanced, and defended, and their Contraries,
Profaneness and Immorallity suppressed, and punished, then the Lord will Build
us, and not Pull us down, Plant us, and not Root us up. If we entertain the
Life and Power of Christianity and Honesty in our Families, Upon all the Glory
shall be a Defense, Isa. 4. 5.

Quest. What think you of Errors and Heresies, tending to the subverting of
Christianity? A. Quest.
And what may we think of Parties and Sectaries, Are they not greater Enemies
to the Church then profane Families?

Answ. (1.) Here is not intended a Comparative Answer.
Enquiry, whether Damnable Errors and Heresies, do more mischief in our
Church, then wicked Families, but the main Business in hand, is to show, that
Profane and Wicked Families, are Pernicious Enemies to both Church and Sat.
Sabbath-breaking, Swearing, Drunkenness, Filthiness, Coveteousness, Oppression,
Pride, Treachery, Perjury, Cursing, Cheating, Killing, Stealing, Lying, and
such like black infernal Sins in Families, will (without Reformation) Ruin
Kingdoms and Churches.

(2.) Profane Scandalous Livers, are Practical Atheists and Heretics, They
profess that they know God, but in good works they deny him, being abominable,
and disobedient and to every good work reprobate, Tit. 1. Last.

(3.) Moral Evils of Sin and Intellectual, are Conjunct; A foul Stomach has an
aching Head, and corrupt Streams come from a corrupt Fountain, St. Paul, In
Titus 3. 10. And, 1 Cor. 5. 11. Joins together Heretics, and Sensualists, or
Scandalous Persons in Families and Parishes, as Fatal and Capital Enemies to
the Church, and equally obnoxious to Ecclesiastical and Civil Punishments.

(4.) We have sad experience what Mischief, Parties and Sectaries, Rents and
Schismatical Causes and Instruments, have wrought among Christians, even to
oppose, That Great Article of our Faith [The Communion of Saints].

(5.) He is no better then a Wicked Man, that hatcheth Divisions, and Covets to
make separations, and will not admit of healing. Such were the Donatists, whose
Tumults were suppressed by the Magistrate.

O that all Scandalous Profane Families in Parishes, would sit down, and set
themselves as in Gods presence, seriously considering, that they are no more
Living Members of Gods Church, then the Dead Bodies in the Church Yard, are
Living Members of that Family, whence they came to be Interred.

3. Consider, That Profane Families are 3. Aggravation of Family Impiety: It
rendereth the Ministry of Gods Word unprofitable.
great Enemies to the Ministry. If Heads of Families would perform their
Duties, according to Gods command, that is, to set up Religion in Families,
Prayer, reading the Word of God, Catechizing, showing good Examples, in the
Week Day, and upon the Lords Day, causing their Families to keep it Holy, both
publicly and privately; I say were their Families thus Governed, the word
Preached would take better effect upon them. Is it likely that Preachers should
do any good, when Parents by open Profaneness, pull down what they set up? As
if they were resolved to live as they do, let the Minister say what he will. Is
it likely that the Ministry should prosper in a Congregation, when most
Families will do nothing toward it themselves, by keeping Holy the Lords Day,
and serving and worshipping him in the Week Day? Would Masters of Families take
hold with the Minister, Religion would enter into Families through Gods
Blessing. But O what little is done to help forward the salvation of Souls by
Good Parents! They ought to prepare and break up the fallow ground of their
Families, they ought to Root out the Weeds of Vice, and pluck up corrupt
Principles out of this little spot of ground, that it may be fit to receive the
Seed of the word with profit, Jer. 4. 3, Hos. 10. 12.

Governors of Families ought to make their Families Nurseries for the Church,
i. e. well Husbanded, well disciplined, and well taught. In their own Houses.
Parents are both Magistrates and Ministers, in a Subordinate way, to the
training up an hopeful Generation, for Church and Kingdom. Why do Ignorant,
Loose, Worldly, Careless, Prayerless Families, cast off their Duty upon
sureties for the Christian Education of their Children? Whereas they themselves
stand Bound as they are Believers, not only to Dedicate them to the Lord by
Baptism, but as their Childrens Sponsors, To bring them up in the Nurture and
Admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6. 4.

4. The Barrenness of the ground, upon which the Seed of the word is sowed, is
4. Aggravarion of the sin of Family-Impiety: It is a great Discouragement to
the Office of the Ministry.
cause of sorrow as well as discouragement to a faithful Minister. Is it not
matter of discontent and sorrow, that the Seedtime for Corporal Bread, is stopped
by some rude wicked fellows, in the Neighborhood? And do you think (O wicked
Families) that it is not greater sorrow, to Godly Ministers in their Office,
that the Seed-time for the Bread of Souls is hindered by you? Is not Christ
himself Lord of this Harvest, who is Judge of the World? Are not you the Tares,
and must not they be cast into the Fire, not only for Being Tares, but for
hindering the Wheat, Mat. 13. 40, 41? It was the Great grief of that Holy Man
and Famous Divine, Mr. Ric. Greenham (about the 35 Y. of Q. Eliz.) That
notwithstanding his Dr. F. Church History, Book 9.
Preaching, Prayers, Tears, he had a Barren, Obstinate, Ignorant Parish.

Greenham had Pastures green,
But Sheep full lean.
Is it not matter of sorrow, that the good Minister finds little more show of
Religion in his Congregation, then what comes in Course upon the Sabbath Day,
or that most in the Parish part with Religion, as soon as they turn their backs
on the place of Gods Worship? This troubles the good Minister, that most Heads
of Families deny that at home, which they seem to like well in the
Congregation; that some (it may be) bring their Bibles to the Church, and never
take them up all the week after; that they Join in Public Prayers, and will
not Pray in their Families; And lastly, This discourageth and troubles the
good Minister, that many carry it like Christians in Gods House, and live like
Heathens in their own. Our Blessed Savior, wept over Jerusalem, saying, Oh
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are
sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy Children together, even as
a Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings, and ye would not, Mat. 23. 37?
When he beheld the City he wept over it, saying, If thou had known, even
thou, at least in this thy Day, the things which belong unto thy Peace, but now
they are hid from thine eyes, Luke 19. 41, 42. After this sort the Prophet is
affected, If you will not hear it, my Soul shall weep in secret places for your
Pride, etc. Jer. 13. 17. O ye Irreligious Families, What will you do? Will you
be obstinate and impenitent, because your Good Minister, nay, your Blessed Lord
and Savior, is Tender and Compassionate? Will you be careless and secure
because your Minister is commanded to watch for your Souls? And will you be
cruel to the Souls of your Families, because Ministers are sent of God, to
Preach Faith and Repentance, Mercy and Forgiveness to you? Will you harden your
Hearts, and stand it out, because God by his Ministers, is praying you in
Christ's stead to be reconciled to God?

5. Consider, That Profane Families do 5. Aggravation of Family Impiety. It
provokes God to take away the Gospel from us.
provoke God to take away the Gospel from us, and give it to a Nation that will
bring forth the Fruits thereof, Mat. 21. 43. God has been pleased to Plant his
Vineyard in England, which since the Reformation has taken Root, and spread
her Branches in abundance. And Blessed be the Almighty, the Wall thereof (our
good Laws) is not broken down. But where are the Fruits? We hear of common
seandalous sins of Drunkenness, Swearing, Whoredom and Pernicious Doctrines;
And the sin of Sabbath-breaking in Towns and Villages is notorious:
Notwithstanding K. W. the IIId. 10th. Y. of his Reign, Feb. 24. 1697.
his Majesty's Royal Proclamation for the suppressing and preventing of
Profaneness, dissolute Living and all Immorallities, and for the Countenancing
of Virtue and Piety in this Church and Kingdom. What shall we say of Loiterers,
Travelers, Tatlers going from House to House? What shall we say of Debauched
Prodigals, Harlots, Hectors at Drunken and Filthy Meetings? How few Families in
Cities, Towns, or Villages do make any better Account of the Lords Day, then
Almanac Holy Days? How few Christians keep Holy the Lords Day, after Service
in the Public Assembly? It were Just with God to Translate the Gospel to
another People, and to put a Bill of Divorce into our Mothers hand, for the too
common Disgust of the Power of Christianity and Practice of Piety. It were Just
with God, to deliver his Strength into Captivity, and his Glory into the
Enemies hand, Psalm. 78. 61. Referring to the sins of Eli his Sons, in the
Priesthood, 1 Samuel 2 Chap. And to the Punishment, in the 4 Chap. not only of
the Priests but People also. And, we of this our Church, both Ministers and
People, for our sins of other Kinds, have cause to fear least God deprive us of
our Strength and Glory, i. e. his gracious and influxive presence.

6. Consider, That this Profaneness of Families, is the greatest reproach upon
6. Aggravation of Family-Sins. They bring the greatest Reproach upon such
Families.
them. As sin leaves behind it the forest wound upon Conscience; So, It
marketh the Person, with the Vilest Brand. What can expiate that Guilt, which
staineth the Heavens, Curses the Earth, has cast down Angels from their
Glory, and made Man as vile as the Beasts that Perish? Who can blot out that,
which is written in Heaven in Gods Book, on Earth in the Consciences of Men,
and unhappily Copied out, to be written in the memory of succeeding Posterity?
Who can purge that away, which Peccati inacula durat in aeternum ex se, and
Seclusa Dei misericordia.
defiles the Souls of Men? It is not devouring time, nor flight, nor
Banishment, nor change of Climate, nor strange Inhabitants, no, nor Death it
self of the Infamous sinner, that can free his Conscience from the Guilt of his
sin, and wipe off the reproach and everlasting shame thereunto belonging, Dan.
12. 2. And those that sleep in the Dust of the Earth shall awake, some to
everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt. The Seed of Evil
doers shall never be renowned, Isa. 14. 20. The memory of the Just is Blessed,
but the Name of the Wicked shall Rot, Prove. 10. 7. Thou have consulted shame to
thy House, by cutting off many People and have sinned against thy Soul, Hab. 2.
10. Are not Ahabs and Jezebels sins upon the File of Reproach? There was none
like Ahab, who sold himself to work wickedness, whom Jezebel his Wife that
Cursed Woman stirred up. Add hereunto, Jeroboam the Son of Nebat who made
Israel to sin: And this is, That King Ahaz, Simon the Sorcerer, Elymas the
Sorcerer, Judas the Traitor. These Persons to this day have their (...), their
Brand of Infamy. Man never came to loose his The way to true Honor.
Honor but by sin, then he Marred his Creation-Robe, and was clad with Guilt,
Shame and Amazement. To this ancient Estate of Honor and Communion with God,
none but the Anointed of the Lord can restore, Investing with a New Creation.
Robe of Righteousness and Holiness. Well then, Grace is the Foundation Nemo
denique egregius, nisi qui b^nus and innocens. Lact. lib. 5. Cap. 15.
of Pristine Glory. The way to raise thy self and Family is by the steps of
Piety and Virtue, down then with Wickedness and Vice, and set up Religion in
thy Family. Them that Honor me I will Honor, and they that despise me shall
be lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 2. 30. It is said, That the Valiant Roman
Marcellus, built two Temples of Honor, Virtue,
in such manner that none could enter into that of Honor, but he must first
pass through the other of Virtue. By the Laws of Armory, Plut. Vita Marcelli.
none ought to be promoted to Civil Honor, unless they be Loyal, Temperate,
Religious, Valiant, Charitable to the poor, and ready to attend their Sovereign
to the Wars: And can any hope that God will Honor any such Families or Persons
as trample upon his Holy Laws, Blaspheme his Name, renounce their Allegiance in
Holy Baptism, and give no Honor and Service to that God, who has condescended
to take them for his Covenant Servants. Can we say properly that such as these
are Christians? Are they not the scandal and shame of Christianity? Are they
Members of Gods Church, Are they not of the Synagogue of Satan, Rev. 2. 9?
It Is very excellently said, by a Learned Bp. Sand. his third Sermon Ad Cler.
page 109, 110.
Divine to this matter, as follows: All the Members of the Body have their
proper and distinct Offices, according as they have their proper and distinct
Faculties. As in the Body, that indeed is no Member, which cannot call it self
by any other Name, then by a common Name of a Member: So in the Church, he that
cannot style himself by any other Name then a Christian, does indeed but Usurp
that too. If thou say, thou art of the Body: I demand then, what is thy
Office in the Body? If thou have no Office in the Body, then thou art at the
best, but [Tumor praetur naturam] a Scab, or Botch, or Wen (as Physicians call
them) or some other Monstrous Excrescency upon the Body, but certainly thou art
no true Member of the Body. And if thou art no part of the Body, How dare
thou make Challenge to the Head, by miscalling thy self a Christian? Therefore
oh Christian beware of having a Name to Live, and yet Dead. As a Dead Man is no
Man, so the Nominal Christian is no Christian.

7. Why will thou O Professor of Christianity, 7. Aggravation of
Family-Impiety. It is condemned by Heathens.
live in thy Family, As without God in the World? Why will thou Heathenize thy
self and Posterity. Idolaters Condemn thee for thy course of Life, as they did
(by the Prophets Testimony) the professing People of the true God under the
Law; Pass over the Isles of Chittim, and see and send to Kedar, and consider
dlligently, and see if there be any such a thing, Has a Nation changed their
Gods, which are yet no Gods, but my People have changed their Glory, for that
which does not profit? Jer. 2. 30, 31. All People will walk, every one in the
Name of his God, and why wilt not thou walk in the Name of the Lord thy God,
A^icah 4. 5? O Christian, thou art not only Condemned by Idolaters, for thy
Irreligion in thy Family, but Condemned by thy own self; As Joshua said unto
Israel, Ye are Witnesses against your selves, that ye have chosen you the Lord
to serve him, and they said, we are Witnesses, Joshua 24. 22. Thou (O
Christian) have chosen the Lord to serve him, and to put away the Idols of the
Flesh and the World, by thy Covenant in Baptism. Therefore take up Joshua's
Resolution; and say, As for me, and my House, we will serve the Lord, Josh. 24.
15. O therefore, be Households of faith, govern your Families in the fear of
God, and hope of his Mercy. O ye Worldly, Ignorant, Carnal Parents, Masters and
Heads of Families, will it be comfortable parting at Death from your Children
and from your Servants, when you go out of this World, not only with the guilt
of your own sins, but of your Children and Servants? You say you believe in
Christ, and yet Live without Repentance; This Faith the Scripture calls
Historical, and it is the Faith of Devils, such Believers are Mockers and
Impostors. And (as one says excellently) Charron of Wisdom, page 262.
more then [Men] in the Articles of their Belief, and worse then [Swine] in
their Lives. The Lord have mercy upon all such Families, that call not on his
Name, and grant them Grace to reform their Houses as becomes Christians, for
their own Comfortable Account, and the benefit of succeeding posterity, at the
great Day of Appearance; That so God may put his Name in their Houses, and
leave an Entail of a [Blessing] and not of a [Curse] upon the surviving
Generation, For the Lord our God is a Jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the
Fathers upon the Children, unto the third and fourth Generation, II.
Commandment.
of them that hate him, and showing mercy unto Thousands, of them that Love him
and keep his Commandments.

To him, the Habitation of whose Throne are Justice and Judgment, and before
whose presence are Mercy and Truth, be Glory and Worship from all Families for
evermore. Amen, And Amen.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for John Lawrence, at the Angel in the Poultrey.
MR. Pooi's English Annotations on the whole Bible, wherein the sacred Text is
inserted, together with the various Readings, and Parallel Scriptures, etc. in
2 Vollums, Folio.

The Works of the late Reverend Divine, Mr. Stephon Charnock, in 2 Vollums,
Folio.

The Life of the Reverend Mr. Richard Baxter, with the History of the Times he
lived in, written by himself, and Published by Mr. Matthew Sylvester, in Folio.

Mr. Lorimers Apology for the Ministers, who subscribed only unto the stating
of the Truths and Errors in Mr. William's Book, from the exceptions made
against them by Mr. Trail, Quarto.

-- his remarks on Mr. Goodwins Discourse of the Gospel. Proving that the
Gospel Covenant is a Law of Grace, and Answering the Objections to the
contrary, etc. Quarto.

Mr. Shower's Winter Meditations: Or, a Sermon concerning Frost and Snow, and
Winds, etc. and the wonders of God therein, Quarto

-- his Thanksgiving Sermon on the discovery of the Assassination Plot, April
1696. Quarto.

Mr. Nathaniel Vincents Funeral Sermon, Preached by Mr. Nath. Tailor, Quarto.

Mr. Stephen's Sermon before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London, at St. Mary
Le Bow. Jan. 30th. 1693. Quarto.

-- his Thanksgiving Sermon, April. 16th. 1696. Quarto.

Mr. Slaters Thanksgiving Sermon, October. 27th. 1692. Quarto.

-- his Sermon at the Funerals of Mr. John Reynolds, and Mr. ^incher, Ministers
of the Gospel, 410.

-- his Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. George Day, Minister of the Gospel at
Ratliff, 1697. 410.

The Jesuits Catechism, 410.

A Sermon Preached at a Public ordination in a Country Congregation, by Mr.
Sam. Clark, 410.

Mr. Gibbons Sermon of Justification, 410.

Mr. Matthew Mead's Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. Tim. Cruso, who Dyed, Novem.
26. 1697. 410.

Mr. John Howards Assize Sermon at Buckingham, July 5. 1692. 410.

-- his Visitation Sermon at Rotkwell in Northamptonshire, Oct. 12. 1697. 410.

An Effort against Bigottry, and for Christian Catholicism, by Henry Chandler,
410.

Mr. Shower's mourners Companion on Funeral discourses on several Texts, the
Second Edition, in two parts, 810.

-- his Sermons upon Isaiah 55. 7, 8, 9. Gods thoughts and ways above ours,
especially in the forgiveness of sins, 810.

-- his Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. Nath. Oldfield, December. 31. 1696. 810.

Mr. Nath. Tailors Preservative against Deism, showing the great Advantage of
Revelation above reason in the two great paints of pardon of sin, and a future
state of happiness, 810.

Catholicism without Popery. An Essay to render the Church of England, a means
and a Pattern of Union to the Christian World, 810.

Dr. Burtons Discourses of Purity, Charity, Repentance, and seeking first the
Kingdom of God, Published with a Preface, by Dr. John Tillotson, late
Archbishop of Canterbury, in 2 Vollums, 810.

Remarks on a late Discourse of William Lord Bishop of Derry, concerning the
Inventions of Men in the Worship of God. Also a Defense of the said remarks
against his Lordships Admonition, by J. Boyse. 810.

Bishop Wilkins Discourses of the Gift of Prayer, and Preaching; the latter
much enlarged by the Bishop of Norwich, and Bishop Williams. 80.

Mr. Slater's Call to Family Religion; being the substance of eighteen Sermons.
80.

Mr. Addy's short hand Bible. 80. Cambridge Phrases, by A. Robinson. 80.

History of the Conquest of Florida. 80.

Mr. William Scoffin's help to true spelling and reading, or a very easy
method for teaching Children or Elder Persons rightly to spell, and exactly to
read English. 80.

Monro's Institutia Grammaticae. 80.

Pavis Grammaticae: Or, the ready way to the Latin Tongue: Containing most
plain demonstrations, for the regular Translating English into Latin. 80.

Mr. Alsop's Faithful rebuke to a false Report. 80. -- his Vindication of the
Faithful rebuke, etc. 80.

Mr. Shower's Sermon on the Death of Mr. Not. 80. Oldfield, who departed this
Life, December. 31. 1696. 80.

Mr. Hammond's Sermon at Mr. Steel's Funeral. 80.

Mr. Allins English Grammar: Or, the English Tongue reduced to Grammatical
Rules, Composed for the use of the English Schools. 80.

Mr. John Mason's little Catechism, with little verses, and little sayings for
little Children. 80.

A free Discourse wherein the Doctrines that make for Tyranny are Displayed;
the Title of our Rightful and Lawful King William Vindicated. And the
unreasonableness and mischievous Tendency of the odious Distinction of a King
de Facto, and de Jure, discovered; by the Honorable Sir Robert Howard.

A Funeral Sermon occasioned by the Death of Mrs. Jane Papillian, late Wife of
Thomas Papillian, Esquire Preached July 24. School. and now Published at his request,
by John Woodhouse.

The whole Duty of Man Epitomized for the benefit of the Poor, with select
Prayers suited to every partition; by Edm. Stacy, a Minister of the Church of
England. 20. Price bound 6d.


