THE CHECQVER-WORK OF GOD'S PROVIDENCE, Toward his own People, Made up of
Blacks and Whites: VIZ* Of their Abasements, and Advancements; Their
Distresses, and Deliverances; Their Sullying Tribulations, and Beautifying
Relaxations: Represented in a SERMON Preached at the Funeral of that Faithful
Servant of the LORD, MARY the late Wife of Joseph Jackson Esquire Alderman of the
City of BRISTOL; on the 5. day of May, Anno Dom. 1657. By Francis Roberts,
Pastor of the Church at Wrington.

Job 23. 10. When he has tried me, I shall come forth as Gold. Acts 14. 22. We
must through much Tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God. LONDON, Printed by
R. W. for George Calvert, at the sign of the Half Moon in Paul's Churchyard.
1657.

To My much Honored friend JOSEPH IACKSON Esque Alderman of the City of
Bristol; As also, To all the entirely beloved CHILDREN of MARY his late Dear
and Gracious Yoke Fellow, Now sleeping in JESUS, yea living with JESUS; Grace,
Mercy and Peace, from the Father of Mercies, and God of all Consolation.
My dear Christian friends,
WHen, upon your desires, I had Preached this ensuing Sermon at the late sad
Funeral of such a Wife, of such a Mother, as you not long since had, I thought
my work about this Particular had been at a Period. Since which, through the
importunity of diverse my Near and Dear Relations (whose Request is to me a
virtual command) thinking better of it then I my self, I have been induced to
Publish it, for the benefit of them and other. The good LORD add his Blessing
both to what was then spoken, and is now written: for furthering of their
faith, and helping of their joy. And now I present the Sermon Revised, with the
help of two distinct coples thereof taken in shorthand when I preached it lest
any useful passages should be omitted; there being a different Gift in Writing
and Preaching.
Revised (and where it was needful a little enlarged) unto you: Who, from her
own Designation, recommended the present Text to me. The Jewel in the words
deserves a richer Cabinet; yea and her sacred Dust a better Monument: But till
you meet with Richer and Better, let this be favorably Accepted.

Not long since, Viz From Jun. 22. till almost July 20. 1656.
my self was (by reason of a continuing Fever) not far from the Psa. 49. 15.
hand of the Grave: but the living God Isa. 38. 17.
has loved my soul from the Pit of corruption. So that in this Sermon I have
Preached, mine own Experiences, and her Expectations of deliverance. The
Gracious LORD, (whose methods of mercy are many) has Released us both from our
respective extremities, as from the Psalm 68. 13.
Pots: Me From Death, That I might live to his Praise a while on Earth: Her, By
Death, That she may live in his Praise for ever in heaven. Thrice blessed be
the God and Father of Mercies, for all the Mysteries of his Mercies.

May I now speak a few words of Advice to you that survive: especially to you
the dear and Hopeful children of so Happy a Mother? My sincere love to her,
mine ^rdent longings after your salvation, constrain me: And I cannot hold my
Peace. Let me stand a while as in your late Mothers stead. O let my counsel be
accepted and embraced.

1. Become Godly and Religious betimes. 1 Chronicles. 289 1 King. 18. 3, 12.
Know, fear, love and serve God from your very youth. Eccles. 12. 1.
Remember your Creator in the days of your youth. Early Christians are Happy
Christians. Under the Old Testament God called for the Exodus 34. 22, 26.
First Fruits of the ground, and the Deuteronomy. 12. 6. 17.
Firstlings of the Flock; Much more he expects the firstlings of our days, of
our youth, of our strength. Think of 1 Samuel 3. 4. to the end.
Samuel, 1 Samuel 16. 7, 11, 13. and 17. 33, etc.
David, 1 Chronicles. 22. 5. and 29* 1. ^ ^am. 12. 24. 1 King. 3. 3.
Solomon, 1 King. 18. 3. 12
Obadiah, 2. Chron. 34. 1, 3.
Josiah, Luke 1. 15.
John Baptist, 2 lim. 3. 15.
Timothy, and Luke 2. 40, 42, 46, 47, 52.
Jesus Christ himself: how Religios they were in their very youth, and tread in
their steps. Oh what sins and iniquities are prevented: What experiences of God
are up-heaped: How large a seed^ time of Grace and good works is obtained: How
long opportunities of 2 Pet. 1. 10.
making our Calling and Election sure are enjoyed, by giving up our selves to
God betimes.

2. Be sincerely and entirely Religious. Hypocrisy, is a mere mockery in
Religion: which occasions Mat. 23. 14. and 24. 51.
the deeper condemnation. Content not your selves with Rev. 3. 1.
a name to live, but be alive indeed. Rest not in 2 Timothy 3, 5.
the Form, but look to the power of godliness. 1 Chronicles. 28. 9.
Serve the Lord with a perfect heart. Seek, love, and obey him Psalm 119. 10.
with the whole heart. Let the whole soul be as it were Woaded in Grace. Fill
your judgments with knowledge and truth, your consciences with purity, your
wills with ^ractableness, your hearts and affections with heavenliness, etc.
Approve your selves throughout to God: that you may say as Peter; ^oh 21. 17.
Lord thou know all things, thou know I love thee, I fear thee, I trust
in thee, etc.

3. Maintain sweet Communion with God in Jesus Christ. Walk closely with God
every day, as Genesis 5* 22, 24.
Enoch, Genesis 6. 9.
Noah, Genesis 17. 2. and 48. 15.
Abraham, Psalm. 101. 2* etc. 1 King. 15, 5. Psalm. 18. 22. Acts 13. 22*
David, etc. Think of him frequently; Desire him vehemently; Love him entirely;
Be never well but in his Presence. Accept all stirrings of his Spirit, glimpses
of his face, tastes of his love. Open with him every morning, shut with him
(like the Sun-flower) every night, Turn toward him, and pant after him all the
day long. Say Psalm. 73. 25.
Whom have we in heaven but thee? etc. Thus you shall recover the lost
Paradise, Thus you shall live as in an Heaven on earth: and when you come to
die, you shall but exchange one Heaven for another and a better; A Spiritual
Heaven of grace for an Eternal Heaven of Glory.

4. Let JESUS CHRIST be your All: your 1 Cor. 1. 30.
Wisdom, to guide you: your Righteousness, to justify you: your
Sanctification, to cleanse you: your Redemption, to save you. If you hunger, he
is John 6. 48* 51.
Mannah: If you thirst, he gives John 4. 10, 14.
living water: If you faint, he is Luke 2. 25.
the consolation of Israel: If you pray, he is 1 John 2. 1, 2.
an Advocate with the Father: If you conflict with spiritual enemies, he is
your 1 John 5. 4, 5. 1* Cor. 15. 57. Romans 8. 37.
Victory and Triumph,: If you live, he is your 1 Timothy 1. 1.
hope: If you die, be is your Phil. 1. 21.
gain: If you be buried also, he is your I^hu 11. 25.
Life and Resurrection. O let him be the Rev. 1. 8, 11.
Alpha and Omega, The Center and Circumference, yea the very Col. 3. 11.
All in All, your Desires, Loves, Joys, Delights, Endeavors and Undertakings.
If you want Christ, you want all things: If you have Christ, you want nothing.
In all your joys, Christ is the highest Exultation: In all your sorrows,
Christ is the sweetest Consolation: In all your Gains, Christ is the chief
Remuneration: In all your losses, Christ is the richest Compensation. In him
make up the loss of Wife and Mother. All Sweetness, Dearness, Tenderness,
Fullness, Contentment, Satisfaction, Consolation and Happiness is a thousand
fold in him more then in these, or all the Relations of the world. These are
but glimmering Lamps, He is the glorious Sun; These are but broken Cisterns, he
is the living Fountain; These are but little drops, he is the boundless Ocean.
Now therefore turn all your desires and a^fections toward him, and be fully
satisfied. One Christ, is beyond ten thousand worlds.

5. Strive after well-grounded Assurance of a good spiritual state. Labor not
only, That God, Christ, Grace, and Glory may be yours: but also, That ye may
know assuredly they are yours. Assurance is possible; For 1 Cor. 2. 12.
Gods Spirit is given to help us to it, etc. Job 19. 25, 26, 27. Heb. 10. 34. 1 Timothy 1. 16. 2 Timothy 1. 12.
Many have attained it. Assurance is necessary: for God has charged us to
endeavor after it; 2 Pet. 1. 10.
Give diligence to make your calling and election sure, etc. And Assurance is
very comfortable, and advantageous to our 2 Pet. 1. 10.
Perseverance. This held up Job 19. 25. etc.
Job under all his misery. This cheared up 2 Timothy 4. 6, 7, 8.
Paul against approaching death.

6. Contend exceedingly, That 2 Pet. 3. 18. Col. 3. 5, etc.
Grace may still be growing; and sin be dying. The more Grace, and the less
Sin: the less like Satan, the more like God; ^he further from Hell, the nearer
to Heaven. The Ephesians. 5. 27. and 4. 12, 13.
Abolition of sin, and the Perfection of Grace, are the suburbs of Glory.

7. Live to God, and upon God in Christ, that you may live with God and with
Christ. Romans 14. 8.
Live to God, in all holy, heavenly, and blameless conversation; Habak. 2. 4.
live upon God, in all constant faithful dependence: That you may John 14. 3,
19.
live with God and Christ in immediate eternal enjoyments.

8. Live in 1 John 4. 7, 8.
love one to another, and toward all Gods People. Love entirely, love
affectionately, love Christianly in order chiefly to Spirituals and Eternals.
Sincere love is the John 13. 34, 35.
Badge and Character of Christ's Disciples on earth; and 1 Cor. 13. 13.
Love will be part of the Crown of Christ's Members in Heaven. Oh ye dear
children that tumbled in the same bowels, still retain the Phil. 2* 1, 2.
same Mind, Heart and Affection one toward another. You shall have adversaries
enough in the world: and therefore never be one another adversaries. So live
in love together on E^rth, as those that look to live in ravishments together
in Heaven.

9 Highly prize and frequent All the Means of Grace in Public and Private Gods
Ordinances are his Sacred Channels wherein alone in ordinary, his streams of
grace do flow. Haw did David Psalm. 84. 1, etc. and 122. 1, etc.
exult in the enjoyment of them! How did he Psalm 12. 1. to 5. and 63. 1, 2.
lament in the want of them! Christians ought to Mat. 28. 19, 2^.
observe all Christ's Commandments and Ordinances. They H^b. 10. 25.
must not forsake the Assembling of themselves together, as the manner of some
is, ^ Psalm 89. 15.
blessed is that people that know the joyful sound! The Heb. 1^. 20. Mat. 28.
19, 20. 1 Cor. 11. 26.
New Covenant, and the Administrations thereof are to continue till the end of
this world: and therefore they ought still to be attended upon by all Gods New
Covenant People.

10. Be 1 Cor. 15. 58.
constant, steadfast, persevering, and abounding in Faith, Obedience, and all
goodness unto the End. Be faithful to the Death: Then Rev. 2. 10.
you shall receive a Crown of life; then 2 Ioh. 8.
you shall receive a full reward. 2 These. 3. 13. Gal. 6. 9.
Be not weary of well-doing, for in due time ye shall reap if ye faint not. How
constant and steadfast to the end was your gracious Mother in Faith, Patience
and Godliness, although no small Tempest of Pain and Trouble lay upon her. The
best of Saints may be exercised with the worst of sorrows here: But the Lord is
Dan. ^. 25. Exodus 3. 2. Isa. 43. 2. Psalm. 23. 4.
with them in the furnace of their Trials, yea, was with her to uphold her in
the valley of the shadow of Death. Hence, though she was 2 Cor. 4* 8, 9^
Troubled on every side, yet was she not distressed, though perplexed, yet not
in despair; though cast down, yet not destroyed. Iam. 5. 11.
We count them happy that endure. O let not sharpest trials or troubles ever
make you faint or flag at any time. They that Luke 9. 62.
put their hands to Gods plough, and look back, render themselves unfit for the
Kingdom of God.

11. Lastly, Mourn moderately in the loss of her, and other earthly comforts.
When holy Jacob dyed in Egypt, Genesis 50. 10.
The Israelites the children of Jacob mourned seven days, but the Genesis 50. 3.
Egyptians seventy days: This was not because the Egyptians had more love to
Jacob then the Israelites; but because the Israelites had more Grace, and Hope,
and Moderation, then the Egyptians. Natural affection is commended: 1 These. 4.
13.
excess in mourning is condemned. John 11. 35.
Jesus himself wept at Lazarus his Grave: and yet Christ's members 1 These. 4. 13.
must not mourn as others that have no hope for them that sleep in Jesus. Were
she still lying among the sullying pots, in midst of her sighs, groans, dolours
and extremities, you might well bleed over her and lament her; but that she is
delivered from all her sins and sorrows; is as the wings of a Dove, covered
with silver, etc. has laid aside her earthly sables, and is clothed in
heavenly white: Is in Luke 16. 22.
Abraham's bosom, in Luke 23. 43.
Paradise, Heb. 12. 22, 23. Phil. 1. 23.
with Saints, Angels, and with God in Jesus Christ, which is far best of all,
etc. Now rejoice in her joys, triumph in her triumphs, Intelligeres ^llum non
emori, sedemigrare; and mutare amicos, nonrelinquere. Hicr^nym. in Epitaph.
Nepotian. p. 25. Tom. 1. Basil. 1553.
she is not so much dead, as delivered by death: she has (as Hierom said of
Nepotianus) not so much lost her friends; as changed them, and changed them for
better: she is not so much 2 Cor. 5. 4.
uncloathed, as clothed upon, her mortality being swallowed up of life. Let
her have your Imitations, rather then your Lamentations. Her graces and
gracious deportments toward God and Man, and more especially toward you, In
her health and sickness, in her life, and at her death were very Christian and
exemplary. In all, 1 Cor. 11. 1.
do ye follow her, as she followed Christ. Let her virtues still live in you:
so shall she in some sense still live with you. And inasmuch as, Fiducla
Christiano rum, Resurrectio mortuorum. Tertul. de Resurrect. c. 1. p. 31^.
The Resurrection of the dead, is the peculiar Hope and Consolation of
Christians, consider; she 1 These. 4. 14. 15, 16, 17.
sleeps in Jesus, she shall at last awake and be Raised again by Jesus: And ye
shall meet again; meet, and never part; meet, not to sigh and mourn together,
but to sing and triumph together. Ye shall be caught up with her and with all
the Elect together, to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall ye be ever with
the LORD. Amen. So prays.

Your affectionate friend, and brother in the Lord, for the furtherance of your
Faith and joy, Fran: Roberts.
Wrington June 12. 1657.
THE Checquer Work of Gods Providence toward his own people, Made up of
BLACKS and WHITES: VIZ.
Of their Abasements, and Advancements; Their Distresses and Deliverances;
Their Sullying Tribulations, and Beautifying Relaxations, etc.
PSALM. 68. 13. Though ye have lien among the Pots; yet shall ye be as the wings
of a Dove covered with silver, and her feathers with yeallow Gold.
GOD's dearest people, may for a long time Isa. 50. 10. Job 19. 8, etc. and 30.
26.
walk in darkness; yet at last the Psalm. 18. 27, 28. Genesis 15. 17.
light of refreshing consolation shall shine upon them: May Job 2. 8. with
chap. 42. 10, etc.
sit down with Job a great while among the ashes; yet at length shall be lifted
up, God turning their captivity: and may Psalm. 68. 13*
lie with ISRAEL (Gods only people under the Old Testament) among the Pots, for
many ages: but in fine shall safely escape, like silver-winged and
golden-feathered Doves, from all the blackish sulliedness of their Afflictions.
The sharpest storm ends in a grateful calm: and the darkest night has its
succeeding Day. This Mercy here Promised, was (according to the purpose of the
most high) Performed to Gods Israel: And this blessing is in some sense
accomplished to our late dear Sister deceased, an Israelite indeed. This was
her condition: she long walked in darkness; sat down with Job in ashes: and
lay with Israel among the Pots: But at last the Gracious LORD has turned, Her
Darkness into Light, Her Ashes into Beauty, Her Pots of sad affliction into
glory.

These words were First and Immediately Directed to the Jewish Church, which
had been a long time exercised with very many and heavy afflictions: but are
extensive also, in like condition, to the Christian Church which is
incorporated into it, and ^ph. 3. 6.
of the same Body: yea and applicable also, in a due Rule of Proportion to any
Particular Christian in a like parallel case of darksom distressing
tribulations. A Particular Promise first directed to one single Person is
sometimes improved to the General Consolation of Christians: As that sweet
Promise to Joshuah; Io^h. 1. 5. with He^b. 1^. 5, 6.
-- I will not fail thee nor for sake thee, is urged by the Apostle, as a
General ground of Contentment to all Christians in any troubles or oppositions.
How much more may a General Promise to the whole Church, as here, be Applied to
the comfort of a Particular Member. And therefore I cannot but impute it to the
Christian judgment and apprehensiveness of our deceased Sister (now with the
LORD,) that she could appropriate the consolation of this more General Promise,
to her self in Particular: and that, though the sense and comfort of this
Promise be wrapped up and infolded in obscure Metaphorical expressions. The
words were often in her heart and lips in the days of her Tribulation: whence
doubtless she supported her self with pertinent and comfortable Meditation.
For, 1. Here she had, (in the Churches abject, blackish, deformed, and despised
condition, that had lien among the Pots,) A lively Po^^traiture or delineation
of her own extreme Distresses. And, if the whole Church of God lay among the
Pots: why might not she? This might administer to her much matter of Patience,
Contentedness, and Consolation, Solamen mis^ris soclos h^buisse Dolo^ls.
Its some Consolation, not to be alone in heavyest Tribulation. 2. Here she
had, (in the Churches Promised Felicity, that should be as the wings of a Dove
covered with Silver, and ^er Feathers with yeallow Gold,) a foundation of Hope
touching her Deliverance at last out of all her extremities. If the Church
should be brought from her black sullying Pots, to the wings of a silver and
Golden-coloured Dove: from darkest miseries to brightest felicities: Why might
not she, in Gods due time, one way or other, expect the like happy
transmutation? This might sweetly nourish her Faith, Hope and Christian
Expectation. This Scripture was so suitable to her condition, and so much in
her thoughts, that discoursing about her expected dissolution, she said; I
think this must be the Text at my Funeral; Psalm 68. 13.
Though ye have lien among the Pots, yet shall ye be as the wings of a Dove
covered with silver, and her Feathers with yeallow gold. And hereupon, I have
been requested, by some of her nearest Relations, to make these words the
subject. matter of my discourse upon this sad Occasion.

This Scripture, (and so this Psalm,) is very mysterious and intricate: One
thing being expressed, another intended: As is usual in Metaphors and
Allegories. For removing the obscurity of the words, and improving them to our
present utility, consider we; 1. Their coherence with the context. 2. Their
true sense and meaning. 3 The Lessons or Doctrinal Propositions intended in
them. We must take more pains then ordinary to attain the right meaning of
these words.

1. The Coherence of these words with the context, may be briefly represented
as follows, viz.

Of this Psalm, (most justly styled by R. A. EZra, Non inter omnes conven^t de
A gumento hujus Psalmi, quem affirmat ^^zra valde esse excellen^e^. Sim. de
Muis in ^rg. ad Psalm. lxv (...)
A very excellent Psalm) 1. The Penman: ^. Matter: 3. Occasion: and 4. Parts
are as follows.

I. The Instrumental Author, or Penman, was DAVID, that 2 Samuel 23. 1.
sweet Psalmist of Israel. See, Title of the Psalm.

II. The Subject Matter, is of a mixed Nature: being made up of Petition and
Gratulation, of Doctrine and Exhortation, of History and Prophecy. And
containing such an Eminent Prophecy of Christ's Triumphant Ascension into
Heaven, and of the Benefits thereof: Compare Psalm. 68. 18. with ^phel. 5. 8*
etc.
Thou have ascended on high, thou have led captivity captive, etc. it may
deservedly be ranked among the Prophetical Psalms.

III. The Occasion seems to be, 1. Either David's Compare Psalm. 68. 1 etc. with
Nu^b. 10. 35.
bringing up of the Ark of God into the place prepared for it in Sion, in the
City of David: as some. 2. Or, some As that in 2 Samuel 21. 15. to the end. See
Psalm. 68. 1, 2.
difficult and eminent expedition of DAVID against his enemies: wherein he
aforehand assures himself of desired success and victory, both from the
assistant power of the mighty God, and from Isreal's constant experiences of
like nature: as other^. 3. Or, some ^amous and Renowned victory obtained: as
others. 4. Or, (As to me seems most probable) a Complexive Series and Heap of
victories over his and his Kingdoms enemies subdued under him, even from N^lus
to Euphrates, recorde^ in 2 Samuel 8. and 1 Chronicles. 18. whereupon he is by some
supposed to have Penned two Triumphant Psalms, viz. Psalm 47. See verse. 5. and
Psalm. 68. See verse. 18. Herein King David being a special Type of CHRIST, the
King of Kings, that subdues all our spiritual enemies, and Captivates our
Captivity, As Psalm. 68. 18. with ^ph. 4. 8, etc.
part of this Psalm applied to and interpreted of CHRIST, does clearly
intimate. And throughout the whole current of this Psalm* besides the immediate
literal sense of it touching David and his Temporal Kingdom, there is easily
observable a Mediate, Spiritual and Mystical meaning touching CHRIST the true
DAVID and his spiritual Kingdom. Let this be still remembered: lest we lose
much of the spirituality of this heavenly Psalm.

IV. The Parts or Branches are chiefly three, viz. 1. Petition, 2. Exhortation,
and 3. Gratulation.

1. A Prophetical Petition. Let God arise, etc. ver. 1, 2, 3. This was the
Numb. 10. 35.
Prayer at the moving of the Ark, that singular Token of Exodus 25. 21, 22.
Gods Presence, Type of Exodus 25. 2^. with o^. 3. 25. 1 Ioh. 2. 2.
Jesus Christ, and Romans 9. 4. 1 Samuel 4. 21, 22.
Glory in Israel.

2. A Pathetical Exhortation, or Hortatory incitation, unto the High Praises of
God, ver. 4. to 19.

3. A grateful Exultation in the LORD, for his many Blessings and victories,
verse 19. to the end.

This 13. verse falls under the second branch, viz. the Exhortation. The
Psalmist exhorts to the Praises of God, from two sorts of Motives especially,
viz. I. From Gods more General and Common Acts of Providence, 1. To the
Fatherless. 2. To the widows. 3. To the solitary. 4. To the Captives. ver. 4,
5, 6. II. From Gods more Special and Peculiar Providence toward his own
People Israel: and this chiefly in four observable intervalls of Time that came
over them, viz. ^. When they came out of Egypt, and marched through the
wilderness. ver. 7, 8. 2. When they were newly possessed of, and planted in the
Land of Canaan, ver. 9, 10. 3. In the troublesome and unsettled times of the
Judges, ver. 11, 12. 4. In the more composed and happy days of David, ver. 13,
to 19. In this last Particular note two things, viz.

(1) The Preface to this matter of Praise and Thankfulness for Gods
Providential goodness which should be to Israel in the days of David, more
then in former times: Though ye have lien among the Pots, yet shall ye be as
the wings of a Dove covered with silver, etc. ver. 13. That is: In the three
former times, in Egypt and the Wilderness, In Canaan, and Under the Judges, ye
have lain as among the Pots, low, debased, blacked, deformed, etc. with many,
and sore afflictions: But now under David's Dominion, especially under Christ's,
ye shall be as Doves wings and feathers of silver and golden color: ye shall
escape and be delivered, ye shall be advanced to a more joyous, prosperous and
happy condition, and have better times then ever formerly. Ye shall be taken
from among the Pots, and adorned with opposite Beauty and Glory.

2. The Particular Arguments inciting Israel to Praise and Thankfulness
hereupon, are drawn, 1. From Gods victoriousness over his enemies, to his
Peoples prosperity, ver. 14. 2. From the Eminency and Fertility of Gods Hill,
Sion: especially of the Church of God shadowed out by it, ver. 15. 3. From the
Lords constant Residence in, and All-sufficient Protection of, his own Hill, his
Church and people, ver. 16, 17. 4. From Gods Triumph over all his, and his
Peoples enemies: which was to have its chief Ephesians. 4. 8, etc.
accomplishment in JESUS CHRIST Ascending up into heaven, and leading captivity
captive, etc. ver. 18. Thus stands the coherence: by which you may receive much
satisfaction touching the right meaning of the words.

11. The sense and meaning of the words will now be the more easily extracted.
Here Is one Hebrew word in the Original which especially renders the Scripture
intricate, viz. (...) Shephattajim: which, being a word of diverse
Significations and Translations, occasions various Interpretations. It is
Rendered, 1. Limits, or Bounds. 2. Lots, or Inheritances. 3. Pots, or
Pot-ranges.

1. Some render it, Two-limits, or Two-bounds, (the word being of the Dual
number,) viz. the To this effect merc^rus and Cev^l^rius in S. Pagnin. These. ad
very. (...) and Moller. Com. in Psalm. 68.
two limits, bounds or coasts of the enemies, ready to afflict, vex, and infest
them on each hand. Or, two confines of the Country where they fortified
themselves against their enemies. This sense some later writers embrace. And
its Or, we may understand it of the two bounds. and limits of the enemies.
where they are continually assailed an^ e^dangered. And t^ is the Greek seems
to favor, tu^ning it ana meson toon cler^on amids, (or between) the
Inheritances; even as they also translate the two bur^^ns o^ limits between
which Isacha^ couched* Genesis 49. 14* which Tribe had the Philis^ins at one end,
and the Ammonites on the other, that vexed them. H. Amsworth in (...) ^AWORD^,
on Psalm. 68. 14.
one of the Interpretations which Ainsworth gives, though not in the first
place. But, this version seems here very unsuitable: for that it quite
destroies the Elegancy and fitness of the Opposition betwixt the two Metaphors,
representing Isreal's different conditions, before and under David's Government.

2. Some render it: Two-lots, or Two-Inheritances. So the lxx. (...); that is,
Amidst the Lots, or between the Inheritances: Inheritances (as in Canaan) being
anciently set out by lots. This Hierom seems to follow, turning it; Si
dormiatis inter medios cleros. And thus he expounds it, Si dormiatis inter
medios ^leros, etc. Cum duobus ^rediderls Testamentis, in^enlcs in u^toque
Spiritum Sanctun^* Et cet sit pul^htitudo elm juxta l^eram scire quae legas;
amen vis lecor^s omnis ^n sensu est. Exter^or ltaque ^e^borum orllatus in
Argenti nomine demonst^atur, occultiora vero mysteria in reconditis ^uri
muleribus continentur. Si dormiatis inter medios cleros; hoc est, si quiescati^
inter novum ^^ve us Testamentum^ invenietis in duobus Testamentii gr^clum
Spiritus San^i. Cle^i licuntur singuli lib^, etc. Hi^r^ny^, in Comment* ad
Psalm. lxvii. page 94. ^. C. Tom. 8. ^^sil. 15^3.
When thou believe the two Testaments, in both thou shall find the Holy
Ghost. And though there be a beauty, even according to the letter to know what
thou read: yet the force of all the comeliness is in the sense. Therefore the
outward Ornament of the words is demonstrated by the name of silver, but the
more secret mysteries are contained in the hidden gifts of gold, etc. So that,
with him; The two Lots, are the two Testaments; The Dove, is the Holy Ghost;
Her wings covered with Silver, the outward letter of the Testaments; The
feathers of yeallow gold, the inward; spiritual, and mysterious sense. But this
is rather a witty Allegorical All^sion, then a judicious and solid Exposition.
Augustine. in Enarrat. in Psalm. lxvii. p. 702, etc. Tom* 8. Basil. 1569*
Augustine also expounds the words much to this effect: but altogether as
unsatisfactorily. The ancient Fathers are not always the best Expositors.

3. But most do render the word, Pots or Pot-ranges. Thus; Although ye have
lien among the Pots (or, between the^ Pot-ranges: or, between the two banks, or
rows, viz. of stones to hang pots on in the Camp or Leaguer) yet shall ye be as
the wings of a Dove covered (or, decked with silver, and her feathers^ with
yeallow-greenish gold. And they observe in the words a double Metaphor: 1. The
one of Isreal's lying among the Pots, as scullions lie among the pots, kettles
or cauldrons in the camp or leaguer in time of war, and so are blacked, soiled,
smutted, deformed: denoting Isreal's abject, low, mean, sullied, deformed and
despicable condition under afflictions and extreme distresses in time past in
Egypt, the Wilderness, Canaan, and in the time of the Judges. 2. The other of
Isreal's being like the wings of a Dove (which is of very Psalm 5^ 6, 7,^
speedy flight for escape) of bright silver, and beauteous golden-colour:
representing their escape and deliverance at last out of all their blacking,
smutting and deforming afflictions, into the contrary, beauteous, prosperous
and happy state, under the Kingdom of DAVID, especially of JESUS CHRIST the
true DAVID. Blackness notes extreme affliction and misery: Doves wings, escape:
white silver-colour and beauteous golden-colour, Prosperity and Felicity. Thus,
the Metaphors are elegantly opposed one to another, and very significantly set
forth the several conditions of Israel, first as lying among the pots of deep
afflictions in former times, but after as assured of deliverance, of better
days, and that they should be as a silver winged and golden-feathered Dove,
full of beauty, comeliness, prosperity and felicity. To this effect, R. David,
un Comment. (...) sunt (...) i. Chytropodes, loca ubi ponuntur ollae, aut
caldariae. l. In loco humili, and nigro, ut est hic locus. Ac si dicat, ^i
ambulastis hactenus nigris induti estibus ob inimicotum afflictionem, adhuc
eritis albi sicut alae columbae, quae tect^est argenta. l. Quae habet pennas
albas sicut argentum. S. Pagia. in Thesaur. ad verb. (...).
R. David Kimchi, Inter Chytropodes.] ^. In l^co humili, sicut est locus
chytropodum: vel in loco obscuro and atro, l. In summa anxietate and rebus
adversis constituti fueritis, etc. Eritis adhuc sicut Pennae columbae tectae
argento. Candor* faelicitatem significat. Pag^.and Mercer ab.
Pagnin, Nunc per modum correctionis addit, etiamsi fideles interdum contingat
jacere in tenebris, Deum nihilominus in tempore prodire liberatorem. --
Generaliter admonet, inter medias afflict jones arcana and mirifica Dei vertute
fideles quasi integros servai, vel subito restitui, ut nulla malorum signa
appareant. Utrumque enim sensum verba admittunt; Quod jacentes in suligine and
tenebris, nitere tamen non desinant: Vel quod liberatio contractum ex malis
nigredinem dis^utia^. Uirumvis Eligas, summa huc redit, nunquam afflictionibus
vel. consumi vel obrui sideles, quin sua illis maneat incolumicas, etc. Joan.
Calvin. in Comment. ad Psalm. 68. 14.
Calvin, In priore membro Metaphora est a calonibus and lixis castrensibus
petita, qui ab aeris injuria utcunque se defendunt, delitescendo inter
fuliginosas ollas, and lapides focarios, apta huic loco, ubi de bello Sermo
est, figura. In posteriore est metaphora a Columbis desumpta, quae per medium
aerem volitantes, nunc niveum atque argent^um, nunc aureum splendorem
ejaculantur. Significatur porro hoc versuex omnibus angustiis and periculis,
quantumvis ingentibus, emersuros exiturosque salvos and incolumes. In Sacris
literis Atror mala; Candor vero, incolumitatem and prosperitatem notat. Simeon
de Muis in Comment* ad Psalm. 68. 14.
Muis, Quamvis antea jacueritis, etc.] Quamvis tribus predictis temporibus, In
Egypto and Deserto, Interra Cananes, and sub judicibus fueritis hactenus
similes Calonibus and lixis fuligine deformatis* deinceps tamen eriti^ similes
pennis columbae. -- nunc sub imperio Davidis ampliorem habebant letandi
occasionem quam unquam antea, etc. Joan. Foord in Expos. Psalm. 68. 14.
Foord, B^tween the Pot ranges] Or, b^tween the two banks or rews, to wit, of
stones made to hang Pots and Kettles on in the Camp or Leaguer; places where
scullions lie, and so are black; meaning hereby affliction and misery; as on
the contrary, by the Doves silver-Wings is meant prosperity. H. Amsw. Annotat.
on Psalm. 68. 14.
Ainsworth, and Though ye have] -- The meaning is, After that ye O People of
God, shall for a long time have endured base slavery, and have been like
scullion boys lying upon he ground, dirty and smoaky; you shall be again
restored to glory and honor by Gods deliverance. J. Diodat. Annot. on Psalm.
68. 14. Among the Pots] Though God suffer his Church for a time to lie in
darkness, like a black scullion among the Pots; yet he will restore it, and
make it most shining and bright. Large Land. Annotat. on Psalm 68. 13.
others expound these words. And in my judgment this Exposition seems most
genuine and proper: as being, without forcing, most agreeable both to the
intent of the Context, and Propriety of the words. And thus they are very
suitable to this present sad Occasion.

The words, thus explained, are 1. Narratory, 2. Promissory. For Here Is 1. A
Narrative of Isreal's former deep affliction and misery; Although ye have lien
among the Pots. They had been in former times, in Egypt, Wilderness, Canaan and
under the Judges, as so many scullions among the Pots, abased, smutted,
spotted, made black and deformed with many and great tribulations.

2. A Promise of Isreal's future Deliverance, Prosperity and Felicity; yet shall
ye be as the wings of a Dove, covered with silver, and her feathers with
yeallow Gold: They should not always lie blacked and sullyed in the smoke and
among the Pots, they shall be as the wings of a Dove, speedily escaping, they
shall be delivered out of their dark and black condition, and be made bright,
beauteous, and every way prosperous, as white silver-coloured and
yeallow-greenish-golden feathered Doves: most naite, pleasant and beauteous.

III. The third thing that remains, is, The observation of the Exodus 14. 20.
Doctrinal Positions, or Lessons here intended. The words are somewhat like the
Cloudy Pillar in the Wilderness; Which had, 1. A black side, full of darkness:
and 2. A bright side, full of light. In the Black side we may read this Lesson;
1. That, Sometimes Gods Israel, Gods own endeared People, may lie, as it were
among the Pots, in deepest distresses and afflictions. In the Bright side, on
the other hand, we may read this Instruction; 2. That, Gods distressed and
afflicted People shall not always lie among the Pots, but at last, as with
Doves wings, escape out of all their distress and misery, and enjoy all
contrary Mercy, Prosperity and Felicity.

Let me speak a little briefly to both these Observations; which notably set
forth the Diversity of Gods dispensations toward his own people. As it were
the Checquer-work of Gods Providence to them, Their Black and White conditions:
God one while abasing them by sullying Tribulations, and after advancing them
by beautifying Relaxations.

Doctrine I.
That, Sometimes Gods Israel, Gods own endeared People, may lie, as it were
among the Pots, in deepest Distresses and Afflictions.

This Doctrinal Lesson is evidently fluent from the first Branch of the Text.
For Unfolding and Improving whereof, I shall chiefly Manifest. 1. That, Gods
People being in deep Distress and Afflictions, is like lying among the Pots.
2. Why God suffers his Church and dearest People sometimes thus to lie as among
the Pots, in deepest distresses and tribulations. 3. What Inferences may
readily result here upon.

I. That, The lying of Gods endeared People in deepest Distresses and
Afflictions, is like lying among the Pots. For,

1. They that lie among the Pots are in a very low, mean and abject condition;
Scullions, of the meanest rank, are wont in the Camp or Leaguer to lie among
the Pots: So they, that are in deep Distresses and Afflictions, are in a very
low, mean, and abject state, in the eye of the world. Israel, in affliction,
was in a very low condition: Psalm. 136. 23.
-- who remembered us in our low estate. Low in Egypt; when they Exodus 1. 13 14.
and 5. 10, 11.
toyled in the clay, and must make brick without straw. Low at the Read-Sea:
when nothing but Exodus 14. 2, 10, 11, 12.
present death was before their eyes; Egyptians being behind them, the Sea
before them, and mountains on each hand. Low in the Wilderness; when Exodus 16.
3 and17. 1, 3.
they had neither bread to eat, nor water to drink, etc. Low in the Land of
Canaan: Judge. 4. 3. See that whole Book. 1 Samuel 4. 11, 21, 22. and 31 7, etc.
when they were delivered into their enemies hands, which swarmed about them
like Bees; yea when the Ark of God was taken from them, yea when Saul and
Jonathan were destroyed. Low in Babylon: when they were visibly as helpless and
hopeless as people dead and Ezekiel 37. 11, 12, 13.
buried in their very Graves. Thus, Joseph was very low in his Affliction: when
he was Genesis 39. 20. Psalm. 105. 18.
clapped up in Prison in Egypt, and laid in Irons, having not one friend in all
Egypt to help him out. Job very low: when smitten with Job 2. 7, 8.
sore boyles from the sole of his foot to his crown, so that he scraped himself
with a pot heard, and sat down among the ashes. David very low: when he, in
fear of his life, Psalm. 34. ^i^le. 1 Samuel 21. 11. to the end.
changed his behavior, feigning himself mad before Achish King of Gath: and
when he 2 Samuel 15. 30.
fled from Absalom his son, going up Mount Olivet barefoot, weeping and having
his head covered, etc. Jonah very low; when he lonah 1. 15, 17 and 2. 2, ^, 5,
6, 7.
was as it were twice buried, once in the Sea, and again in the belly of the
Whale, and the weeds were wrapped about his head. And Lazarus extremely low:
when he Luke 16. 20, 21.
lay hunger-bitten, full of sores and ulcers at the rich-mans gate, desiring
his crumbs, which none gave unto him, the dogs coming and licking his sores.

2. They that lie among the Pots are apt to be spotted, fullyed, fouled,
blacked with the Pots: So they that are in deep affliction and distress are
rendered in the eyes of others, deformed, sullied, black, tanned, Sunburned,
etc. Distressed Job said: Job 30. 30.
My skin is black upon me. The afflicted Church confesses; Cant. 1. 5.
I am black, -- as the Tents of Kedar: Even as the
black-hair-cloath-weather-beaten-Tents of Kedar. And again; Cant. ^. 6.
Look not upon me because I am black, because the Sun has looked upon me.
Great afflictions make the very Church her self black, or blackish, and
Sunburned; how much more her particular members. Thus Jeremiah lamented; Our
skin was black like an Oven, because of the terrible famine, Lam. 5. 10. The
Nazarites visage is blacker then a coal, etc. Lam. 4. 7, 8. yea our blessed
Savior JESUS CHRIST himself was in his comeliness deformed and marred
extraordinarily by his sore afflictions and sufferings; Isa. 52. 14. and 53. 2.
His visage was so marred more then any man, and his form more then the sons of
men. -- He has no form nor comeliness, and when we shall see him, there is no
beauty that we should desire him.

3. They that lie among the Pots, being deformed, sullyed and blacked, are wont
to be slighted, despised, abhorred, men look strange at them, are ashamed of
their company, cannot abide to come near them: So they that lie in deep
distress and misery, are usually neglected, despised and rejected of others;
yea oft-times their very kindred, friends and familiar acquaintance are
estranged from them, and stand aloof from their calamity. Thus Job in his
extreme afflictions complained; Job 19. 13. to 22.
-- He has put my Brethren far from me, and mine acquaintance are verily
estranged from me. My kinsfolk have failed, and my familiar friends have
forgotten me. They that dwell in mine house, and my maids, count me for a
stranger; I am an alien in their sight. I called my servant, and he gave me no
Answer; I entreated him with my mouth. My breath is strange to my wife: though
I entreated for the childrens sake of mine own body. Yea young children
despised me; I arose, and they spoke against me. All mine inward friends
abhorred me: and they whom I loved are turned against me. Thus Heman the
Ezrahite in his sad afflictions lamenteth; Psalm. 88. 18.
Lover and friend have thou put far from me, and mine acquaintance into
darkness. And, though our blessed Savior bear, not his own, but our griefs and
our sorrows, yet even for them he was exposed to extreme contempt; Isa. 53. 3,
4, 5, 6.
He is despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrows, and acquainted with
grief; and we hid as it were our faces from him: he was despised, and we
esteemed him not. Oh how hard a thing is it for the dearest of Gods Saints to
be deeply distressed, and not to be greatly despised!

II. But, Why is it, that the LORD suffers his Church and his own endeared
People, thus to lie sometimes, as among the Pots, in deepest distresses and
tribulations?

The LORD Permits, Orders, Directs and Over-powers the sharp afflictions and
distresses of his own dear people for their Manifold Benefit. He lets them lie
among the Pots, then even this may turn to their Heb. 12. 10. Phil. 1. 19.
and Romans 8. 28.
cooperate for their good, for their manifold good. For,

1. By these, The sins and failings of Gods people are more clearly detected.
He with-draweth not his eyes from the righteous: Job 36. 7, 8, 9.
-- And if they be bound in fetters, and be holden in cords of affliction: Then
he shows them their work, and their transgressions, that they have exceeded.
The distress of Genesis 41. 21, 22.
Joseph's Brethren in Egypt, revived afresh upon their consciences, their old
offenses against Joseph; Afflictions awaken their sleepy souls and drowsy
consciences. As the Suns Eclipse is best discerned in water: Or as Blots run
most abroad in wet paper: so their sinful blots and ecclipses are most
evidently discovered in their waters of affliction.

2. By these, They are more thoroughly melted and humbled for their sinful
failings discovered. The fire melts the mettle in the furnace, that it will run
into any mould. When 2 Chronicles. 32. 24, 25, 26.
wrath was upon good Hezekiah for the Pride and lifting up of his heart, how
quickly did he humble himself under the hand of God! That Phoenix King 2 Chronicles
3^. 16, 17.
Josiah exceedingly melted and wept before the LORD, when he discerned the
Judgments of God but hanging over their heads for sin, in the clouds of the
threatenings.

3. By these, their spots, stains and sins, Detected and Lamented, are very
notably cleansed, rubbed out, and purged away, Isa. 27. 8, 9.
By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit to
take away his sin. Dav^d himself acknowledged this advantage by his
Afflictions; Psalm. 119. 67.
Before I was afflicted I went astray: B^t now have I kept they word. So true
is that of Elihu to Job; Job 36. 8, 9, 10.
Then he opens their ear to Discipline, and commands that they return from
iniquity. Our afflictions do lance out out corruption; Scour away our spots
and stains; File off our rust and canker; Fan away our chaff; Segregate our
Dross; And, like the Dan. 3. 23, 24, 25.
Fiery furnace, burn off the bands and cords of our corruptions, that we may
walk at liberty. Even Manasses, that Monster of wickedness) when taken among
the thorns, and bound in fetters, etc. repented and reformed, 2 Chronicles. 33. 1.
to 20.

4. By these, Their graces are Tried and Proved, whether they be sincere; Not
that God does not know what is in us: but that we do not know what is in our
selves. 1 Pet. 4. 1^.
Think it not strange concerning the fiery Trial, which is to Try you. 1 Pet.
1. 6, 7.
-- That the trial of your Faith being much more precious then of Gold that
perishes, though it be tried with fire, might be found unto praise, and
honor, and glory. Some writings cannot be read but at the fire or in the
water. So some gracious endowments and inscriptions on our hearts, as Faith,
Patience, Self-denial, etc. cannot so well be discerned as in the fire and
water of Tribulations. The Furnace tries the Metal; The Touchstone tries the
Gold; The Storm tries the Pilot; The Battle tries the Soldier: So the Furnace,
Touchstone, Storm and Battle of Afflictions try the Faith, Patience, Courage,
Constancy and Graces of the Christian. Our true spiritual Beauty becomes the
more Beauteous by this washing, when thereby paint and counterfeit colors are
wiped away.

5. By these, Their Graces and Spirituals are much advanced and improved. As
the body by a Growing Ague, or as the grass by an April^ shower. Romans 5. 3, 4, 5
Tribulation works Patience, and Patience Experience, and Experience Hope,
and Hope makes not ashamed, etc. What a rich and strange crop is this! Here Is
Grapes on Thorns, and Figs on Thistles. By rubbing, the Pomander smells far
sweeter: By treading, the Camomile grows the better; by wearing, the nail
becomes the brighter: So ou Spirituals become more bright, fragrant and
flourishing, by being exercised with Afflictions. Opposition and Difficulties
excite their Activities. Had not the Afflictions of Job been so extreme, Job 2.
3, 9, 10. with Iam. 5. 11.
the Integrity and Patience of Job had not been so renowned.

6. By these, Their Spiritual Activity in Meditations Prayer,
Self-examinations, Self-denial, Obedience and all Christian Duties, is
exceedingly actuated and awakened. When Genesis 32. 24. 25, 26.
Jacob was in fear and danger of Destruction by his Brother Esau, he wrestled
all night by Prayer with the Angel of the Covenant, and would not let him go
without a Blessing. While David was exercised under Saul's oppressive
persecutions, and other sad afflictions; he breathed out to God his most
Celestial Devotions. Then he said, ^sal. 119. 71.
Its good for me that I have been afflicted that I might learn thy Statutes.
When David was lowest in Affliction, he was highest in Devotion. Yea, Jesus
Christ himself, Luke 22. 44. (...).
being in an Agony, Prayed the more earnestly. As the Birds in the Spring tune
most sweetly, when it rains most sadly; Or, As a musical Instrument, when the
strings are struck, sounds most melodiously: So when God rains down troubles
upon us, and by his chastisements strikes the very strings of our hearts, often
times our spirits make the sweetest melody in the ears of God.

7. By these, They are Romans 8. 8, 29. 30. (...). 53. 2, 3, 4. ^eb. 2. 9, 10.
Conform to Jesus Christ their Head and Elder Brother, who was a man of
sorrows, acquainted with grief, and perfected, or consecrated through
sufferings. And Heb. 8. 7.
if we suffer with him, we shall be glorified together. If now we be conform to
him in his Cross, we shall hereafter be conform to him in his Crown. Its the
Perfection of the Members to be conform unto their Head.

8. By these, These child-like Relation to the heavenly Father is sweetly
Ascertained, while they are enabled to bear and endure his chastisements with
filial patience and submission. Heb. 12. 6, 7, 8, etc.
If ye endure chastening, God deals with you as with sons: for what son is he
whom the Father chasteneth not? But if ye be without chastisement, whereof all
are partaker^, then are ye bastards and not sons. The heavenly Father will take
pains with his own children to chastize, discipline and nurture them for their
good; when he will not wear his rods upon Bastards and Castawaies. And how
useful is that his Paternal Affliction, which discries his Fatherly affection
unto us, and our Son-like Relation unto him! I am well contented to be under
the Rod of the Almighty; that so I may be distinguished from the Bastards of
this world, and numbered among the sons of God.

9. By these, They are 1 Cor. 11. 32.
chastened of the Lord, that they should not be condemned with the world. And
that's an happy Castigation, that helps to prevent Eternal Condemnation. Who
would not say with him? Hic ure, his seca: ut in ae^ernum parcas.
Here burn me, here cut me, that thou may for ever spare me.

10. Finally, By these sharp afflictions and distresses, God fits and prepares
his afflicted servants for their Eternal Glory. Christ was first Ephesians. 4. 9, 10.
Abased before he was exalted: and passed by his Cross, unto his Crown; through
Luke ^4. 26.
his Sufferings, into his Glory And his members must follow him: Acts 14. 22.
Through much tribulation we must enter to the Kingdom of God. We shall meet
with Tribulation, much Tribulation; that is the wa^ we must go: but through this
much tribulation we must Enter into the Kingdom of God, that's the blessed end
of this way. If it were, Tribulation, and much Tribulation, and after that no
entrance into heaven; that were the tribulation of tribulation, a doleful way
to a more doleful journeys end: but in that through this tribulation, yea
through this much tribulation, we shall at last enter into a Kingdom, and that
the Kingdom of God: This renders all our much tribulation, as in effect no
tribulation at all. And, 2 Cor. 4. 17. (...) etc.
The momentany lightness of our affliction works for us a far more exceeding
(Gr. from Hyperbole to Hyperbole; or an Hyperbolical Hyperbolical) eternal
weight of glory. Our Afflictions work this transcendent glory for us, by
working and disposing us for this transcendent glory. And the sharper are our
sorrows here, the sweeter will be our joys hereafter. As health is most
acceptable after the sharpest sickness: liberty most sweet after rigorous
bondage: rest most delightful after toylsom weariness: and the harbor most
welcome after the sorest storms: So heaven and glory it self will be most
grateful and glorious after sharpest afflicting extremities. Thus of the Causes
why the Lord suffers his, To lie among the Pots.

III. Inferences or Corollaries, Hence resulting are diverse. As,

1. Hence, Behold here the mystery and wisdom of Gods Providential
Dispensations. His own people, (though his Jewels) shall lie among the Pots,
and be most sadly afflicted: Psalm. 73. ^. to 21.
when the wicked shall flourish like a green Bay Tree, in all Prosperity. This
strange Dispensation of Gods Providence did exceedingly puzzle and perplex holy
David, till he went into the Sanctuary of God; then he saw the end of those
wicked prosperous men, that they were set in slippery places, -- that they are
brought into desolation, as in a moment, etc. Godly Luke 16. 19, 20, 21, etc.
Lazarus lay full of sores, among the dogs at the rich man's gate, Destitute of
his very crumbs to satisfy his hunger: while the wicked rich man was in his
Purple and fine linen, and sured sumptuously every day. Assuredly, Then,

(1) No man knows Gods Peculiar Eccles. 9. 1, 2.
love or hatred by these External Dispensations: by all that is before him.

(2) Happiness or Misery consists not, In having or wanting of these outward
blessings: Nor in escaping, or enduring the sharpest sorrows or afflictions.

2. Hence, Saddest Extremities of Ou^ward Afflictions and miseries in this
present If, are not inconsistent with the gracious condition of God* own
People. Yea, most usually Gods own people in this world are of all other the
most afflicted, when as others Heb. 11. 26, 27.
enjoy the Pleasutes of sin for a season. O what extremities of sufferings and
deaths have the faithful undergone in all ages! Consult that little Book of
Martyrs in the Epistle to the Hebrews, Heb. 11. 35, 36, 37, 38.
They were tortured not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better
Resurrection. And others had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea
moreover of bonds and imprisonment. They were stoned: they were sawn asunder:
were tempted: were stain with the sword: they wandered about in Sheep-ski^s,
and Goats-skins, being destitu^e* afflicted, tormented. Of whom the world was
not worthy: they wandered in Deserts, and in Mountains, and in Dens and Caves
of the earth.

Oh what strange Similitudes, Emblems and Expressions are used in Holy
Scripture for representing of Gods peoples calamities! As,

A Genesis 15. 13, 17.
smoking furnace: to denote the affliction of Abraham's seed in Egypt.

A Ezod. 3. 2, 3, etc.
Bush burning with fire, all on a light flame.: to express Isreal's former and
future sharp and fiery calamities.

Their Psalm. 44. 25.
Souls being bowed down to the dust, and their bellies cleaving to the earth.

Their being sore broken in the place of Dragons, and covered with the shadow
of death.

Yea the Jews in Babylons captivity, said; Ezekiel. 37. 11, 12, 13, 14.
Our bones are dried, and our hope is lost, we are cut off for our Parts. And
they were as so many dead bodies that were buried in their very Graves. And
therefore extremity of distress in this present life, is not only consistent
with, but very incident unto, the sincerest heirs by grace of the life to come.

3. Hence, Let Christians learn patiently and contentedly to bear their
heavyest pressures and afflictions, since no temptation has befallen them, but
what is humane, 1 Cor. 10. 13. Yea sometimes it is the lot of the Church of
God, and of (...), to lie even among the blackest Pots. See thou, Joseph
Psalm. 105. 18.
laid in Irons; Job Job 2. 7, 8.
sitting in the ashes; Lazarus, Luke 16. 20, 21.
lying among the dogs, full of sores; and Jesus Christ himself so Isa. 53. 2,
3, 4.
full of sorrows: and do thou think much at thine affliction? Oh fret not
against Gods dispensations, faint not, but endure thy tribulations: since Jesus
Christ himself, and his choicest members are therein thy companions.

4. Hence, How unsafe and imprudent is it to Despise, Abhor or Censure others
of Hypocrisy, or of a null^^y of grace, because of their sad, doleful and
strange afflictions! For, in so doing we may rashly condemn the Generation of
the righteous, before we be aware. Gods own endeared people oft-times lie among
these blacking Pots. O think of David and ^sal. 13^. 1. and 73. 14.
all his afflictions, how he was hunted as a Partridge up and down the
Mountains, how all the day long he was plagued, and chastened every morning; Of
Paul, 2 Co^ 11. 2 (...) the end.
in Perils and Distresses on every side; Of Jeremiah, (...) 38. 6.
cast into the myrie dungeon, and (as some think) sinking up to the Arm-holes
in the mire: Of Daniel Dan. 6. 16, 17.
flung into the filthy and fatal Den of the hungry Lions: Of the Prophets
persecuted and slain by the Jews, Acts 7. 52. Of the three Jews Dan. 3. 21, 22,
23.
bound hand and foot and cast into the hot burning fiery furnace, heat seven
times hotter then ordinary, for not worshipping the golden Image; Of Job,
covered all over with Job 2. 7, 8.
sore boils from the sole of his foot unto his crown: Hierom thinks, A planta
pe^^s usque ad vi^^cem perc^sseit ^um vulnere pessimo, (...). Eleph antia. In^^
^oto corpore vermes fl^eb^nt, and sinles and putredo. Solam linguam integram ^l
reservavi^, ut possi^ Dominum (...) blasphemare, Hironym in Comment. ad Psalm.
66. p. 9. D. Tom. ^.
Satan left only his tongue free, that therewith he might blaspheme his LORD:
Of Lazarus, Luke 16. 20. (...).
full of sores and ulcers; Of Hezekiah, smitten with a mortal ^sa. 38. 2^.
boil: Of the godly, (...) 8 ^6.
killed all the day long, and counted as sheep for the slaughter: Of the
Martyrs, Heb. 11. 35, etc. Of the cruel Primitive Persecutions: And of Jesus
Christ himself the spot less Son of God, (...) 23. (...), 17. 37, 38. Cra. 3.
13.
put to death, and crucified by wicked hands, and hung (for the greater infamy)
between two thieves, upon the cursed Tree, O think deliberately upon these
Instances, viz. Of the unquestionable yea incomparable piety of their Persons,
and of the unutterable extremities of their Passions and then take heed of the
error of Jobs friends, of Despising, Abhorring or Censuring any the servants
of the Lord, though lying among the Pots, though implunged under heavy, unusual
and extreme calamities. Do you think the worse of a piece of gold, because it
is besmeared with soot? Or do you ever the less value Lucet marg^ritam in
sordibus; and fulgor gemmae purissimae etiam in luto radiat. Hieronym. ad
Pammach. consol. p. 164. C. Tom. 1. Basil. 1553.
a Jewel, because its fallen into the mire? Its gold still, though colleyed:
Its a rich jewel still, though bemyred. Why then should we harbor more hard,
mean, despising, undervaluing thoughts of afflicted David, Paul, Job, Lazarus,
or of any of the distressed Saints of God; which in Gods account are precious
gold still, rich jewels still, though besmeared and blacked with most deforming
and amazing miseries?

5. Hence, Finally, Behold, one noted difference betwixt the condition of Gods
people in earth and in heaven. Here Gods endeared people may lie among the
Pots; may be smutted, soyled, blacked, etc. in the eyes of men, with deep and
sore afflictions: But when once the last Messenger has summoned them, and when
once they shall set foot in heaven, they shall never lie among the Pots any
more; they shall never be Cant. 1. 5, 6.
black as Kedars Tents any more; they shall never be tanned with misery, or
Sunburned with affliction any more. But they shall perfectly Rev. 14. 13.
rest from all their labors, of Sin, Temptation and Tribulation. Then, no more
Sea, no more Pain, no more Crying, no more tears, etc. Then Job, that here sat
down Job 2. 7, 8. Luke 20. 36.
among the ashes, shall there set up among the Angels. Then Luke 16. ^0, 21, 22.
Lazarus, that here lay among the dogs, shall there be lodged in Abraham's
bosom. Then the endeared Saints and servants of God, that here oft-times lay
among the Pots, Rev. 3. 4.
shall walk with Christ in triumphant White, and be counted worthy.

And thus I pass from the Dark to the Bright side of the Text; yet shall ye be
as the wings of a Dove covered with silver, etc. Hence, note;

Doctrine II.
That, Gods afflicted and distressed people shall not always lie among the
Pots, but at last (as with Doves wings) shall escape out of their deepest
misery, and enjoy all contrary Mercy, Prosperity and Felicity.

They may for a time lie in distress; but not always. Their outward misery may
be great: but shall have an end. They Genesis 15. 13. to 17.
may for a few years be oppressed in Egypt, and wander in the Wilderness: but
at last they shall come to Canaan, the Promised Rest. Psalm. 30. 5. (...)
jubilatio shoutingioy.
Weeping may lodge for a night, but shouting-joy in the morning. Isa. 54. 7, 8.
In a little wrath God may hide his face from his, for a moment: but with
everlasting kindness will he have mercy on them. For a season they may lie
among the Pots, like black, soyled and deformed Scullions: but at length they
shall be as the Wings of a Dove, covered with silver, and her feathers with
yeallow gold. That is, They shall escape: Escape harmless: Escape beauteous,
happy and prosperous. Consider well the expressions in the Text, viz. 1. They
shall escape. This is noted by, Wings. They shall be (not as a Dove, but) as
the wings of a Dove. Wings are swift: A Doves wings are eminently swift. Hereby
the Scripture sets forth a swift and speedy escape from distress and trouble;
Psalm. 55. 6, 7,
O (says David) that I had wings like a Dove, then would I flee away and be at
rest, etc. Thus, they that lie among the Pots, shall at last be as the wings of
a Dove: they shall have a 1 Cor. 10. 13.
way of escape. 2. They shall escape harmless and innocent. Why else does he
mention the wings of a Dove, rather then of any other fowl? Doves are commended
by our Savior for their Simplicity and Harmlesness; Mat. 10. 16. (...) i. e.
vel (...) (...) (...) misceo.
Be ye wise as Serpents, and harmless (Or, unmixed) as Doves. Gods people Job
23. 10. Zech. 13. 9.
when they are tried in the furnace of affliction, shall come forth as refined
gold and silver. They shall be Dan. 12. 10.
purified, and made white, and tried. They shall leave their dross behind them.
3. This is not all. For, They shall so escape out of distresses, as to enjoy
the contrary mercies and felicities. This seems to be imported in the Doves
white, silver-coloured, and golden-coloured feathers: or, as the Hebrew word
properly signifies; (...) Est aurum cu^us color nonniril ad virorem vergit.
(...) in Pag^^ Th^^. ad verb. (...)
her feathers with a greenish yeallow Gold; which feathers in the Dove are very
shining, pleasant and beauteous. White, ordinarily in Scripture denotes
Prosperity, Felicity, Triumph, Glory, etc. As, Judge. 5. 10. Zech. 6. 3, 6. Rev.
2. 17. and 3. 4, 5, 18. and often elsewhere. And Gold, or Golden, is often used
to set forth that which is flourishing, prosperous, rich and happy. Hence, The
Babylonish Monarchy is compared to the Head of Gold, excelling all the other,
Dan. 2. 32, 38. and Babylon is called, The Golden-one, viz. The Golden City,
Isa. 14. 4. and the purest and choicest oil is called, Golden oil, Zech. 4. 12.
O, this is a very bright, sweet and comfortable side of the Text.

For further clearing of this sweet Lesson, note: 1. That Gods Afflicted shall
at last escape out of their distresses into the contrary felicities. 2. Why
they shall escape. 3. How God is wont to bring about such their escape. 4. The
Inferences that offer themselves hereupon.

1. That Gods afflicted shall at last escape and be set free from their
distress, and be vested in the Opposite Felicities; is evident,

1. By Gods faithful Promises to this effect, in all ages. And Gods Heb. 6. 13,
17, 18. Tit. 1. 2.
Promises are one sort of those two immutable things wherein it is impossible
for God to lie. Take a taste of such Promises.

God Promised deliverance to Abraham's seed out of all their Egyptian
afflictions. Genesis 15. 13, 14, 16.
-- Know of a Surety, that thy seed shall be a stranger in a Land that is not
theirs, and shall serve them, and they shall afflict them four hundred years.
And also that Nation, whom they shall serve, will I judge: and afterward shall
they come out with great substance. -- But in the fourth Generation they shall
come hither again, etc.

In the days of Asaph and David God Promised to his people: Psalm 50. 15.
-- Call upon me in the day of trouble; I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me.

Psalm 91. 14, 15.
Because he has set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him: I will set
him on high, because he has known my name. He shall call upon me, and I will
answer him: I will be with him in trouble, I will deliver him and honor him.
How sweet also is the Promise in my present Text, Psalm. 68. 13. In the days of
Isaiah; Isa. 54. 6. to the end.
-- The LORD has called thee as a woman forsaken and grieved in Spirit, and a
wife of youth, when thou wast refused, says thy God. For a small moment have I
forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather thee. In a little wrath I
hid my face from thee, for a moment; but with everlasting kindness will I have
mercy on thee, says the LORD thy Redeemer. -- Oh, thou afflicted, tossed with
tempest, and not comforted, behold, I will lay they stones with fair colors,
and lay thy foundations with Saphires, and I will make thy windows of Agats,
and thy Gates of Carbuncles, and all thy borders of pleasant stones, etc. Oh
what manner of stones are here promised for raising of this building! What
manner of expressions are here to set forth this deliverance and restoration!
Thus their escape, etc. is certain by Gods faithful Promises.

2. By Gods Peoples frequent Experiences in all Generations, this their escape
out of all their blacking troubles, is also very evident. We read much of their
distresses in Scripture, but we read much also of their deliverances. Psalm. 34.
19.
Many are the afflictions of the righteous: but the LORD delivers him out of
them all. Gods people have many afflictions: but their God has as many
deliverances for them. We read; How Psalm. 105. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.
Joseph was sold for a servant, clapped up in Prison, hurt with fetters, laid in
Iron, etc. yet we read also, how he changed his Prison-garments, how the King
loosed him, let him go free, made him Lord of His House, and Ruler of all his
Substance, etc. How Genesis 15. 13, 14, 16. Exodus 1. to chap. 15, etc. Josh. 21.
43, 44, 45.
Israel was oppressed in Egypt, and forty years afflicted in the Wilderness:
and yet, How at last the LORD, by a mighty hand and outstretched arm, brought
them out of Egypt, through the Wilderness, into the Promised Canaan, the Land
of Rest. How Job 2. 7, 8. and 42. 10, etc.
Job sat down among the ashes and scraped himself with a Potsheard: and how
God also turned his captivity, restoring him to double Prosperity. How 1 Samuel
18, etc. 2 Samuel 5. 12.
David was hated, persecuted and hunted up and down by Saul, from place to
place, from cave to cave, from hold to hold: and yet how at last the LORD
established David in peace and glory upon his royal Throne. How Ier. 38, 6, 13.
Jeremiah was cast into the dirty dungeon, where he sunk into the mire: and
also how Jeremiah was lifted up again out of the dungeon. How Jonah 1. 14. and
2. 10.
Jonah was thrown into the Sea, and devoured by the fish which God had
prepared: And also how the third day the fish cast up Jonah alive upon the dry
ground. How Dan. 3. 21. to 28.
the three Jews were bound and flung into the fiery furnace: And also how they
were preserved in the furnace, and delivered out of it, without having an hair
of their head singed, their coats changed, or the smell of fire upon them. How
Dan. 6. 16, ^7, 22, 23.
Daniel was cast into the Den of Lions: and also how Daniel was taken up again,
alive, and without hurt, out of the Lions Den. How 2 Cor. 11. 23. to the end.
and 1. 4, 5, 8, 9, 10. 2 Timothy 4. 16, 17, 18.
Paul was full of Afflictions, in many perils, yea sometimes pressed out of
measure, above strength, etc. and yet how in his abounding tribulations, he had
abounding consolations by Christ, how he was delivered by the Lord out of them
all, yea sometimes from the mouth of the Lion, sometimes from the jaws of
Death. How Luke 16. 19, 20, 21, 22.
Lazarus lay at Dives gates, full of sores, licked by dogs, not vouchsafed the
crumbs of the rich man's Table (the dogs portion) so that he dyed: and yet how
Lazaruts immediately upon his Death was carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom;
And what shall I say? we read, how our dear Redeemer Is^. 53. 2, 3, 4. Heb. 12.
2, 3. Acts 2. 23. 1 Cor. 15. 4, etc. Ephesians. 4. 8, 9, 10. Heb. 8, 1, Phil. 2. 7.
to 12. Ephesians. 1. 19^ 20, 21, 22.
Jesus Christ, was a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief, abasement and
sufferings, from his Manger to his Cross, endured such contradiction of
sinners, and at last was cruelly crucified on the Cursed tree, and after buried
in the darksom grave: but we read also, How he revived and Rose again from the
dead, Ascended up far above all Heavens, leading Sin, Satan, Death, Grave, and
all our Captivity Captive, and is sat down on the right hand of God in supreme
Authority, Majesty and Glory, All Angels, Principalities and Powers, yea all
creatures being subject to him. Now all these, and like experiences of the
Saints are most evident Demonstrations, That, the LORD Psalm 22. 24.
has not despised, nor abhorred the Affliction of the Afflicted: That, Psalm
58. 11.
verily there is a reward for the righteous, verily he is a God that judges in
the earth.

II. But, Why, or whence is it that Gods afflicted shall, one way or other, at
last escape out of all their afflictions, be taken from among those sullying
Pots, and partake the contrary Mercies and Felicities?

Answ This comes to pass;

1. Because, Their God exactly 2 Per. 1. 9.
knows how to deliver the Godly out of Temptations and Tribulations, though
never so intricate and perplexing. Oh the infinite wisdom of God! He knows how
to bring his People into troubles, when they know not how they came thither:
and he knows how to bring them out of troubles, when they know not how they
came thence. He knows how to do this, with means, without means: By strong
means, By weak means, and contrary to all means. Thus, Acts 12. 6. to 12.
by his Angel he brought Peter (sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two
chains) out of prison, his chains falling off his hands, and conducted him
through the keepers at the prison door, through the first and second ward, and
through the Iron gate of the City, which opened to them of its own accord, etc.
Though Peter all this while wist not that it was true which was done by the
Angel, but thought he saw a vision. Thus Dan. 5. 30, 31. ^z^a. 1, 2, etc.
by Cyrus and Darius he brought his Captive Jews out of Babylon as strangely as
if they had been fetched out of their Graves. Whence they said; Psalm 116. ^,
When the LORD turned again the Captivity of his People, we were like them that
dream. This deliverance was so wonderful, that it did transcend their Faith,
and almost surpass their Admiration. The LORD knows how to deliver us, (us (
Nobis voentibus and nolentibus, selentibus and nesclentibus, vigilantibus and
dormientibus, etc.
willing and nilling, us knowing and not knowing, us waking and sleeping, etc.)
out of our distresses.

2.^ Because, Their God is infinitely able and powerful to rescue his people out
of their lowest ebb of Tribulation. When King Darius cried to Daniel in the
Lions Den, Dan. 6. 20, 21, 22, 27.
O Daniel, servant of the living God, is thy God, whom thou servest
continually, able to deliver thee from the Lions? Hark what Daniel answered; O
King live for ever. My God has sent his Angel, and has shut the Lions mouths,
that they have not hurt me, etc. As if he had said; Yea, my God is able to
deliver me from the Lions, for he has delivered me. He that made the Lions,
can easily shut the mouths of the Lions. O Pagan King believe in this
omnipotent God.

3. Because, Their God is infinitely loving, tender and compassionate toward
them in all their afflictions. Thus God spoke to his Zion, which dwelt with the
daughter of Babylon; Zech. 2, 7, 8.
He that touches you, touches the Apple of mine eye. And the Apple of the eye
is a most tender part: the least touch, the least mote, the least hair is very
painful and intolerable to it. And such was Gods compassion to his afflicted
Israel of old, that Isaiah says; Isa. 63. 9
In all their affliction he was afflicted, ( viz he as it were smarted in their
pains, sympathizing in their sorrows; And what followed hereupon?) and the
Angel of his presence saved them: In his love and in his Pity he redeemed
them, and he bare them, and carried them all the days of old: because of his
love, pity, commiserations to them, therefore he redeemed, saved and delivered
them lob was restored by God out of all his extremities: but why^ Even because
of Gods love and compassions to him; Iun. 5. 11.(...) ignisicat commiseratlonem
five compassi^nem cum miseria alterius. Jac. Laurent. Con. in lo^
^e have heard of the patience of Job, and ye have seen the end of the Lord;
(viz. what an happy issue God gave of all his sufferings, and why?) that (or,
Because, (...)) the Lord is much-of-bowels, and Commiserating. Oh these yerning
bowels and commiserations of God were such toward afflicted lob, that he would
not suffer him still to lie among the Ashes. How emphatically are they here
expressed! That Passage of Hezekia recovered is very sweet; sa. 38. 17.
Behold, for peace I had great bitterness: but thou have in love to my soul
delivered it from the pit of corruption, etc. Hebr. Thou have loved my soul
from the pit of corruption. As if he had said; O Lord, the strength of thy
love, the arms of thy love, the cords of thy love etc. have kept me, and
rescued me from the grave into which I was sinking: I ascribe my life and
recovery, merely to thy love. Oh Gods dear love to his afflicted, is a sweet
cause of their escape out of affliction.

4. Because, Their Covenant God is ever nigh to, and present with, his people
in all their deepest and darkest distresses. Therefore they shall be supported
under them, and seasonably released out of all: Psalm. 91. 15.
I will be with him in trouble, I will deliver him and honor him. Gods
Presence with us in trouble, is our deliverance out of trouble. He was the Genesis
15. 17.
burning lamp in midst of the smoking furnace, Abraham's afflicted seed; He was
the Exodus 3. 2, 4. 5, 6.
Angel in midst of the bush (Israel) burning, but not consumed; He was Dan. 6.
22.
with Daniel in the Den of Lions, with the Dan. 3. 2^.
three Jews in the fiery furnace, with Jeremiah in the Dungeon, etc. And
therefore they all had such false escape. If the LORD's Presence be with his
people: then Safety is with them, Deliverance is with them, etc. And in due
time they shall be released.

5. Finally, Because their God is most faithful. This Reason the Apostle gives;
1 Cor. 10. 13.
God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able,
but will with the Temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to
bear it.

III. How, and in what way does God take his People from the Pots, deliver them
from their distresses and afflictions?

Answ. The Lord effects and brings this about, variously, and sometimes very
mysteriously. As,

1. Oft-times by Transmutations of his Peoples condition. How often does he
literally in this life Turn, their darkness into light, their sorrow into joy,
their sickness into health, their pain into ease, their poverty into riches,
their bondage into liberty, their adversity into prosperity, their trouble into
triumph, their miseries into mercies! etc. As Joseph's bondage into Lordship;
Jobs Poverty into double prosperity; Hezekiahs sickness into health, etc.

2. Sometimes by disarming their afflictions and miseries. This is an excellent
way: when the sting, venom, mischief, malignity, etc. of affliction is taken
out and suspended. In such case, Gods people may be visibly in a state of
affliction, and yet un-afflicted. 2 Cor.^, 9, 1^
As chastened, and not killed; as dying, and yet living; as sorrowful, yet
always rejoicing; as having nothing, and yet possessing all things. Think it
not a Paradox. Exodus 3. 2, etc.
The bush burned, but was not consumed. Dan. 6. 22.
Daniel was in the Lions Den, but had no hurt by the Lions. God disarmed the
Lions paws, and shut their mouths. Dan. 3. 25, 27.
The three Jews were in the fiery furnace, but had not an hair singed, or their
coasts changed, nor had the smell of fire passed upon them: because God
suspended the burning property of the flames. Thus the Martyr cried out in the
fire, Acts and Monuments, p. 301. vol. 2. Land. 1641.
Behold ye Papists that look for wonders, I feel no more pain in this fire,
then in a bed of down, but it is to me as a bed of roses. Thus Gods dear people
are sometimes without affliction, whilst under affliction: Delivered from
misery, whilst in misery; God disarming their afflictions of their sting,
venom and malignity.

3. Sometimes, by Remedying of one Affliction or Trouble with another. As he
that by a wound was cured of an Impostumation; Or, as Physicians sometimes help
a Palsy or Lethargy, by sorcing the patient into a Burning Fever: So sometimes
the Lord is pleased to deliver his people out of one affliction by another.
Thus ( Jonah 1. 1^, 17.
Jonas cast overboard, was saved from the Sea, by being devoured by the Whale.
He had been swallowed up, if he had not been swallowed up. He had been
devoured, if he had not been devoured. He had been buried, if he had not been
buried. The bottom of the Sea had been his grave, if the belly of the fish had
not been his grave. How admirable is this Dispensation, when God makes one
affliction an antidote against another!

4. Sometimes, by elevating his People above the bitterness of their
afflictions, by the surpas^ing sweetness of his Presence, and transporting
consolations. Great afflictions may be upon them, but greater divine
refreshments may even drown and swallow them up. 2 Cor. 1. 5.
Our abounding afflictions are sweetly cured by Christ's abounding and
superabounding Consolations. The Moon and Stars are in the sky at midday, as
well as at midnight, but not one of them then appears; because the Sun shining
in his strength, has outshined them all: So when Jesus Christ the glorious Sun
of righteousness shines in his strength of Grace and Consolation upon the
hearts of his afflicted, he so shines away their troubles and distresses, that
they scarce appear. If Christ steel the Spirit with Faith, Courage and
Magnanimity, and fill the heart with the Consolations of God, which are not
small; how easy is it to trample upon the greatest tribulation, and count all
afflictions as no afflictions, yea as great advantages! Holy Acts and
Monuments, p. 308. N. 50. vol. 3. Land. 1641.
Bradford Martyr said; I thank God more of this Prison, then of any Parlour,
yea then of any pleasure that ever I had; for in it I find God, my most sweet
good God always. And Laurence Sanders Martyr confessed; Acts and Monuments, p.
139. vol. 3. Land. 1641.
I was in Prison, till I got into Prison. Hierom has a good note concerning
Job: That God came nearest to Job in his extremities, and dealt with him then
most familiarly. And he adds: Veniant plagal, omnia paenarum genera: dum post
plagas advenlat Christus. Hieronym. com. in Psalm. 66. p. 93. Tom. 8. Basil 1553.
Let strokes come, let all kind of Punishments come: so that after these Christ
will come.

5. Finally, If God release not his dear People from Miseries and Afflictions
before death, yet he always sets them at liberty by Death, and brings them
into the contrary Felicities. Rev. 14. 13.
Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord -- they rest from their labors.
Death cures all the Saints diseases, cease all their pains, tears, sighs and
groans, and supplies all their wants whatsoever in Christ immediately beheld
and enjoyed, Phil. 1. 23. 2 Cor. 5. 6, 8, 9.
which is far best of all. If the Lord do not deliver us before death, he
delivers us at death. And if he delivers us not from death: yet he delivers us
by death. Death is our great year of Jubilee, our year of Release, when we
shall be set at liberty from all our bondage and thraldom, from all our debts
and morgages, from all our sorrows and sufferings, because from all our sins. O
therefore when death approaches, then the Saints may gladsomly lift up their
heads, for their Redemption draws nigh. Gods people in this world are like
Jonah in the Tempest: This world is as the roaring and raging Sea, still ready
to drown and swallow them up; but death, like Jonas his Whale, is prepared of
God, and swallows them up from the Sea of this world, so that to them Rev. 21.
1.
there shall be no more Sea: And at last this great devouring Whale, Rev. 20.
11, 12, 13.
Death, shall be forced to cast them up again upon a safe shore of Eternal rest
and true felicity, at the General Resurrection, John 17. 24.
that they may be where Christ is, to behold his glory, and live in his
ravishing presence for evermore.

Thus you see how the Lord delivers his Afflicted out of Afflictions.

III. Inferences hence, by way of Application.

Shall not Gods afflicted and distressed people still lie among the Pots, but
at last (as with Doves wings) eseape out of their deepest misery, into the
contrary prosperity and felicity? Then,

1. Hence, How different is the Dispensation of Gods Providence toward the
godly and the wicked, and how different is their condition! The godly must
Psalm. 68. ^3.
first lie here among the Pots of blacking afflictions; but afterward shall
be, through an happy deliverance, as the wings of a Dove, covered with silver,
and her feathers with yeallow gold: First they are in their mourning sables;
but after they are clothed with the garments of Praise: First Job ^. 7, 8. ^
4^. 10, etc.
they lie among the Ashes; then after the Lord turns their Captivity: First (
Ier. 38. ^, 13.
they are in their Dungeon of distresses; after they receive deliverance: First
Luke 1^. 25.
they have their evil things and are tormented; but afterward their good
things and are comforted. But on the other hand, if you look upon the wicked,
you shall find the Scene is altered. They may at first be as covered with
silver, and their feathers with yeallow gold: but at last they shall lie among
the blackest Pots of misery: First they may flourish and Ps^^. 37. 3^, ^6.
spread themselves like a green Bay tree; but after they shall wither (...)
like grass upon the housetops: They may Luke 6. 25.
now laugh; but hereafter they shall mourn and weep: They may now Luke 16 25.
receive their good things; but hereafter shall have their evil things: They
may now be comforted; but hereafter shall be tormented: They may first Psalm
92. 7.
spring as the grass and flourish, but at last shall be destroyed for evermore.

O then, who would not Triumph to be Godly? who would not tremble to be wicked?
The Godly first receive their wormwood and their gall, but afterward their
milk and honey: but contrariwise, the wicked first receive their milk and
honey, and then their wormwood and their gall. Oh how much better were it, to
begin with Gall and end with Honey, to begin with Sorrow and end with Joy: Then
to begin with milk and end with wormwood; then to begin with vanishing
comforts, and end with endless Torments.

2. Hence, Let all Gods afflicted people that lie among the Pots of darkest
fullying miseries, most patiently bear their present pressures, and hopefully
wait for their desired Deliverance. They shall be taken from among the Pots,
they Psalm. 68. 13.
shall be as the wings of a Dove covered with silver, etc. Therefore, tarry the
Lords leisure. He that believes makes not haste. The Lords time of Relaxation
will come: and his Time is the best time. He does all things in number, weight
and measure. There Is no Contradicting, Diverting or Directing of him in his
proceedings. He knows best when, where and how to deliver his distressed ones.
Be their sufferings never so extreme or long, they shall at last certainly
escape, either from death, or by death: either in this world, to partake sweet
temporany felicity; or in the world to come, to enjoy sweetest everlasting
glory: Therefore patiently bear and Habak. 2. 3, 4. Heb. 10. 35. to 39.
wait a while, and live by Faith: the vision will not fail, at last it will
speak and will not lie; and he that comes with salvation, will come and will
not tarry.

3. Hence, Finally, This may much calm and quiet their Spirits whose near
Relations lie among the Pots: and also may excite their hearts to unfeigned
thankfulness, whose endeared friends are released from distress and misery, to
enjoy the contrary felicity.

Are your dear Allies in deep Afflictions, much blacked and disfigured as among
the Pots? You bleed in their sufferings, and are exceedingly distressed upon
their Extremities. Yet compose your selves, There Is hope in Israel concerning
this. Such as belong to God, one way or other shall have deliverance: either
from death, or by death. Remember this and like Promises, and quiet your
hearts; Psalm 68. 13. Genesis 15. 13, 14, 16 Psalm. 50. 15. and 91. 14, 15. Isa. 54
6. to the end.
Although ye have lien among the Pots, yet shall ye be as the wings of a Dove
covered with silver, etc.

Are any of your near and sweet Relations Released from their Distresses;
Before Death, or By Natures Dissolution? Bless God with thankfulness for his
gracious Dispensations. For, thus; Gods Promises are Performed: Gods Mercies
are expressed: Their Miseries are removed, and their Felicities exalted. And,
as to the present case before us touching our Dear sister deceased: though
here is much matter of sadness, yet here is more matter of thankfulness. Although
it was her lot to lie a long time among the Pots, in more sharp tormenting
pains and miseries then many others; Yet now she has obtained a full Release.
And, so holy was her Life, so constant her Faith, so steadfast her Patience to
the end, and so great her interest in God; that we have no cause to doubt, of
her celestial Felicity, or of her present Triumphs in Glory. It is true, Our
loss is great: But her gain is incomparably greater. Her Husband has lost a
Dear, a Sweet, a Comfortable Yoke Fellow; Her Children have lost, a Tender, a
Careful, and Compassionating Mother; Her Allies have lost a Faithful and
Sincere-hearted Friend; The Poor have lost a special and liberal Benefactor;
The Church of God has lost an Holy, Heavenly and Gracious Saint; yea and Her
self has lost something among all these losses, she has lost all her
Diseases, all her Pains, all her Sighs and Groans, all her Tears, all her
Sorrows and Sufferings, all her Troubles and Temptations, and all her sins. But
Oh how much has she gained, upon all these losses! she has Ph^l. 1. 21. 2
C^r. 5. ^, etc Feb. 12. 21, 22. John 17. 24. Phil. 1. 23. Mat. 5. 8. 1 John 3.
^. Mat. 25. 21, 23. ^salm ^6. 11.
Gained Heaven, Glory, Eternal Life, The Spirits of just men made perfect, The
Society of Angels, The immediate presence and embracements of Christ, the
beatifical vision and full fruition of God; The joy of her Lord, and unmixed
pleasures at Gods right hand for evermore. These, These are high matters of
gratulation. I say of her, to you her near relations, as sometimes Hierom said
of Nepotianus to Heliodorus; Nec doleas, quod talem am^^eris. Sed g^ndeas, quod
talem habue^is. Hieronym. ad Heliodo^. Epitaph. Nepotiani. p. 23. A. Tom 1.
Basil. 155^.
O lament not so much that you have lost such an one, as rejoice that you have
had such an one: yea, again rejoice and bless God that you have had such an one
so long. Consider; Her extremities on earth were intolerable; but her
enjoyments in heaven are unutterable. Your losses of her may be abundantly made
up in God: but what can compensate her present felicities? Her sorrow is turned
into joy, her misery is swallowed up of felicity, her trouble is terminated in
triumph. She has passed from the Dark side, to the Bright side of my Text. O
bless the LORD for her, and rejoice with her; That she Psalm 68. 13.
lies now no longer among the Pots, but is become as the wings of a Dove
covered with silver, and her feathers with yeallow Gold.

FINIS. (...).
MARY JACKSON the late Dear and Godly Wife of JOSEPH JACKSON Esquire, Alderman of
the City of BRISTOL, Having lived about forty years, Did sweetly fall on sleep
in CHRIST, April 24. Was decently interred, May 5. 1657. And is at blessed
Rest, till CHRIST's second Appearing, To Awaken, Raise, and Glorify her with
Himself for evermore.

Reader,
THere is newly published an Excellent BOOK entitu^ Myst^rium and Medulla
Bibliorum. The Mystery and M^^ row of the Bible: viz. Gods Covenants with Man
the First Adam, before the Fall: and In the Last Adam (...) Christ After the
Fall; From the Beginning to the End of (...) World; Unfolded and Illustrated in
Positive Aphorisms ^ their Explanations. Wherein, The General Nature, Sev^^
Kinds, Gradual Discoveries, Sanctions and Administrations of Gods Holy
Covenants, From First to Last, throughout the (...) Scriptures, together with
their peculiar Terms, Occasions, (...), Foederates, Matter, Form, End,
Properties, Agreeme^^ Disagreements, and many other their noted Excellencies
largely and Familiarly expounded: The blessed Person and (...) of Jesus Christ,
the Soul of all the Covenants of Faith, and Mediator of the New Covenant, is
Described: Many (...) Fundamental points of Christianity, are Explained: Sun
Practical Questions, or Cases of Conscience, are Resolved: (...) puzzling
Controversies about the present Truths are (...) Stated and Determined: Many
Obscure and (...) Scriptures are occasionally Elucidated: And, in all, The
(...) supernatural Mystery of the whole Sacred Bible, touching Gods (...)
Wise, Gracious, Merciful, Righteous, Plenary, Wonderful, Eternal Salvation of
Sinners by Jesus Christ through Faith, (...) Couched and Gradually Revealed in
his Covenant Express^^ in all Ages of the Church, is Disclosed and Un-veiled.
FRANCIS ROBERTS, M. A. Pastor of the Church Wrington, in the County of
Sommerset.


