THE SECRETS Of the Famous LAZARUS RIVERIVS, Councellor and Physician To the
FRENCH KING, And PROFESSOR of PHYSIC In the UNIVERSITY of MONTPELIER.

Newly Translated from the Latin, by E. P. M. D.

LONDON, Printed for Daniel Brown, at the Black Swan and Bible without
Temple-Barr. MDCLXXXV.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Reader,
THou art here presented with the Secrets of that ever renowned Physician,
Lazarus Riverius, whose other Works, published first in Latin, and then in our
own Language, I believe thou art very sensible that they were like good Wine,
needing no Bush; for at the first coming forth of his Practice of Physic in
the Latin Language; many eminent Physicians in England, and other parts made it
their Cynosura and steered their Practice wholly by it; as the Mariner sails by
his Compass: for in those days, before it was translated into English; you
might see the Apothecaries files filled with Recipe's, transscrib'd out of his
Book almost verbatim, and ad amussim, scarce any alteration at all, or what is
worth the taking notice of, being made in their prescriptions; and at this very
day I can assure you there are very able Physicians in England and other parts
(without making comparisons) that still adhere to, and have a greater
esteemation of, and veneration for him, than for Willis, the London Practice of
Physic, etc. and other later Books. Now as concerning these his Arcanum's,
they were published in Latin, as it seems, by an Honest, Ingenious and
Conscionable Scholar of his; who was not willing the World should be deprived,
of such a rich Cabinet, containing so many precious Jewels; and if any one
shall object any thing as to the laboriousness of these, above other operations
yet extant; they are desired to consider; that their excellent Virtues and
eximious Qualities, will countervale, equally balance and recompense, all
that; always remembering the old saying, Dii laborantibus omnia vendunt; and
labor improbus omnia vincit. And this is all, Reader I hope I need to say in
behalf of this piece; little truly in it self; but will it find, without doubt,
to be great in its worth; so I bid thee Adieu, as also because I would never
have too great Gate made for a little City; and so I say again Farewell.

THE SECRETS OF Laz. Riverius, etc.
CHAP. I. His Tincture of GOLD.
SINCE there are more then a good many Recipes of Aurum potabile extant, in the
World, which by some are denominated the Essences of Gold; etc. I have a mind,
in like manner, to describe one after my most Honored and Learned Master
Riverius's method and manner, as one of those to whom I doubted not, in the
least, to stand by, and trust to, after the example of my aforesaid Master, and
also of the very Learned and excellent Artist Peter John Faber; under whose
Discipline I first learned my Chemical Operations; and many of his very
excellent Secrets.

Other Artists dissolve Gold, making not, in the least, any preparation, or
disposition thereunto before hand; but our method is performed after this
manner.

Take of the purest Plate-Gold, and calcine it thrice with Antimony; always
adding thereto Crude Antimony; then separate it from the Cinders which will be
very apparent; and being mundisied dissolve them in Aqua regia after the usual
manner of dissolutions. Upon the dissolutions sprinkle Oil of Tartar made by
del^q^i^m drop by drop; and so the Gold will be precipitated to the bottom;
then the water being drawn off by decantation; see you take away the acrimony
by often ablutions with clear, sweet, common water: Then dry it either in the
Sun, or upon warm Cinders; but be sure you beware of the Fire, for it is now
Aurum fulminans. Afterward dissolve the Powder in Spirit of Salt, and our
Spirit of Vitriol, keeping it in a heat for the space of one month; and by that
time it will communicate its whole Tincture to the said Spirits. Separate the
half, adding a new Spirit till it be tinctured; and to every Ounce of the
tinctured Spirit, add a dram of the volatile Salt of Tartar dissolved,
digesting it in a warm place for the space of fifteen days; then add all these
again to the Powder, which then remains in the bottom of the Vesel; put it into
a Glass-house Furnace for (...) sp^ce of two months, with a gentle Fire at
first, augmenting the hear by little (...); for at fifteen days end they will
all become of the consistence of a stone; then after two months, let them be
put in a moist place, in an Egg, as the custom is, till they be dissolved; thus
you have the true, exact and genuine process of our Aurum po^^^^le.

Virtues, Uses and Doses.
THE Virtues of this our so great a Secret very far excel all others; for it
corroborates the Heart, the Brain, the Liver, and all the parts of our Body;
but those parts especially whose duty, faculty, and functions are to attract,
alter, ^nourish, separate, expel, etc. By this the pture Balsame of life is
upheld; by this it is preserved in its Youthful state; its Spirits are
augmented, and old Age retarded; and lastly it so orders affairs that the
Humors corrupt not one another. So that it is proper in all kind of Diseases,
both by reason of the Gold, and also of the six'd Salts, which dissolves all
impurities of the Body by transpiration; it is given in certain appropriate
Liquors from five drops to eight, for one dose.

CHAP. II. His Tincture of SILVER.
BEcause what is written of Gold, challenges to its self, the First place in
Value and Virtue; In the next place, I put our Tincture of Silver; as coming
nighest to the other, not only in Price but in Virtue also. Its process is
performed after this manner and method following.

Take of the purest Plate-Silver, and dissolve it in Aqua fortis; and see you
precipitate it with Oil of Tartar; then shall you wash it with common Water;
then dry it, and extract a Tincture with the aforementioned Liquors after the
very same manner and method, as aforegoing in the process of Gold, and at
length dissolve it, as abovesaid.

Virtues, Uses and Doses.
INnumerable are the Virtues of this Tincture of Silver; especially in Capital
Diseases; for it is very effectual in the ^pilepsie although it be of a long
standing, in the Vertigo, in the Megrim, Pally, and all other Diseases
proceeding from ^^s^^^^ion of the Brain. For as it the Macrocosm, or great
World, Sibver is called ^he Brain of the World; So this Tinc^ure is a true, and
powerful remedy against Diseases of the Brain. It more over wonderfully helps
Hectical and Pthisical persons, if it be given with other specisies, especially
with our potable Gold, before described; it is given in Waters appropriate to
the Disease, as for example, in the Falling Sickness, in Swallows Water, from
five, to seven drops, etc.

CHAP. III. His Tincture of Jupirer, or TIN.
COncerning Tin, many write of a Salt made thereof; but few have had the
happiness to attain to the true and genuine manner and method of its operation:
So that in lieu of Salt of Jupiter, or Tin, they will extract the Salt of Saturn,
or Lead; as plainly appears in most of our great, boasting Professors at this
day; who are not able to produce any substance from Tin; Now our Tincture is
made after this manner following.

Take pure Tin without Lead, and calcine it in the Fire, in an Iron Vessel,
continually stiring it with an Iron Spa^hula till it be reduced to a Powder;
and it will wax white with the heat of the Furnace, then put it into a
Glass-house Furnace for a month, with a very vehement Fire; or into a
Reverberatory Fire, for seven days together; afterward digesting it with a
gentle heat, in distilled Vinegar, separate the green Tincture, which will
tinge; and this being taken away, put your Vinegar to the calcined Tin into a
luted Retort, distilling it seven times; always adding new distilled Vinegar:
Digest the distilled part with the same Calx in a warm place for many days
together; then siltre and distill it to a dryness; adding (...) of Wine well
rectified, and alcooli^^ted to that which is sixth mat^^r (...) shall dissolve
the Tincture; but take notice you shall put only so much of the Spirit, as will
dissolve the fixed matter. Afterward digest it for eight days, for by that time
the Spirit being separated, the Tincture will remain in the bottom, which
indeed is marvelous.

Note. You will not find any such clear and sincere Receipts as these; for I
lay down nothing, but what I have illustrated by frequent Operations.

Virtues, Uses and Doses.
THis Tincture is wonderfully beneficial for all kinds of Diseases; for as
Jupiter derives his Name a juvando, from helping; so that this Tincture helps
all Diseases, both inward and outward. Inwardly it obtains the first place in
Diseases of the Womb, although incorrigible: For it Comforts, Strengthens and
Mundifies it from impure and corrupt Seeds, which produce so many various
Diseases; it also succors the Brain, Heart, Liver, and Hypochondria's, and
given with Specifies, it much profits Hectical and Pthysical persons. Outwardly
it bridles and checks any acrimonious humor in Wounds; and sweetens it; and
brings them to their perfect integrity. It Is given with Liquors, from a Scruple
to half a Dram, for one dose.

CHAP. IV. His Tincture, or Essence of MARS.
THere are already very many Remedies extant from the very many preparations of
Mars, or Iron, though a Tincture of the nature of this of ours be in use but by
very few; and yet it is one of the most excellent, though it be the most
laborious of all others; its process is as follows.

Take filings of Iron, and being very well fired in a Crucible, extinguish them
with distilled Vinegar, and this do more then thirty times, then make them boil
in the said Vinegar. And, while it is warm, filtre them through a Paper; dry
your Filings, and siring them again, as before, in Crucible, quench them with
distilled Vi^negar, as abovesaid: Which rule after yo^ have repeated thrice,
you shall then disti^^ your siltrated Vinegars to a dryness; an^ then add
thereto Spirit of Wine; and a^ for the rest of the process, you shall observe
the same order as in the Tinctur^ of Jupiter.

Virtues, Uses and Deses.
THis Tincture is a great Cordial, strengthening the parts, and opening
obstructions: For it is excellent above other remedies in all Fluxes, as
Dysenteries Diarra'heas, and Iaenteries, etc. and all immoderate monthly and
white Fluxes in Women; Gonorhaeas, spittings of Blood, Fluxes of Blood, either
at Nose, or Hemorrhoides; in all sudden Fluxions in any part of the Body. It
suffers no Corruption in any manner of Wounds; and heals them in a very short
time; it mundisies and heals Wounds and Ulcers; it is given in specifi^
cordials from a Scruple to half a Dram.

Note. After the same manner are made the Tinctures of Lapis Hamatitis, Sanguis
Draconis, etc. which are Remedies appropriate to the Blood.

CHAP. V. His ^ssen^^ of MERCVRY.
SUblimate your Mercury thrice, according to the common manner, with Vitriol
and Nitre; and thence separate a most pure Crystal; which you shall afterward
sublimate again leven times, with common white Salt very well decrepitated; and
being very well bruised put it into a Glass Vessel, with Spirit of Salt very
well rectisied, which must be six fingers breadth above the Salt: Being sealed,
digest in Balneo forty days; then separate the Spirit by decantation; and
pouring new Spirit thereon digest again, for forty days more. Then separate as
aboves^id; and if all the sublimate be not dissolved, infuse and digest anew,
until almost nothing remain in the bottom. All the Spirits being digested, put
them into a Retort very well luted; and with a Recipient distill them until
white drops ascend; then remove them and cohobate the Spirit four times, always
upon the Caput mortuum; making, toward the latter end, a more vehement Fire,
till all becomes one: what remains of the fixed matter in the bottom calcine, so
long until (...) wax white, and become a Salt after the usual manner. Distill
the Spirit, and separate until the Tincture remain in the bottom, which you
shall join to its Salt, by a gentle Fire, that they may incorporate into one
substance, then dulcifie it with Spirit of Wine, and digest it in the same, and
separate the Spirit; doing thus five times, that it may become dulcified.

Virtues, Uses and Doses.
THis is a difficult Operation; but in recompense it eradicates all almost
incurable Diseases; and may be given to all Bodies, Sexes and Ages, in all
kinds of Diseases; it mundifies all kinds of corrupt Diseases producing
malignancy in any part of the Body: It Operates without any trouble,
disturbance, hurt or damage to the Body; it preserves and cherishes the natural
Balsam of Life; it expells all impurities by insensible transpiration; it dryes
up and consumes Catarrhs proceeding from what cause soever: It cures obstructed
and cachectic Bodies, caused from depraved, and naughty humors of the
Hypochondria's, Womb, or corrupt Blood: It helps both hot and cold hysterical
persons, by corroborating the Liver and other viscera: It drives out either new
or old infections proceeding from the Lues Venerea: It heals also Schyrrhus's,
King's Evil, or such pertinacious tumors: It Is administered in Broths, or the
yelks of Eggs, or Wine, from eight drops to ten, in a morning, fasting.

CHAP. VI. His Essence, or Tincture of CORAL.
THERE are almost infinite Recipes, which teach how to draw a Tincture from
Coral; and how to make its Salt: But for the most part they are deceived: And
in lieu of a Tincture of the Coral, there appears a Tincture of other
lagredients, (from the Efficacy of the (...)) which use to be mixed therewith.
Ours is this which follows, a very sincere one, if it be artificially performed
by an expert Operator.

Take Coral very smally pounded; and infuse it in a Glass Vessel in Vinegar
which has before extra^^ed the Tincture of Antimony; and was separated
therefrom by distribution; for there is nothing more sit than this for C^rals,
Unions, Crab's-eyes, Eggli^^^^s, B^le-Ar^^me, Lapis hematitis, and the like. Let
the Vinegar swim six singers breadth uppermost; and let the Coral be dissolved
for some days space in an hot Balneo; and then distill the Vinegar to dryness,
then wash the Powder ten or twelve times in Cordial Waters; until all acrimony,
and the grosser and carthier parts be taken away, and it become very well
du^cisy'd, and as clear as Crystal. Then dry it well and lay it up to be used,
as shall be directed hereafter: Then take other Coral, and being mixed with
equal quantity of Sal Armeniac, put them into a sublimatory Vessel to be
sublimed; and the Sal Ammoniac will attract all the redness from the Coral:
Then put your Sal Ammoniac, being rubisyed, into Spirit of Wine, rectilyed and
a^choolizated, in an hot Bath; and in sew days the Spirit of Wine will attract
to it self all the Tincture; then separate the Spirit by distillation, and
there will remain an Essence; to which you shall add the aforesaid fixed
Powder, and this is your true, real and genuine Essence of Coral.

Virtues, Uses and Doses.
THis is a Cordial, and a mundifier of the Blood, as may appear in Leprous
persons; it is given to all Bodies, and in all kinds of Diseases; it is proper
for Fluxes as has been said in the Essence of Mercury: It comforts the Heart
and Stomach; restores the natural heat, and fortifies the radical moisture; it
dissolves glotted Blood; it helps and cures venomous Wounds, and malignant and
solid Ulcers: It Is given in Broth, the yelk of an Egg, Wine, Plantane-water;
etc. from half a Dram to a Dram.

CHAP. VII. His Essence of PEARLS.
OUR Essence of Pearls differs somewhat from that which is commonly described
by others; and is this which follows.

Digest your Pearls in Vinegar of Antimony, as before, and they will very
quickly be dissolved; then do as before in the Essence, or Tincture of Coral,
until the Salt become white; to wit, after it has lost its Acrimony by
washing; then dissolve it in Alchoolizated Spirit of Wine, and distill it seven
times, always upon the Caput mortuum, then separate the Spirit, and there will
remain your Essence as in others.

Virtues, Uses and Doses.
IT IS a most perfect Cordial; and not in the least inferior to Aurum potabile;
for it is given to restore weak and languishing Bodies; it is proper in malignant
Fevers, and the Plague, by reason of its Cordiality: It repells, Syncopes or
Swooning Fits, Passions of the Brain, as Apoplexies, Epilepsies, Palsies, and
Vertigoes, as also Hysterical passions and Hypochondriacal Fits; it is given in
Broth, or the yelk of an Egg, in appropriate Waters, from half a Dram to a
Dram.

CHAP. VIII. His Essence of EMERALDS.
TAke one part of the Fragments of Emeralds finely poudred; of Nitr^ and
Sulphur three parts; the which being put into a glas'd Vessel that will resi^
the Fire; you shall calcine it: Afterward being dulcifyed with warm Waters,
cal^ cine them twice, after the same manner as before, always with new Nitre
and Su^phur. After the third calcination and du^cification put your Powder,
into a crucible luted, into a Glass Furnace; or into a Reverberatory Fire, for
the space of six days afterward being put into a Glass Vesse^ pour on Spirit
of Salt rectified; as much as will overtop it four singers breadth; an^ so
digest them in an hot Bath for twenty days; then make a separation by
decantation into another Vessel; and, pouring on new Spirit of Salt upon the
foeces, digest them again as abovesaid, until all the Powder b^ dissolved. Put
all the Spirit into a Vesse^ very well stopped; and digest it for the space of a
month; which being past, distill it lightly, for the Tincture will remain in the
bottom; then you may augment its Virtue by adding Spirit of Wine Alchoolizated;
and digesting it, and afterward by separating it.

After the same manner is made your Essence of Carbuncles, Hyacynthes, and
other precious Stones.

Virtues, Uses and Doses.
I Have no need to say any thing of the Virtues of this Essence, good Wine
needing no Bush; for it is really a most potent Cordial against Poison, and
malignant, pestilential Fevers; and succors all Diseases of the Brain, as
Madness, Apoplexies and the like.

CHAP. IX. His Essence of Auripigmentum.
IT IS a very dextrous and perfect spaggirical Art, to be able on the o^ hand to
extract deadly Poison from use precious things; and on the other has to be able
to convert Poison it self in^ most perfect Antidotes, Alexipharmics a^^ true
Cordialls. As may be seen in Or^ment; which though it be one of the dealy
Poisons; yet may be produced from an admirable Essence; by reason of (...)
Cordiality; and its process is performed ^^ter this manner following.

Take one part of Auripigmentum, a^^ three parts of rectified Nitre, which
bei^^ put into an unglassed Earthen Vessel th^^ will resist the Fire; do as is
usual in Cro^^ Antimonii; being calcined, then wa^ off the Nitre with warm
Waters; the^ dry it, and do so again as abovesaid wit^ new Nitre; then repete
this exsiccatio^ after a new ablution; and adding two parts of Nitre, and two
of Sulphur Fire it a fresh; and du^c^^y it; but take heed of flame and sum:
After the third calcination and dulcification, put your Powder into a crucible
well luted (...). Furnace or Reverberatory Fire (...) space of one month.
Afterward, proceed with Spirit of Salt, as has been often said in other
foregoing processes, digesting and cohobating it oftentimes; all being
dissolved, separate the Spirit, to a dryness; then with Spirit of Wine; etc.
proceed as in other before.

Virtues, Uses and Doses.
THis Essence expells all manner of Poison very forcibly; and is of like Virtue
with Aurum potabile, Pearls, Corals, and precious Stones; it purifies impure
Bodies from all naughty corruption in the Veins: This is the chiefest among
other remedies against malignant Ulcers, Gangreens, or any other corrosions;
and roots out Scurffs and Scald-heads being anointed therewith. It Is given in
Broths or Waters, from a Scruple to a Dram.

CHAP. X. His Essence of common Salt.
FIltrate decrepitated Salt several times through a Paper in rain Water being
seven times distilled: Exhale the humidity and from what remains fixed,
diligently extract a Spirit with Bole-Armenia according to Art. Then cohobate
it four times upon the Caput mortuum, and being rectified from its impurities
keep it, for the use hereafter specified; then break your Retort, and make a
Salt of the Caput mortuum according to Art; filtrating it well and it will
begin to look red; then joining it with the aforesaid, digest it in Balneo, in
a Vessel well luted with Mastich and the white of an Egg: Then after a month is
past, rectify it again twice or thrice, and adding alchoolizated Spirit of
Wine, and making a new digestion, separate the Spirit of Wine, and there will
remain your Essence of Salt.

Virtues, Uses and Doses.
THis Essence will preserve as well dead Carkases as living wights from
Corruption, and is more effectual for Wounds, than your Balsams; it wonderfully
helps Ulcers; it dissolves the Gravel and Stone in the Blader; it mundifies the
Veins from any bad, gross quality; and cures Diseases proceeding from Blood; it
conglutinates, consolidates and cures Ulcers of the Reins and Blader: It helps
obstructions of the Spleen, Liver and visera; it very much prevails against
putrid Fevers; it removes infections of the Skin; amongst which are Scabs,
Pimples, Shingles, St. Anthony's Fire, Ringworms, etc. it suppurates all sorts
of hot Tumors; and dissolves cold ones, although they be schyrrous: It appeases
pains in the joints; it defends the radical moisture, keeps back old Age;
sharpens the Wit, 'its drank in Liquors from one Dram to two.

CHAP. XI. His Essence of Sal-prunella.
MIX Sal-prunella very well clarified with Common Salt decrepitated; 'its done
by the same Rule as in Common Salt. This differs not in Virtue from the Common,
chiefly in Fevers.

CHAP. XII. His Essence of Sulphur.
FIrst of all rubifie Vitriol, then adding an equal portion of Sulphur; put it
into a new pot as the custom is, and let the Sulphur be sublimated four times;
then mix with it Common Salt decrepitated, dissolved and coagulated, and
sublimeit thrice with the said flower, and then the flower will wax white, and
become volatile; and this keep for uses hereafter specified; Afterward take
Spirit of Sulphur drawn ^er Campanam, and rectified: And passing it a fresh
through filings of Steel; ^ake away its acrimony; so that it become as sweet as
Water; put your flowers, formerly laid by into this dulcified Spirit; so that
the Spirit may swim four singers breadth above them, and digest them in Balneo,
in a well Glazed Vessel well stopped; where your Spirit will assume a reddish
Color; separate the Spirit by decantation; still adding fresh until it will
tinge no more; then separate the Spirit by distillation; and the Tincture will
remain at the bottom; to which adding alchoolizated Spirit of Wine, digest them
for several days, until they be very well mixed; afterward separate them by
distillation, and in the bottom there will remain an Essence.

Virtues, Uses and Doses.
THis is a most cordial Essence; and nothing is more proper against contusions
in Wounds, even when the nerves are cut in two; it cures Punctures, or
Poysonons bitings, of any animal; it extinguishes the Poison, and heals the
Wounds. It Is a true Balsam in Diseases of the Lungs, even Ulcers thereof; it
succors Hectical, Pthysical, Asthmatical People. It conserves the radical
moisture; it eradicates pains of the joints; it comforts the nerves; it
consumes new and old impurities in Catarrhs; it restores hearing to the Deaf;
it is profitable to sordid Ulcers: it is to be drank from half a Dram to a
Dram, in Broths or Waters; and is outwardly used by it self alone, or with
proper Unguents.

CHAP. XIII. His Essence of Vitriol.
PHilosophers assert Vitriol to be the Blood of the macrocosmical machine; and
will needs have the Philosophers Stone, after which so many inquirers have
labored in vain, to be made of it. In this they affirm the true Force and
Virtue of the Universal Secret which is the Soul of minerals does consist. But,
indeed, and in truth, if through genuine spagyric Operations, there emerge so
many wonderful Virtues, from all sorts of minerals and seminerals; then
certainly not a few marvelous ones are to be extracted from Vitriol; as may
appear, from its stopping Fluxes of Blood, it being only calcined in the Sun;
and the many also that use it by applying it a distance, to preserve the parts
from corruption. Hence it may appear, that it must certainly be of much more
efficacy being mundifyed from its Impurities, and brought to its perfection by
an ingenious Artist. Now its process is as follows.

Take calcined Vitriol, and, a Spirit being extracted therefrom according to
Art, rectify it; and dissolve the foeces that remain in hot Water; then filtre
and dry them, repeating the said Operations several times, that you may gather
from thence a Spirit and Salt, as beforesaid. Afterward join the Spirit, being
thrice rectified, to the Salt; and distill them, cohobating them seven times;
but always dissolve the Caput mortuum, and fix it as before. Put your Salt into
a Vessel, that will endure the Fire, into a Reverbatory Fire for seven days,
until it begin to look red; then add it again to its Spirit well rectified,
and, in a Vessel very close stopped, digest it in an hot Balneo Mart^e; After
forty days distill it, and rectify the Spirit seven times and dissolve the Salt
in aqua vitae, rectified and alchoolizated, and six it; then join the Spirit
again, and digest it until it grow red; afterward separate the Spirit by
distillation; in the bottom there will remain a Tincture which you shall add to
fresh Spirit of Wine alchoolizated; digest it, and, extracting a Spirit
therefrom, there will remain your Essence.

Virtues, Uses and Doses.
NO one yet ever communicated a more famous medicine against all Diseases; for
it expells all kind of Poison whether vegetable, animal or mineral; it recreats
the vital, natural and animal Spirits. This is the Arcanum so long concealed by
many which is so wonderful and so universal; and which agrees so well with all
Diseases, all Ages and both Sexes; it exceeds your Aurum potabile, Panacea's,
or any other medicine under any denomination whatever: It Is given from a
Scruple to a Dram, in Broths, yelks of Eggs or other Liquors.

CHAP. XIV. His Antiepileptic Troches.
THere are many that affirm these to be your mineral cinabar; whose mother they
suppose to be the bowels of the Earth. But they are much mistaken; for that
which is called your mineral cinabar, is covered under the shadow of this of
ours, lest it should be called Antimony. The cinabar laid down by many Authors
against the Epilepsy, called mineral and arti^cial, is made after this manner
following.

Take the Caput mortuum, which remains after making of your compound Butter of
Antimony, and add thereto as much Mercury sublimate; then distill it for use in
a Glass well luted in an Alymbec. Toward the end make a fierce Fire, so that
the Antimony may ascend to the neck of the Glass, just like your clearest
cinabar, which will be mineral. Wash th^^ until it be dulcified, and then put
it into a Crucible, into an open, circulatory Fire for three hours together,
and kindle your Spirit of Wine three or four times.

Of this take one Ounce, Magistry of Pearls and Coralls, of each one Dram and
an half. Ambar and Safron, of each one Scruple, Elke's hoof one Dram; humane
Scull prepared without Fire three Drachms; faeculi Peoniae half an Ounce, Oil
of Ambar distilled, of the mucilage of Hart's-horn, and Scull, as much as will
be sufficient to form them into Troches; whereof give from a Scruple to half a
Dram, to Epileptics; and you will see Wonders; for this Arcanum has been
confirmed by many experiences.

CHAP. XV. His magistral Caput mortuum
TAke the Caput mortuum of Aqua fortis, made of Nitre rectified, and Vitriol
well calcined; and make a lixivium thereof with warm, distilled Rainwater, and
extract a Salt according to Art. Then the same Salt being dissolved again twice
in the said distilled Rainwater, until there appear chrystalls; take one part
of rectified Nitre, and two of the said Salt; and melting the Nitre in a
crucible with a Fire of the second degree, add the Salt by degrees; and melt
them all with the Fire for the space of three hours. Put this Mass into Aqua
fortis, extracted from the aforesaid things; and to every pound add flowers of
Antimony from the Regulus of Mars, three Ounces; leaf Gold three Drachms;
Coral, Pearls, Egg-shells, of each two Drachms; digest all in a warm place for
four days together; this done distill to a dryness; powder (...) which remains,
and imbibe it again in Aqua vitae digest for eight days, and distill to a
dryness; The Caput mortuum which remain keep in Glasses well stopped: And if you
shall give from twelve to eighteen drop thereof, you will consume
Hypochondriacal Diseases; for it is one of the most powerful remedies against
such Diseases. I expells all kinds of obstructions, an^ naughty Fevers; it is
good for Cachecti^ Bodies and frees solks from Dropsies.

CHAP. XVI. His Golden Cathar^^ic.
TAke of our Aureat, hereafter described half an Ounce; Spirit of Sulphur
rectified after the best manner; thre^ Ounces; digest them in a warm place At
fifteen days end distill them with (...) Glass retort with a Fire of Sand; an^
then cohobate the said Spirit with the sai^ Aureat nine times; and wash the
powde^ very well with Cordial Waters, and dry it. The dose is from four to ten
Grains, with Magistery of Mechoacan, Jalap, Seamony, or Extracts; which shall
be most convenient.

CHAP. XVII. His Antivenereal Pills.
TAke of our Calomelanos, Magistery of Lapis lazuli, extract of Rhubarb, Se^a,
Turbith, Buckthorn-berrys, of each two Drachms; Gum Guajaci or Ligni sancti the
weight of them all; magistery of Tar^ar dissolved in Oil of Cinnamon of each one
Dram and an half; Syrup of Fumitery as much as will suffice to form them into
Pills.

Virtues, Uses and Doses.
THese Pills very happily pull up all Venercal humors by the root; yea even ^f
the Bones be infected; Their dose ^s from half a Dram to one Dram; ^or
twenty, thirty or forty days together.

CHAP. XVIII. His Calomelanos.
TAke good Mercury, and put it into a Retort, with a double quantity of San^
both very well mixed; and put to the Fir^ by degrees; and pour it into a Vessel;
no^ shuting its mouth, that the impure part^ may remain in the Sand. Then
sublimat^ it with common Salt decrepitated, according to Art; and throwing away
the foeces, add the Salt again to that Mercury being more purely sublimated.
Then casting away the parts that remain sublime i^ more purely with new Salt;
do this seven times, and the foeces being at last separated, place the Retort
in a Reverberatory Furnace, with the sublimate of the seventh process, and
leave it there for two hours with a most vehement Fire. Then wash it with
Cordial waters many times, and imbibe in Juniper Aquae vitae, which must swim a
top a fingers breadth, and ^urn it, which you must do thrice.

CHAP. XIX. His Cathartic of Antimony with Vitriol, called His Catholicon.
TAke shining Antimony out of the Earth; that which is of a Golden Color, one
part, rubify'd Vitriol two parts, being ^urify'd and mixed, put them into a
Cru^ible that they all melt together: then ^owder the Mass, and put it into a
Re^ort very well luted with distilled Vinegar, that it may be uppermost four
fingers ^readth; and augment the Fire by little and little, and at last make a
most ardent ^ne, that all the Spirit may be exhaled; and it will evaporate with
a moderate ^eat, until there remain a sat Tincture. Then take of the Extract of
Rhubarb, Se^^a, Jalap, Turbith, black Hellebore, of each one Dram; Extract of
Aloes one Ounce, Essence of Juniper and Citron Pills of each, two Drachms; and
adding thereto half an Ounce of the abovesaid Tincture, digest them all with a
moderate heat; and so reduce to the consistence of an Extract; and you will
have a very excellent Catha^ ^^c, marvelous against all kinds of Fevers as well
acute as intermittent; excelling a^ the ^anchy magogues of other Physitian^ the
dose from eight to fifteen Grains.

CHAP. XX. His Troches against Gangrenes.
TAke the foeces of Common Regulu^ and put it into a moist place upon a Marble,
under a Vessel, and keep it from the rain, that the Air only penetrate it and
that it may be dissolved into an Oil which you shall exhale with a gentle Fire
and you will have a most pungent Salt whereof take one Ounce, Mercury sublimate
one Ounce, Barley and Lentil meal o^ each two Ounces; Gum tragaganth, two
Drachms; dissolve them in Rose Water, and make Troches of them, which will cure
all Gangreens, and wonderfully corrode peccant flesh.

CHAP. XXI. His Antihectic Powder.
TAke of the starryed Regulus of Mars, and English Tin, of each one part;
^ulverize them and mix them with three parts of rectified Nitre, and calcine
them according to Art; then take away all the ^altness with hot water, as is
usual, and put the white powder again into a Rever^eratory Furnace for three
days, or in a Glass, or Potters-Furnace; and imbibe ^t again in Aqua vitae
rectified, which you shall kindle to burn; and this you shall do thrice. Take
one Ounce of this Powder, of Vipers prepared half an Ounce; Sage dried and
powdered one Ounce and a half, then throw live Frogs into a pot; shut it close
till they be dead; and then put them into an Oven till they be so dry as they
may be powdered; and mix three Ounces of these with the ingredients abovesaid;
and of this compound give from one Dram to two; for forty days together.

CHAP. XXII. His Aqua vitae, against pains of the Joint
TAke four handfuls of ground Ivy of Cypress leaves, Sage, R^lema^, Spike,
Netles, of each one handful; o^ Elm Bark, and leaves, of (...) Ounces: Dwarf
Elder two handfuls; all these being beaten, in a Mortar, infute them in two
pownds of Generous Wine; and the^ (...) and extract the forth part. T^ (...)
called Aqua vitae, add half o^ (...) the aforesaid green Herbs, and (...) of
Earthworms, which have (...) washed well with Wine, before; and (...) pounds
of Dogs grease, and then di^^l them again, extracting the half. Then ^^d the
third part again of the aforesaid Herbs, Worms and sat, and distilling them
again extract the third part; and so you will have a perfect Aqua vitae, which
will be excellent good to comfort and resolve all Diseases of the Joints and
Feet-Gout.

CHAP. XXIII. His Anodine, or Narcotic of Vitri^l.
TAke of Roman Vitri^l and Tartar of each one pound; filings of Steel half a
pound; the Tartar and Vitriol being pulverized put them into a Glass Cucurbit;
being first well mixed; then imbi^e them in distilled Vinegar, swimming two
singers breadth above; and digest for three days. Which being past, congele them
with a moderate Fire; and imbibe them in Vinegar as aforesaid; and follow the
aforesaid order; After you have congel'd them add distilled Vinegar, which must
overtop it six singers breadth; and with a mild Fire it will very suddenly take
a red color. Then put fresh Vinegar thereto, until the Tin^^ure be extracled;
and to the said Vinegar add Oil of Tartar per deliquium: For so all the Sulphur
will descend to the bottom of the Glass: then you shall dry it well; and
immerge it in three pounds of rectified Aqua vitae; then place the Vessel, well
stopped with Mastick and the white of an Egg, in hot Horsedung; which you must
change every four days; At the fortieth days end distill; and reserve the
Tincture remaining in the bottom of the Glass, according to the custom of
Tinctures: And here you have a true Narcotic.

Virtues, Uses and Doses.
THis Narcotic was invented chiefly to chase away away all acute, burning and
malignant Fevers, and especially in deliriums; as also against Hysterical
passions. Colic, and Nephritic pains; and against all Diseases wherein
Laudanum, or Nephenthe is to be given, this Narcotic is safer; the dose is from
five Grains to twelve.

CHAP. XXIV. (...).
TAke one Ounce of (...) Gold, Crude Antimony four Ounces: mix them and melt
them together in a crucible: but with an equal, not a vehement Fire; lest the
(...) separated by too much Fire. Atter you have melted them let them cool; and
then powder them finely; after that calcine them by degrees with a gentle Fire
after the same manner as done in calcining of Glass; always stiring them with
an Iron rod. You shall know them to be calcined enough when the Antimony and
Gold shall become very white; and will not cleave together: nor being put upon
burning coals will smoke at all. Glass is made from hence by putting the Cal^
in a crucible in a vehement Fire of Fusion for an hour; and then ^ts perfect
when the Vitrification appears very clear and of the color of a Carbuncle Stone.

This truly is somewhat a difficult Operation; and sometimes fails the Artist
but you shall have a more clear manner and method for the compounding this
Arcanum, in another Work, which I shall expose to light; where I shall
explicate the very proper and genuine one to the young Student. This as it is a
richer preparation with Gold than that which Crollius, Senertus, Schroderus and
others have left us, so it is a more Cordial one: Lastly this out Aureatum is of
a vomitive and solutive nature; but challengs to it self, the first place among
the Vomitives; because the Gold defends the Heart and Viscera. It does not only
equal the Virtues of the Antimonial Cup but excells them: Its dose is from two
Grains to five.

CHAP. XXV. His Catholic Water.
TAke of the juice of Bryonie, Buckthorn berryes, Celandine, Eglantine berryes,
of the bark of Elder, dwarf Elder, Germander; of each two Ounces; Spirit of
Wine rectified two pounds; digest them for two days space, then distill them and
to the distilled water add your Extract of Rhubarb, Agaric, Sena, Hedge Hyssop,
of each half an Ounce; Magistery of Mechoacan three Drachms; solutive Magistery
of Tartar two Drachms; Cinnamon, Mastick, Ginger and Aniseed of each half a
Drac^m. Spirit of Vitriol stibiated six Drachms; and digest them in Horse-dung:
At twenty four days end strain them and keep them in a Vessel very close
stopped: This is called Catholic, because it works truly without any
nausconsness, and (...) all Diseases wherein purging is requisite, it is very
pro^^^^able; and it is to be taken either in Bro^^s, Wine or Water; the dose is
from one Dram to three or four at most.

CHAP. XXVI. His First Alexipharmac Troches.
TAke of Oriental Bezoar Stone, Hartshorn prepared, Jovial and mineral Bezoar:
Of the true Unicorn and Rhinoceros's horn of each two Drachms, Earth of Malta,
yellowish Bole-armenia, Bohemian Earth; Terra sigillata, of each half an Ounce;
Contrayervae five Drachms; Spodium, all the Fragments of precious Stones,
prepared half a Dram. Magistery of Pearls; of all Corals; of Boars teeth, of
each one Dram; twenty leaves of Gold; let all be poudred and with the
Mucilage of Hartshorn make Troches.

Virtues, Uses and Deses.
THey free the Diseased from all manner of Poison, malignant and erratic
Fevers; and are mavelous good against menstrual Fluxes, spitting and vomiting
of Blood; Pleurisy and pain at Heart. And are in a more especial manner
profitable to Women with child that fear Abortion; their dose is from half a
Scruple to a Scruple in Specifies.

CHAP. XXVII. The Second Viper Alexipharmic Troches.
TAke yellow Monks-hood, Swallowwort, Scorzonora, Contrayervae, Citrion Pills,
of each one Dram. Viper powder half a Dram; right Unicorn's-horn, true
Bezoar Stone, and Rhinoceros's-horn, bone of Harts-heart, of each half a
Dram. Jovial Bezoard, red Crystal prepared, of each one Dram; let them be
poudred, and with mucilage of Hartshorn make them into Troches; which will
vanquish Poisons and malignant Fevers, Pustles, Smal-pox and Meazles, and the
like; the dose is from one Scruple to half a Dram.

CHAP. XXVIII. His Third (...) of Alexipharmic Troches.
TAke of Tormentil Root, Angelica, Carline, or White thistle, Gentian,
Contrayerva, yellow Monks-hood, Swallowwort, Scorzonora, Master-wort, of each
one Dram; Juniper and Bay Berries of each one Ounce; Ivy, has an Ounce;
Cinnamon, yellow Sanders, Wood of Moes, of each two Scruples. Bone of an
Harts-heart half an Ounce; you shall ponder all these, and put them into a
G^^s^en Vessel and besprinkle them with Essence of Tartar three Drachms; adding
red Crystal prepared, Oriental Bezoar-Stone, Mag^^ery of Pearls, true
Unicorns-horn, of each o^ Scruple; Magistery of Ambar, Salt of Jupiter, leaf
Gold of each twenty five Grains. Of the Mucilage of Hearts horn and gum
Tragacanth made with Pome-citron-water, as much as will suffice to make all
into Troches according to Art.

Virtues, Uses and Doses.
THese Troches expel the Plague and Pestilential Diseases, and malignant
Fevers; and are profitable and powerful in all Syncoeps or swooning of the
Heart; and Arsenical Medicines; and such like Poisons; the dose of them is from
a Scruple to half a Dram.

CHAP. XXIX. His Cordial, or Balsam of Life.
TAke of our Universal Panacea with Gold, of the Essence of Gold and Silver, of
each two Drachms; of the Essence of Ambar-Grise, twenty five Grains, of the
Essence of Pearls three Drachms; of the Tincture of Vipers half an Ounce; of
the Essence of Harts-blood one Ounce; mix them and add to them true Oriental
Opobalsmum four Grains; and you have a very great Cordial to comfort Nature
with all; the dose of this Balsam is from half a Scruple to a Scruple.

CHAP. XXX. His Balsamum Salutis.
TAke of the Essence of Ambar-Grise made with Spirit of Roses, of the
Quintessence of Roses; of the Essence of Juniper-berryes, and Citron peels of
each one Scruple; Oil of the flowers of Pome-citrions, half a Scruple; mix them
and give it with simple Sugar of Roses, from two drops to six.

CHAP. XXXI. His Bezordicum minerale.
OUR Bezoardicum minerale differs but little from that Common one, which the
Chemists compound; but it is more correct and safer; because the correction of
Antimony and Mercury is while they be purged from all their evil and malignant
qualities by the Fire. Its process is as follows.

Take Regulus of Antimony; but let it be of that which has afterward been
purified in a most ardent Fire; for sixteen hours together; and also Mercury
sublimate that has been made of it, as before in our Calomelanos; and distill
them by an Alembic; as the custom is, extracting a Butter, as in Bezoardicum
minerale, laid down by other Authors: Then dulcify it by washing often with
warm Waters, and dry it in a temperate heat; being dried imbibe in Spirit of
Nitre, which must overtop it four singers breadth, and then distill; and after
cohobate thrice, and dulcify again as before. Put your dulcification into an
Earth Glass'd Vessel, that wi^^ endure the Fire; and kindle your Fire for about
three days together; for this is its true manner and method of its decoction.
Then imbibe the Spirit of Wine; which you shall kindle about five or six times,
and then you are certain to have the perfect and best Bezoardicum minerale.

This is that of my Master's; and i^ you take notice of the compositions o^
others; you shall not need to be altogether so diligent and exact. He used it
in sit sorts of Broths, giving a Scruple (...) one dose; as may appear from
his, and my, Observations; and because it is well corrected and concocted, so
that it will never harm any one, he gave it to all that were troubled, not only
with a malignant, acute and pestilential Fever; but also in Cachectic
distempers; and in the Smallpox and Meazles, and other such like Diseases; the
dose is as before, from half a Scruple to one Scruple.

CHAP. XXXII. His Bezoardicum Joviale.
THis is composed after the same manner as the former, nothing excepted, but
only differs in the Composition; for first ^ou must make a starryed Begulus
Martis, and join to ^t by Fire a like quantity of ^he more perfect Tin; and the
aforesaid Mercury sublimate, as in the process of our Calomelanos; But be sure
you omit nothing of the right ordering and making the aforesaid mineral. For
that is it which is so much celebrated by my Master's using (...) in his
practice; whereof he gave, and to do I, in all desperate Diseases, from half a
Scruple to half a Dram.

There are other Solar Bezoardies made by adding Gold; and also Lunar ones by
^dding Silver; as they are described by other Authors: But I think it enough
not to depart from the Fire, and manner of ^aking which I have laid down in
the^nineral Bezoar. For if you shall do otherwise they shall not obtain their
whole Virtue. The Correction of the correct flowers, crocus and auratum, is
done after this manner.

Take, the Flower, Saffron, or Glass, and put it into a Retort with rectified
Spirit of Vitriol, to digest, for the space of five days, in a moderate hot
place; the^ distill to a dryness; and chohobate six times more; always
distilling to a dryness; then dulcify with Cordial Waters; and being dry imbibe
it in generous Aqua vitae; which you shall kindle thereon five times; for after
this manner your Antimony is much corrected; and being so corrected they are to
be compounded after this manner.

An Appendix.
HAving not a mind to pass by the wonderful prodigy of Bezoardies; I have
given thee this Additional one; whereby Reader, thou will not disdain to cast
thine eye upon a very fair Event which ^hapned at Venice.

The most Illustrious and most excellent Andreas Donatus the most worthy
Senator of this Republic, and to whom I am very much obliged, commanded me to
visit, one John Baptist Tola, who was Sick; I went, and found him to be about
sixty five years Old, of a dull, melancholic temperature; formerly given to
drink much generous Wine; and then at that time laboring under a continual,
malignant Fever, for one day past; and troubled in his head with sumes, and an
obscure delirium; his pulse was tremulent and small; his Urine thick and
troubled; his eyes darkish, almost glassy; his faculties very abject: at
length, that I may contract much into a little, from all signs that appeared
mortal; I gave out that I despaired of his life; which also did a most
excellent Physician; who had administered opportunely many remedy's, according
to rules of Art: We both concluded that there was no other way left but to
succor him with Cordials; and told his Servants there was but a very short
period to death. Yet I asked this most excellent Physician, whether he thought
best, at la^^ to try your Solar and Jovial Bezoardies; for many times good
events follow from those in these cases; because these Bezoardies compel nature
to expel those things, by Sweat, Urine or Seige, which impel the miserable
patient almost to death. He con^rm'd this my opinion; and commanded presently
to be given, six Grains of the Solar, and six of Jovial Bezoar, in Cordial
waters; but he sent to the Governor, a very good Spagyric and a perfect
operator, that he would allow of the aforesaid advice; The patient took it; and
voyded much black choler by seige; but his faculties being exhausted from a
Convulsion, which followed, they were almost destitute of strength, and began
to express signs of greater debility; whereupon his domestics being affrighted;
his Son being a Presbyter comes to me, not only inflamed with anger: But from
the Physicians words signifying to him that his death proceeded from that
powder of the Bezoardies; who though he know it could not in the least be from
that; yet he endeavors to lay the blame upon me, because of that sudden,
dangerous motion: His Son, I say, upbraiding me with the heinousness of the
fact; threatened to accuse me concerning the death of his Father; But at length
such an Evacuation, by the Almighties permission, carried off the black bile,
which nature of it self was not able to do; and so, as it were being dead,
recal'd him to life. Since which time, always when I am in any Consultation, I
never propound any thing contrary to the opinion of others; being assured that
the least evil that shall happen will be attributed to me.

CHAP. XXXIII. His Antipleuretic Extract.
TAke of the Extract of wild Poppy flowers, two Drachms, red Mallows, of Gum
extracted from Wood of Oak; of each one Dram and an half; of the pleura of a
Man, or Boar, two Drachms; of the filings of a Boars Teeth, three Drachms; of
the true Unicorn, Magistery of Coral, of the inward Peels of Filberds, Box
flowers, Salis prunella, of each one Dram; make a Mass with the aforesaid
extracts, and you will have a prodigious composition against a Pleuresy; whose
dose is from a Scruple to half a Dram.

CHAP. XXXIV. His Hysterical Extract.
TAke of the Extract of Mugwort, and Mother-wort of each three Drachms; Extract
of Savin, and Juniper Berryes of each one Dram; foeculae Aronis, half an
Ounce, Foecula of Bryony two Drachms, Extract of Gith, and Assarabacca of each
one Dram, and an half; Magistery of Ambar four Drachms. Salt of Jupiter four
Scruples; Seeds of Hart-wort, Nepente, of each two Scruples; Seeds of
Bishopsweed, Rue, Caraways, Anise, Cardamomes of each two Drachms; Castor, four
Scruples; mix them all according to Art; and give thereof from half a Dram to
two Drachms; for it is greatly profitable in Hysteric passions.

CHAP. XXXV. His Nephritical Extract.
TAke dried Rupturewort, three handfulls, Eryngo, Rest-harrow, Burdock, of each
one handful; Juniper and Bayberryes, of each two Drachms; Seeds of Gromwel,
Netles, Onions, Saxifrage, Anise, Fenil, of each two Ounces; of all these make
an Extract according to Art; to which add Magistery of Lapis Judaicus, mountain
Crystal, Crab's-eyes, Eggs-shells, Salt of Bean-shells, Salt of Flower of
Ammoniac; of each one Dram; ferment all these together, and you have a great
Remedy against pains of the Reins; its dose is from a Scruple to half a Dram.

CHAP. XXXVI. His Golden Extract.
TAke of Bay-beryes, Persian Almonds, of each four Ounces; Flowers of Nuts,
(...) Elder, of wild Grapes; of the (...), Origanum, Pennyroyal, of (...) one
handful; Carot-seed, Ani-seed, F^^il-seed, Cummin-seed, of each two Ounces;
Cinnamon, Cloves, of each half an Ounce; wood of Aloes, one Dram; make an
Extract according to Art; to which add true Balsamof Peru, Oil of Nutin^gs; of
the Skie-color'd Oil of Turpentine; of each half an Ounce; mix and ferment them
together; and the dose is from half a Dram to one Dram.

CHAP. XXXVII. His Golden Diaphoretic.
THis is described by many Authors to be that Sulphur which is in the foeces of
the vulgar Regulus; which being beaten and boild with Vinegar, the Sulphur is
precipitated to the lower part; afterward washing it very often, and drying
it, they use it to mundify the Blood, and provoke Sweat. But our's is more
correct; because the aforesaid forms being finished; it is again calcined in a
Furnace for twenty four hours; or in a circular Fire, till it wax white,
together with the fourth part of fulminant Gold. Then it is digested in ardent
Aqua vitae, which is kindled thrice; and so you have a very good Diaphoretic,
in Pleuresies and pestilential Fevers; and is given from sixteen Grains to
twenty.

CHAP. XXXVIII. His Common Diaphoretic.
THis is the Common Regulus, thrice calcined; always with double quantity of
Nitre rectified, and then dulcified, and Aqua vitae kindled thereupon; It is
given from a Scruple to half a Dram, or to one Dram; against all chronic
diseases; where it will work upon them by sweat, or insensible transpiration.

CHAP. XXXIX. His Fixed Diaphoretic.
IT is the fixed Powder of Father Bazil Valentine, which he proposes for an
universal remedy; and sometimes under the name of Bazil's fixed Panacea;
described in the Triumphal chariot of Antimony of the same Author.

CHAP. XL. His universal liquid Panacea, with Gold.
TAke an Ounce of leaf Gold, and calcine it with Sulphur, in a circulatory Fire
for eight hours; adding Sulphur four times; then wash with warm water; and
being dried join it to Oil of Antimony, made after this manner.

Take of the Regulus of Antimony, Mercury sublimate, of each four Ounces; mix
them well in a M^^tar, and distill them with a Retort; as you use to do in ^^um
glaciale, or Butter of Antimony: Add then Fire by degrees, till it be converted
into Butter; putting coals also to the neck of the Retort; put that Oil into a
Wine Cellar upon a stone, with a Vessel under it, to receive drop by drop; and
you have an Oil; to one Ounce of which add one Ounce of Gold calcined by
circent, as aforesaid. Then put your Vessel in a warm place, digesting for a
month together, for it will be tinged into a Golden color. Then add rectified
Spirit of Wine, and put it into an hot place, as before, and the Aqua vitae
will attract all the Gold to it self: strain it, and adding Aqua vitae again
until it be tinged, exhale the Oil; and the Powder will remain; you shall put
this with eight Ounces of crude Antimony, and twenty Ounces of Oil of Nitre
made per deliquium, into a Vessel, which you shall stop very close, to digest.
At a months end add a quart of rectified Spirit of Wine; and digest again; and
the Tincture will in a short time be robbed of its menstruum, join this Spirit
with that of the Gold; and add another Spirit upon the Oil of Nitre; until the
color be detected; for it ought to remain, as it was when it was first placed.
Then filtrate these Spirits through a Paper; and distill them with cinders, by
degrees; until there remain four Ounces of the Tincture, in the lower part of
the Retort: And this is our universal liquid Panacca; which works by
transpiration; And gently forces the vital faculties, to do those things which
Nature has need of; without doing any damage. Many Hectical, Phthysical, and
Hydropical Patients have been cured and obtained their health by me, with this:
And you may give thereof from eight drops to twenty; with Specifies; and it
works sooner or later as the strength is.

CHAP. XLI. His Tincture, or true Oil of Sweet Antimony.
TAke of your clear Hyacinthine Glass of Antimony, four Ounces; Oil of Nitre
made by deliquium, eight Ounces; the Antimony being beaten mix it with the
aforesaid Oil, in a glazed Vessel well stopped; and digest for a month with an
equal and temperate Fire; and that Oil will become reddish. Then add rectified
Spirit of Wine, as you did before in your liquid Panacea, till the Oil be
deprived of its Tincture. Then extract the Spirit and Tincture, which rests in
the lower part.

Virtues, Uses and Doses.
IT IS very precious against all kinds of Diseases, and little inferior to the
Panacea aforesaid. It Is excellent good in inward Wounds and corrosive Ulcers;
and other pernicious Diseases. Its dose is from eight to ten drops, in Wine, or
other Specifies.

Bazilius and others write that bodies are renewed and made to grow young by
this; for it mundifies all impurities of the humors; which pollute the Blood;
and is a very great-Cordial. It helps Hydroprical, Cachectical, Hectical, and
Phthysical, and all such like infirmities after a wonderful manner.

Many others have written of this; but not easily to be done, for if you
observe the manner of this operation, there is no need of distilling your
menstruum; for your Aqua vitae may be removed, and it will serve for other
solutions.

Other Tinctures are made after the same manner, and all good; but these two
excel the other; that likewise which is extracted from crude Antimony is
mavelous; because the simple Nitre attracts the Tincture; and the Fire
consumes nothing thereof; and is called a Panacea. It is extracted from the
vulgar Regulus of the third degree; from Ambars, from Regulus of Mars, from
Regulus of Jupiter, from Crocus metallorum, from flowers of Antimony; from
calcination of the same; and if it be extracted with the said menstruum, it
will be much better, than from distilled Vinegars, and other such liquors; its
dose is from half a Scruple to one Scruple.

His Corrosive Oils are of two sorts; to wit, his Oleum glactale, that is the
butter, that I speak of to dissolve Gold; and this corrodes all bad flesh: The
other is a liquor which is made of the foeces of the vulgar Regulus, by
deliquium.

Those are accounted for Essences by many, which I call by the name of
Tinctures or Extracts. But I call those Essences which are made after this
manner.

Take of the Simple from which you will extract an Essence, Flowers, Barks,
Peels, Seeds, Roots, if you can have them all; and macerate them in rectified
Spirit of Wine, for two days; then distill to a dryness. Then imbibe that Spirit
again with the herbs or flowers of the same, and digest them again in a Vessel
well stopped; and distill a fresh; and follow the same course twice; then
circulate, and you will have a vegetable Essence, for your use. Those which he
used for the most part are those of Wormwood, Mint, Rosemary, Sage, Spike,
Lillies of the Valley, Marygoldleaves, flowers of the Lentil tree, Peony, Oak,
Angelica, Carline, Swallow-wort, Celandine, Eyebright, Bistort, Tormentil,
Contrayerva, Jumper and Bay-berryes, Ani-seed and Fenil-seed, and Cummin,
Parsnip, and Carots-seeds, Cardamoms, Galanga, Citron-peels, and such like.

CHAP. XLII. QVINTESSENCES.
THese are made after another manner than your Essences; for you materials must
be sermented; as mos^ writers direct; and then an Oil separate^ by
distillation; what is separated is the^ true Quintessence; your liquid Tincture^
are extracted with Spirit of Wine; by exhaling part thereof. Some Extracts are
made with distilled waters by the help (...) acid Liquors: They are extracted
from minerals and semiminerals, with their preper menstruums; as may more fully
appear from our Laboratory.

CHAP. XLIII. FLINIRS.
SInce we mentioned these in our Observations, it is necessary therefore to
ex^licate some of them. As for your Flixir Proprietatis, I always followed
Crellius's way of process; and can testify of its very good effects. And I
add, with him, of the Essence of Wormwood and Mint; as for example two Ounces
of the Elixir, of the Essence of Wormwood and Mint of each one Ounce; digest
them together, and use them, for it is a great stomachie. And so I add to the
same, of the Essence of Celandine, Watercresses, Mustard Seed, Snails, of each
equal parts, and I digest them for a month; of which I give from a Scruple to
half a Dram. Against all atrabiliary distempers, and Scorbutic and
Hypochondriac, with very happy success.

CHAP. XLIV. An Elixir against the Scurry and Hypochondrical effects.
TAke two pounds of Elixir Propietatis, Essence of Ambar two Ounces, Essence of
Capars and Tamarisk-Bark. Essence of the middle bark of Ash, of each half an
Ounce; white Dittany roots, Rhapontic, Polypody, Scorzonera, Fern, Sweet root,
of each two Drachms; Watercresses, Wall-house-leek, Germander, Celandine,
Ceterach, Harts-rongue, Agrimony, Vine leaves with its flowers, Liverwort,
Fumatory; flowers of Broom, Centaury, St. John's-wort, of each two handfuls,
Broom-seeds, Fenel-seed, of each half a Dram; Lignum sancium raspt, and its
bark, of each four Ounces; Salsaparilla, one Ounce and an half, Sassafras four
Ounces; Salt of Tartar half an Ounce; ^eat them and infuse them all in well
rectified Spirit of Wine, and dephlegmated; as much as will suffice, till they
be well imbibed, and it overtop them two fingers breadth, digest them eight
days, distill, and in the distilled repote a new composition, ^s before; it is
marvelous for Hypochondriacs, and for those that are assi^red with cold Rheums;
the dose is from one Scruple to half a Dram in appropriate vehicles.

CHAP. XLV. Elixir Nephriticum.
TAke of true Nephritic wood one Ounce and an half; Camomil, Melilot, ground
Ivy, Golden-rod, Flewellin, St. John's-wort, with its seed and flowers,
Rupture-wort, or the Turkish herb; of each three handfulls, Rest-harrow root,
Pimpernel, Saxifrage, of wild Rose-seeds, and Gromwel of each two Ounces,
winter Cherryes three Ounces; Juniper and Ivy-berryes, of each one Ounce and an
half; being all beaten, put them into a Vessel well stopped, with Spirit of Wine
terebinthinated; which must be uppermost the breadth of four singers; then
digest for eight days; then distill; and again infusing the same things green,
do as before; the dose is of this from a Scruple to half an Ounce: And it is an
excellent thing for Gravel and the Stone.

CHAP. XLVI. An Vterine Elixir.
TAke Mug-wort Rupture-wort, Feverfew, Peny-Royal, Catmint, of each three
Drachms; Peels of Citrons and Pome-Citrons, of each half a Dram; of the roots
of Swallow-wort, Birth-wort, Peony, Madder, Bryony, Oris, white Ditany,
Zedoary, Ani-seed and Cardamum-seeds of each half an Ounce; Bazil two Drachms,
Bay-berryes, two Ounces; Ginger, Cinnamon, Nutmegs and Saffron, of each one
Ounce, being all beaten, digest them in Spirit of Wine, alchoolizated, three
pints, in a Vessel close stopped, and in a warm place, to wit, in Horse-dung, or
Balneo Martae; at fourteen days end distill in Balneo Mariae; and then add to
the foeces, a pint of new Spirit of Wine; and digest again in an hot place. At
eight days end separate the tinged Spirit by inclination; and exhale the
Tincture with a very gentle Fire, until it be converted into a mellagenous
substance. Add this to the first distillation; burn the foeces to ashes; and
extract a Salt with water of Mugwort; which you shall join to the aforesaid
Elixir, together with an Ounce of Tincture of Tin. It works alter a heavenly
manner in diseases of the Womb; and all diseases that draw their origin from
the Womb. The dose is from half a Dram to a Dram, in proper Liquor; and may
be administered during several days, according as necessity requires.

CHAP. XLVII. His Antiepileptical Extract.
TAke of the Extract of an humane cranium, made according to Art, half an
Ounce; Extract of Box, the root and seed of Peony, Oak-wood, Flowers of Lilly
of the Valley, and Flowers of Line-tree of each two Drachms; of the mucilage of
an Hartshorn of one year old, three Drachms; of true Oriental Bezoar Stone,
true Unicorns-horn, true Elks-hoof, of each one Dram; of the Extract of
^wallows and Magpies, before they fly out of their nests, Peacocks-dung, of
each one Dram and an half; of our Narcotic Vitriol, Salt of Silver, A^bar, of
each two Drachms, Magistery of Pearls, Corals and Saphirs, of odoriferous
slowers of Sweet-root, the true Balsam of Peru of each half a Dram; of our
sixth Diaphoretic of Antimony, half an Ounce; of our Universal Tin^^ure of
Antimony with Gold, three Drachms; mix them and make a compound whereof you
shall give either in Pills, or proper Liquor, from half a Scruple to half a
Dram; for a dose, for fifteen days, in the morning in the wain of the moon.

With this have many Epileptics been wholly freed, though I gave it to some for
months together, more or less; and though it be laborious and costly, yet it
challenges a place amongst the most powerful. Used after the same manner, it is
very good against all Megrims, Palsies, Apoplexies, and capital diseases
proceeding from a cold distemper.

CHAP. XLVIII. His Polycrest, or Tincture of many uses.
TAke of the roots of Angelica, Carline, white Dittany, Bistort, Tormentil, of
each three Drachms; Swallow-wort, Gentian, Rhapontic, Scorzonera, true Acorus,
of each half an Ounce, of the leaves of Wormwood, Southernwood, ground Ivy, of
each half an handful; of the slowers of Rosemary, Centaury the less, Clary,
Betony, Pome-citrons of each one pugil, of Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Cloves, of each
one Dram, Myrrh, Mastic, Aloes-Succotrine, of each two Scruples, red Coral
prepared, Hartshorn, Mother of Pearl prepared, of each one Dram and an half;
Saffron one Scruple, Assa dulcis, Spikenard, of each one Dram, Peels of
Citron and Pome-citrons, of each one Ounce and an half; of all the sorts of
Sanders, of each half an Ounce; beat all these, and infuse them in a glassen
Vessel well stopped, in nine pints of choice alcoolizated Spirit of Wine, to
digest for fifteen days; then separate your Tincture by decantation, and add
thereto the Salt made of the foeces according to Art; this Tincture excels in
many Virtues; as your Elixir vitae; it recreats the vital Spirits; and expels
from them all venemo^s Vapors; it is given in all malignant diseases, in time of
the Plague, and against all Poisons, from a Scruple to a Dram.

CHAP. LI. His greater Elixir of life.
TAke of the juice of Baum eight pounds, generous Wine four pounds, shavings of
crude Hartshorn three pounds; Unicorns-horn Bole-Armeny, of each half a pound;
three Vipers the skins taken of, without their heads, tails or intrals, and
distill them through an Alymbic well tinned; which has a great refrigeratory;
but let the fragments of the Hartshorn and Unicorns-horn be put in the neck of
the Alymbic that they may receive all the sum. After you have distilled add
new juice and Wine to the distillings again; and always new Hartshorn, and
three Vipers, as abovesaid, do this operation nine times; to every time adding
fresh juice, and new Wine. And changing your Vessel according to the capacity;
the last time let all things be added to the aforesaid Polycrest Tincture, and
let them be digested in Horse-dung, or in a warm Balneo Mariae for a month in
capable glazed Vessels, well closed: Then distill to dryness, extracting, not
only from all the foeces, but also from the shavings of the horns, and earths,
a Salt according to Art; which being mixed with the distillation, you shall
circulate for two months.

This Elixir, although disticult, yet it is not very chargeable; but I never
sound a more precious one, among the many that I have used: for it operates
more cordially then that of the most Serene grand Duke of Tuscanie's. It may be
given in all diseases wherever the heart and viscera have need of help; and to
resist poison and putrefaction, etc. Its dose is from half a Dram to two
Drachms; neither has it the smell of Aqua vitae, but a most grateful and sweet
one.

CHAP. L. His Tincture of Vipers.
TAke twenty Vipers, their skins pulled off and imbibe them in Spirit of Salt;
and then add white Dittany of Crete, Tormentil, Bistort, Swallow-wort,
Scorzonera, of each one Ounces; as much generous White Wind as will serve to
imbibe them, which must overtop them two singers breadth; and digest in Balneo
Mariae, or Ho^se-d^ng; at eight days end boil them in the same glazed Vessel
for two hours in B. M. and strain them hard: Burn the dried foeces and extract
a Salt from them; what remains is to be twice purified with the white of an
Egg, and to be put into a warm B. M. again for three days; with moderate heat;
for in this time it will be red like Blood.

This is Cordial and Alexipharmic; profitable for Hectical, Phthysical,
Hydropical, Cachectical, putrid and malignant Fevers, and in time of the Pest;
and many use it for a preservative, for they affirm it clears the Blood; the
dose is from a Scruple to half a Dram.

CHAP. XL. His Antinephritic Extrall.
TAke Firr-wood rasp'd and its bark one pound, Nephritic-wood half a pound;
seven Ounces of the inward bark of Fil^erds, Saxifrage and Pimpernel, Pelitory
of the wall, Pupture-wort, of each one handful; ^iquiris, Rest-harrow. Burdock,
and ^ovage roots, of each one Ounce and an hal^; ripe Juniper-berryes, Persian
Almonds, Cherry stone kernels, of each three O^nces: of the seeds of Carots,
Percely, ^impernel, Onions, Netles, Broom, of each half an Ounce; beat and
br^ise them all; then take of the juice of Rupture-wort, ground Ivy, Pellitory,
Onions, ^itrons, Redishes, of each one pound; generous Wine three pints; and
with all the aforesaid materials, put it into a capable glazed Vessel, well
stopped in Balneo for eight days; then press them strongly, and clarify them with
the white of an Egg, and strain them, and exhale by an Al^^^^^ in B. M. until
they become in form of a liquid Extract. Then you shall add these things
following; Magistery of Crab's-eyes, ^gg-shells, Mother of Pearl, mountain
Crystal; of each one Dram and an half; volatile Salt of Beans, Pellitory,
Ambar, Urine, of each one Dram, mix them and keep them for use.

This is a very great Remedy against all kinds of Stones, Gravel and the like;
and excels others in extinguishing pains of the Reins: The dose is from half a
Dram to a Dram either in Pills, or proper Liquors.

CHAP. LII. His Antifebrile.
TAke of China root, bark of Tamarisk, and Ash, of each one Ounce; leaves of
Germander, Celandine, Pimpernel, the lesser Turnsoil of each a handful;
distilled water of the juice of Turnsoil, and from the juice of tender tops of
Ash leaves of each three pounds; Spirit of Vitriol stibiated two Drachms; being
all beaten, infuse them in the aforesaid waters, in a Glass Vessel well stopped,
in B. M. at twelve days end extract all the moisture by strong expression; and
make a Salt of the dried and burnt foeces; make an Extract of the Liquor by the
heat of a Balneum, according to Art; then take of this Extract two Ounces,
Extract of Rhubarb, Sena, of hedge Hysop, of each half an Ounce; Magistery of
Mechoacan, and Jalap of each one Dram; of Salt of the abovesaid foeces, Salt
of the lesser Centaury, Gentian, and Worme-wood vitriolated, of vitriol of
Mars, of each one Dram; Magistery of long small Snails-shells of the Lake,
half an Ounce; Magistery of Tartar solutive, two Drachms; all these you must
ferment for twelve days; and this is given in all kinds of Fevers, as well
intermitting as continual. It stays the Vapors of Fevers, and purges
pleasantly; and is one of the most perfect that can be given; and besides it
has never harmed any one; the dose is from half a Dram to a Dram and an
half.

CHAP. LIII. His stibiated Spirit of Vitriol, which enters into his Aqua
Catholica and Antifebrile Extract.
TAke Spirit of Vitriol rectified one Ounce, Hyacynthine Glass of Antimony,
half an Ounce; digest them in a warm place for a month, and your Spirit will be
tinged into a Golden color; strain it and reserve it for use This Spirit, with
other purging Medicines, from twelve to twenty drops, works pleasantly, and
without Vomit, and corrects their heat.

CHAP. LIVE. His purging Magistery of Tartar.
THis is described by many, but they put not that Trust in it which they ought;
for Physicians don't mind the way of composition, which is this which follows.

Take Salt of Tartar made of the Oil of the said Tartar, one part, the
strongest distilled Vinegar, two parts; mix them together: after they begin to
ferment with an inward murmuring, distill to a dryness; then add new Vinegar,
and the aforesaid sublimation beginning again, let them be dulcilyed: ^er the
Vinegar puts off the Salt with its (...); and the Salt throws off the Vinegar
with its Acrimony; then distill again, and this ^peration you must perform ten
(...); until the Vinegar reassumes its (...); and you must always distill to the
fixing of the Tartar. To the fixed matter of the tenth operation add distilled
and rectified Aqua vitae, made of the s^eces of Wine; and it will suddenly be
tinged into a red color; then strain the Tincture; and pour on Aqua vita again;
till it will tinge no more; then filtrate and distill again to dryness; what
remains six'd, will be dissolved into an Oily liquor by the Air; which is then
solutive Magistery of Tartar.

Virtues, Uses and Doses.
THis dissolves gross and tenaceous humors, in the Veins; but it is a certain
and necessary remedy in all vicious and long Fevers; yea my Master Riverius, at
the end of acute and contumacious Fevers, to dissolve the relics of the
humors and the ferment, purged his Patients by degrees, after this manner.

Recipe, of Maiden-hair-Water or the like, proper for the peccant humor, six
Ounces; Sena two Scruples, Cinnamon, Rhubarb, of each one Scruple; stibiated or
common Spirit of Vitriol three drops; these he infused for a night; and
strained them in the morning, and adding fifteen or twenty drops of the said
Magistery, he gave four or five times, more or less, as need required; to some
every day, to others every other day; to some a less, to others a greater dose;
to some in lieu of Rhubarb he gave Mechoacan, or Jalap; to some he gave an
Ounce of Roses solutive; and after this manner bodies were freed from
infection; and Fevers from becoming erratic. I have used and use this method,
as also many Physicians of my acquaintance, have got great Praise thereby.

CHAP. LV. His Febrifuge.
TAke slowers of Antimony thrice sublimed with Sal-Armoniac, and dulcified;
very clear Hyacinthine Glass of Antimony, of each half an Ounce; Aqua fortis
made with Nitre, and Alum, four Ounces; precipitate the said Antimony in Water,
and again take Mercury revivify'd from Cinabar, six Ounces; and, with Aqua
fortis made with Nitre, Vitriol and Alum precipitate, till all become
precipitated. Then take Gold of Venetian or Hungary Chehiens filled, to one
Ounce, and dissolve it Aqua Regia, and put the three menstroums with the
materials into a Retort well luted; distill by degrees to dryness; gather the
Spirit in a Recipient well stopped, and pour the distilled into a Retort; distill
again, twelve times after the same manner, always upon Caput Mortuum. The last
time, break the Retort, and wash the Powder five times with Cordial Waters; and
being dried put it into a quart of Aqua vitae rectified, and distill again in a
new Retort, well luted, cohobating six times upon the Mass; then separate the
Aqua vitae, and put the Mass of Calx into a strong Crucible well luted in a
circulatory Fire, for three hours: Then take away, and kindle the Aqua vitae
upon them.

This Febrifuge is composed of three Hercules with our Master, the forth
Champion the destroyer of quartane Agues, as may appear from inumerable
experiments from his, and my observations: The dose is from six Grains to
twenty with Resin of Scammony, or Scammony prepared with Sulphur, from twelve
Grains to fifteen, according to the strength of the Patient. Many have searched
for this; but not by true and legitimate operations, but this is the only
sincere one.

CHAP. LVI. Very good Salts, which he used in pertinaceous and Autumnal Fevers,
and to disselve Heterogeneous humors.
TAke Salt of Gentian, of Centaury the less; Celandine, Worme-wood, Carduus
Benedictus, Self-heal, of Vitriol of Mars, slower of Sal-Armoniae, of each one
Ounce; water of Agrimony, or such like, as much as will suffice to dissolve the
aforesaid Salts, and make a ^^xivinm; decoct with a gentle Fire, until there
arise a skin a top; and put it in a cold and molst place, and they will be
crystalliz'd.

Virtues, Uses and Doses.
THese consume obstructions and vititious intermitting Fevers; proceeding from
impurities, as quartanes, etc. the dose is from one Scruple to half a Dram,
and a Dram in Broth; or some proper Liquor: They are given to some two hours
before the sit; covering the Sick that they may sweat.

My Master gave a Salt made of Alum and Tartar, which he highly extolled, but I
never used it; it is this;

Take Cream of Tartar and Alum, of each equal parts, as much Card^us Water
distilled, as will dissolve them; and let them be reduced by a gentle Fire into
a form whereby they may be christalliv'd, in a moist and cold place. Of this he
gave from one Scruple to half a Dram, in proper Liquors.

I also often give Vitriolated Salt of Worme-wood, or others; to wit, take
Salt, and put it to Spirit of Vitriol, till there be a subbullition, which done
evaporate, and it will be the less pungent; and apter to deobstruct, and
cooler; of Vitriolated Tartar many write, and it is given by Physicians.

In like manner any of these Salts are joined with Steel; if you take two parts
of Salt, which you would chalibeat, and one of Vitriol of Mars, and dissolve
with some appropriat distilled water, you may then condense into a Salt, with a
gentle Fire, which will truly be chaly beated. After the same manner they are
made with Vitriol of Venus, with Salt of Luna, with Salt of Tin; and the like.

CHAP. LVII. His Famous Antiscorbutic Salt.
TAke of the white and searsed ashes of Ash-tree, Juniper, Box, Lignum sanctum,
crisp Mint, Germander, Agrimony, Centaury, Liver-wort, Cetrach, Hearts tongue;
Fumitory, Elder-budds, Watercresses, Capars, Tamarisc, Broom, St. John-wort;
Sea-Porcelane, sprigs of Vine, of each equal parts; of which with water of
Watercresses, make a Salt according to Art. Then take of this Salt two Ounces,
and add two Drachms of Vitriol of Mars, Salt of Tartar aluminated half a
Dram; slowers of Sal-Armoniac thrice sublimed, two Drachms; twenty leaves of
Gold; Common Spirit of Salt, as much as will suffice to imbibe, so that it
overtop half a singers breadth; let the Spirit with the aforesaid materials be
dried, and make a Mass, and it is called Riverius's Antiscorbutic; which is very
exquisite in Hypochondriacs and Cachectics, etc. for it expells all impurities
of the attribilious humors, and mundisies the Veins; the dose is from half a
Dram to one Dram; in proper Liquor.

CHAP. LVIII. His Extract of Lignum sanctum, for the Lues Venerea.
THis differs from others because I use the Extract, and menstruum, which is
sudorisie; after this manner.

Take Lignum s^^ (...) rasp'd, with (...) Bark, Salsaparilla, Cinnamon, of each
(...) Ounces, Sassafras two Ounces; genero^s Wine six quarts; digest them in a
Vessel well ^^opt; after two days distill, and extract a quart of the Spirit;
which put by it self; the other Wine exhale by B. M. till half be wasted; then
strain, and siltre, and exhale again by Balneum, until it be of the consistence
of Honey; and a little harder. To every Ounce of this extract add two Drachms of
Common Antimony diaphoretic, and half a Dram of Oriental Bezoar; make Pills,
of which give one in a morning from one Scruple, to half a Dram, in half an
Ounce of the Aqua vitae spoken of before; and let the Patient be well covered;
and in thirty days, more or less, they shall be freed from all evil quality of
the aforesaid disease; as I have often experienced, of this composition.

CHAP. LIX. His potable Turpentine for Gonorrheas.
TAke four Ounces of clear Terebinthine, and put it into a marble Mortar, with
two yelks of Eggs, and mix them with a ^^oden pestle, and they will be
converted into a Liquor; adding a pint of water of Agrimony, mix them till it
be wholly dissolved. Then put it into a Glass Phiol, in B. M. for a night, and
early in the morning strain it through a broun Paper, or a linen Cloth. Then
add a pound or more of fine Sugar, with as much juice of ^imons as will suffice
for a gratefullness; and of this, you shall give one Ounce or an Ounce and an
half, in the morning, to them that cannot take Pills.

CHAP. LX. His Water against old Gonorrheas.
TAke Lignum sanctum, Mastie-wood, the bark of Firr, of each four Ounces; beat
them and infuse them in four quarts of generous Wine; add Dittany and Oris
roots, of each three Ounces; a handful of dried Mint: An handful and half of
Vervene; Seeds of Agnus Castus, Rue, Letuce, of each three Ounces; well
bruised; clear Terebinthine one pound; mix them and put them into a Glass
cucurbit for twenty four hours in a warm place, then distill by B. M. and of
this give two or three spoonfuls; in the morning for some days.

CHAP. LXI. His potion against Gonorrheas and Ulcers of the Reins and Bladder.
TAke of the herb Prickmadam, two handfuls of the roots of Confound, Tormentil;
Ladies Mantle, Solomon's-Seal, Knotgrass, Plantan, of each one Ounce and an
half; Seeds of Quinces, Agnus Castus, Bue, Plantan, Roses, of each one Ounce;
juice of Limons one pound; Sanguis, Draconis, Crocus martis astringent, of each
one Ounce; water of Mallow flowers three pints; macerate them for two days;
then boil with a gentle Fire; and give two spoonful in the morning four hours
before meat.

CHAP. LXII. Concerning Extracts.
IN my Master's Pharmacope^a many Operations seem to differ from these, but
reduced to the form described by him; and are of greater value then those that
Quercitan and others use; not that Qu^rcitan and so many others wanted the
best; but facile inventis addere; he kept an other a more profitable form; as
appears from these Arcan^'s described by me, which are amplify'd by the
addition of Operations and Virtues.

My manner of Extracting Purges from Vegetables, according to the aforesaid
discipline, is thus; I Extract the juice from those Plants, which I had
gathered before at proper times; and I digest in B. and clar^^y very well; then
I distill by seperating the Spirit; and I coagulate what rests into the (...) of
an Extract. Afterward I beat the pressed Plant, and the fresh on not pressed,
and put them into a sit Vessel to distill by descent; such a Vessel as they use
to make Oils of Woods, having placed your Vessel to receive the Oil with a
(...) Fire; which must always ^e more vehemently augmented all the hum^^^^y
long extracted, I convert the rest being burnt, into white ashes; but lest the
ashes should not be calcined enough, I cal^ine them again. Of this with the
Water or Spirit that is first separated, I make a Lixivium; and by siltration a
Salt; according to use: The Oil extracted by descent, which exhales an igneous
odor, I mix with the aforesaid Salt; and a little clear and pure Salt of Tartar
being added to the same, I digest in a warm place; then I distill, always
cohobating the Spirit upon the foeces, till the Oil by the strength of the Salt
be destitute of an Empyreuma. Then I reduce it into the form of Honey. I then
add this mellaginous substance to the extract first made; whereby all the
Spirits of the Extract and faculties of the Salt, are united by this means.
This is the perfectest process that can be found out for Extractions. In using
it is given according to strength of the Compound, or the Rules of the
Pharmacopoeas, yea rather in a less quantity, because it is more Effectual.

In Herbs, Druggs, or dry Roots, or of little juice, all the strength is
extracted with their proper menstruum; and the matter is so accommodated as
before, by descent, and an Oil expressed. Then is made a Salt; which is added
to the Oil; and being often rectified, as it is said, is joined to the Extract;
but truly those kind of Extracts are to be kept in Glass Vessels stopped.

All sorts of Extracts, may be made after this manner as well Alexipharmic as
Specific; though they were compounded of diverse things; but I shall not stay to
describe the way; for one that is versed in the Art, needs no Instruction.

It is to be noted that your Extracts of Vulnerary Herbs, as Aristolochia, St.
John's-wort, Comfry, Star-wort, Veronica, Sanicle, ground Ivy, etc. may not
only be used inwardly; but also outwardly in form of Liniments, applied to
wounds by it self, or with other like; they work wonderful effects; for they
strengthen and contract, and defend the part from corruption; and bring it soon
to a cicatrice; ^o also those Plants which are abstersive and Ulcerative will
the better perform their operations.

Concerning Oil of Vegetables for Spagyric use, many spag^ric Volums treat
thereof, but I esteem this to be the best way. Dry the Plant that you will have
Oil from, and extra^t an Oil by descent, as aforesaid; then make a Salt of the
ashes; which join to the Oil; then with a little ^^lx vrva rectify the Oil; for
the calx dissipates the igneous odor, if you will pour it on, often times as
the custom is. Put it then into a Glass Vessel to the Sun; mixing the flowers,
or leaves of the proper vegetable for infusion; or of another, if you intend a
compound; for it re-assumes a greateful odor, and according to the Virtues of
the Plants, it receives those degrees of increase; which are an hundred fold:
And it is used after the same manner to the aforementioned concerns, by my
first Master Letter John Faber, as well inwardly as outwardly.

CHAP. LXIII. His Chemical Bazilicon.
TAke distilled Oil of Myrrh, Mastich, Frankincense, of each an Ounce; Oil of
Turpentine, Philosophoru^, of wax distilled, of each one Ounce; three yelks of
Eggs, mix them well and use them; for you will find wonders.

CHAP. LXIV. His Balsam of Sulphur.
TAke one Ounce of flower of Brimstone, three Ounces of Oil of Turpentine, Oil
of Violets three Ounces, mix them and let them boil in a glazed Vessel, stiring
them with a wooden Spathula, till they become very red; then take them from the
Fire, and add Oil of wax, yelks of Eggs, of each half an Ounce; mix them and
use it in all cancrous Ulcers, in all Wounds, Convulsions, and bruised and
pricked Nerves.

CHAP. LXV. His mumiated Balsam.
TAke of the Extract of round Birthwort, the lesser Centaury, of each half an
Ounce; of the Extract of St. John's-wort, the greater Comfry, of each one
Ounce; Venice Turpentine, and white Honey, of each four Ounces, Myrrh an Ounce
and a half; true Mummy three Ounces, Crocus martis, four Ounces; mix all these
and infuse them in a glazen Vessel, with three quarts of rectified Aqua vitae;
and digest for a month; daily stiring the ingredients that the Spirit of Wine
may extract more easily the Tincture of the things; then separate the Tincture
diligently by inclination; and distill in Balneo, till there remain, as it were
of the consistence of Honey in the Alembie, which is your Balsam; which you may
use to agglutinate all sorts of Wounds; the distilled Spirit is also of
wonderful Virtue.

CHAP. LXVI. His Apolectic Baisam.
TAke of the Essence, or distilled Oil of Spike, Sage, Rosemary, Juniper, of
each one Dram; Rue, Marjoram, of each half a Dram; Cinnamon, Cloves, of each
one Scruple; of Ambar one Dram and an half; of the Extract of Berjoin, Storax
calamit. Of the white oriental Balsam of each two Drachms; of Balsam of Peru,
liquid oriental Basam, of each half an Ounce, pressed Oil of Nutmegs, three
Ounces; Ambar-greese of each one Dram and an half; sweet Musk, two Drachms;
mix them and stir them over a very gentle Fire, until they be united; it is a
very complete remedy for Epileptics and Apoplecties; it expells Vertigoes;
defends the body from contagious corruptions of the Air; recreates the Heart
and all the vital and animal functions: It Is to be used by anointing the
coronal futures, and the Tempills, and by smelling to it.

CHAP. LXVII. His Spirit of Sulphur, to consolidate Ulcers of the Lungs, and to
cure their corrosions.
TAke of the acid Spirit of Sulphur rectified, and imbibe thereon, by degrees,
two or three pounds of filings of Steel; and it will buble of it self; and from
thence become as it were of a saline quality. Then put all into a Retort well
luted; and distill according to Art, and extract a Spirit; Imbibe in this again
the Caput mortuum, and cohobate five times; in a new Retort every time; to the
dulcified Spirit add Magistery of Pearls, Rue, Oriental Balsam, and of Benjoin,
of each one Ounce and an half; mix them, and it will be wonderful in the
aforesaid diseases; for all Pthysics; whereof many have been cured by me with
this.

Note. Your Magistery of Pearls is made by distilling, your Unions first in Oil
of Sulphur, and then being well dulcified with Cordial waters; afterward
exalting them with Spirit of Wine. Your Magistery of Benjoin and Oriental
Balsam, are to be dissolved in Spirit of Wine, and precipitated with Cordial
waters, and then sublimated after the same manner as Sulphur: That which is
sublimated is purer, and best for the Lungs.

CHAP. LXVIII. His Balsam of a Red-Dog.
KILL a Red-Dog, and throwing away the Intralls, not the Fat, cut its flesh and
skin all into pieces, and break his bones small; boil them all in a fit glazed
Vessel, with a sufficient quantity of Oil and Wine; adding, Bears, Goose, Hens,
Badgers, Foxes, Cats, Horses, Asses grease, of each one Ounce; four pounds of
Earthworms washed in Wine, roots of dwarf Elder, ground Ivy, of each three
handfuls Sage, Spike, Rosemary, Worme-wood, Southern-wood; leaves of Cypress,
bark of Ivy and Elm, Savin, of each one handful: boil all these, until the
flesh be consumed, then press them and put them into a strong Retort well
luted, with six Ounces of Ivy-Gum; and two pounds of the Worms aforesaid,
ground Ivy six handfuls, twenty live Frogs, and digest it in a warm place three
days; then distill and extract all the Oil, which you shall keep, for it is an
Anodine, and consolidates the Nerves, especially in articular diseases.

CHAP. LXIX. Rulandus 's Emplaster of Sulphur.
TAke three Ounces of our Oil of Sulphur, three Drachms of Colophony, half an
Ounce of wax, of Myrrh the weight of all; the Wax, Colophony and Oil being
mixed, sprinkle in the Myrrh by degrees, being very finely powdered, and boil
them with a gentle Fire; always stirring them with a Spathula, until they be
very well mixed; after a quarter of an hour take them from the Fire, and let
them cooll by degrees: And so you have a most excellent and infallible
Emplaster, for the curing of all kinds of Wounds and Ulcers; as his Experiments
in his Centurys describe, which you may always safely trust; and in his ninety
fourth cure, he says, that there is a divine, wonderful, and quick Virtue in
this Emplaster, of softening, suppurating, breaking, absterging and
agglutinating, as by long experience has been tried.

CHAP. LXX. His Toad Oil.
TAke four live Toads, far from any water, and put them into a glazed pot well
stopped to purge; then take two pounds of common Oil, wherein boil Sage,
Sowthistle, roots of Oris and Gentian of each one handful; and putting one of
the Toads therein, set it over a Fire in an open place, in a glazed Vessel
covered, but take heed of the smoke; when the first is dry put in another live
Toad; and that dried, a third, and so a fourth; and when it is boild ^rain the
Oil; and this is very hot, and very good against all cold pains, against Scabs,
Morphew and Dropsy; use it hot.

CHAP. LXXI. His Anti-Apoplectic Balsam.
TAke rectified Oil of Ambar, oleum petroleum Philosophorum, Rosemary, Sage,
Spike, being all distilled) of each half a Ounce; Oil of Nutmegs, by
expression, two Ounces; Extract of Castor, Oil of Box. Camphar, of each one
Dram: Balsam of Peru, Occidental Opobalsam; Civet, of the Extract of Benjoin,
of each half an Ounce; Musk, Ambar-grise, of each one Scruple, mix them all,
and with a moderate heat make a Balsam; which is prevalent against diseases of
the head by anointing the hinder part thereof, the noistrills, and pulse;
against the Apoplexy, Epilepsy, etc. Collic pains and Hysteric passions are
removed by anointing the navil.

CHAP. LXXII. His Pills against pestilential diseases.
TAke washed Aloes, Saffron, Myrrh, of each half an Ounce, Oriental and
Occidental Balsam, of each half a Dram, six bones of Harts-heart:
Unicorns-horn, Emeralds, Oriental Bezoar, Pearls, and Coral prepared, wood of
Aloes, of each ten Grains, Ambar-grise five Grains; our Tincture of
Ambar-grise; of Ambar, and Magistry of Tartar, of each, as much as will form a
Mass of Pills, where take one of half a Dram weight; going to bed, twice a
week. These mundify the Blood, corroborate the Head and Stomach, help pains of
the Heart, comfort all the Spirits, revive youth and retard old age.

CHAP. LXXIII. His Water breaking the Stone.
TAke green Wallnuts in the month of May, bruise them and distill them thrice,
always cohobating with the distilled water upon the fresh Nuts bruised; then
extract a Salt; from the residue of the Caput mortunm; and 'twill be very
powerful.

CHAP. IXXIV. His Balsam against Asthm^'s
TAke Balsam of Sulphur made with Oil of Terebinthine, and his Oil of Sulphur
dulcified of each one Ounce; slowers of Sweet root, one Ounce and an half; two
pounds of Oil of Sugar made with Spirit of Wine; mix them and make a Balsam;
this is very profitable in all diseases of the breast, and lungs, the dose is
from half a spoonful to a spoonful.

CHAP. LXXV. His Pills against all impurities of the blood and humors.
TAke Extract of black Ellebore, with its sixth ^alt, half an Ounce, of our
Calomelanos two Drachms; leaves of particol^^'d Gold half a Dram; Magistery
of Pearls one Dram; mix them and make a Mass of Pills, the dose is from a
Scruple to half a Dram; If without Calonclanos, it may be given for four or
five months twice in a week; but you will mundify the contumacy of the Lues
venerea with the said Calomclanos.

CHAP. LXXVI. His (...) against (...).
TAke of Persian bitter Almonds four pounds. Cypress Tere inthine three pounds,
beat them and mix them well; then take three Ounces of expressed Oil of
Nutmegs, ^alsam o^ (...) one Ounce and an half, Oil of Cloves half an Ounce;
mix and distill them according to Art; and cohobate thrice upon the Capat
^^^^tuum; then add Spirit of Vitriol rosated three Drachms; mix them and
circulate for fifteen days; for it is very profitable against Colic pains; the
^ose is from half a Scruple to one; in proper Li^quors.

CHAP. LXXVII. His Opthalmic water.
TAke the juice of Celandine, Eyebright, Verbene of each half a pound; juice of
River-Crabs eight Ounces; Aloes Succotrine half an Ounce; crude Tutia, one
Ounce; Crocus metallorum, one Ounce and an half; digest them with a gentle Fire
for twenty four hours, then distill, and add to the distillation three Drachms
of glass of Antimony; and boil them over a gentle Fire for an hour, then strain
and keep it; for it is excellent against dimness of sight, Cataracts, etc.

CHAP. LXXVIII. His Arcanuum against the biting of a mad Dog.
TAke the Liver of a mad Dog reduced to the form of a Magistery, and the
Magistery of River-Crabs, of each one Ounce. Tincture of Oriental Saffron,
Gentian, Castor, Myrrh, of each two Drachms; of the Quintessence of Vitriol, of
common Salt, Antimony, Silver, of each half a Dram; of St.
John's-wort-leaves, Betony, Yarrow, the lesser Centaury, Mug-wort, Mint,
Wormwood, Plantane, Polypody of the Oak, the lesser Sage, Verven, Garden Rue,
of each one pugil, of Moon-wort, three pugils, dry and powder them and with a
sussicient quantity of Gum draganth dissolved in Scorzonera-water, and with the
abovesaid liquors make Troches, and give a Dram for a dose for four days,
with some Cordial water, and you will see wonders.

CHAP. LXXIX. His Tincture against Dysenteries.
TAke of Hares-blood dried half a pound rectified Spirit of Wine one pound and
an half; digest them in B. M. for three days; then extract a Tincture according
to Art; and coagulate to the consistence of Honey; the dose is from half a
Scruple to one, with some Emulsion of Sorel-seed.

CHAP. LXXX. His Balsam of Mastich.
TAke of the best Mastich, as much as you will, dissolve it in Spirit of
Terebinthine, over a warm Fire in B. M. then separate the menstruum from the
dissolved body, and then you have a Balsam for all diseases of the body; for
outwardly applied to the mouth of the stomach; it stays vomiting; and inwardly
you give five drops in Broth, or Wine.

CHAP. LXXXI. His Arcanum against twisting of the guts and vomiting.
TAke of the ethereal Oil, or Quintessence of Terebinthine, six Ounces, a
Dram and an half of Balsam of Peru, fine Mastich six Drachms, mix and distill
them, then cohobate thrice; and use it in Malago Wine; or Broth of red Cicers,
or any other specific liquor, the dose is from six Grains to twelve; your oleum
ethereum is good for the same, after the same manner.

CHAP. LXXXII. His Spirit of fixed Nitre tartariz'd.
TAke of Spirit of Nitre rectified one pound, put it into a glass Cucurbit,
with a large mouth open; and pour on drop by drop and by degrees as much Oil of
Tartar by deliquium; which will raise a froth; and so long pour on, as long as
you shall observe no more froth to arise: The Tartar'd Nitre, will fall to the
bottom; then decant, and dulcisy with Rose Water; it is given in long diseases
with appropriat decoctions, from six drops to eight, in water of Crabs, or
Ants, and it is Antifrebrisic.

CHAP. LXXXIII. His Emplaster against a Pleurisic.
TAke three Ounces of Line-seed, Onions and new Soap, of each one Ounce and an
half; bruise and mix them; then put them over the Fire in a Drying Pan; mixing
them till they be incorporated, spread these upon a stupe, and apply it to the
Pleuretic part, and opposite pain; and you will see marvelous effects against
this disease.

CHAP. LXXXIV. His Emplaster for broken and disjointed bones.
THE bone being reduced into its place, take three Ounces of chimney-soot one
Ounce of Frankincense, four Ounces of Wheat Flour; as many whites of Eggs as
will suffice to bring the materials into a sit consistence; then apply it to
the part with fit splinters and bandages; and remove it not till it fall off by
help of nature; this may seem improper to some; but truly, I never saw any
equal or excel this in such like cases; you may afterward use Cerats of
Oxycroceum, and such like; as occasion requires.

CHAP. LXXXV. His Antipleuretic Oil.
TAke four pound of common Salt in the month of May, wherein put humane
pleurae, two pounds, three pounds of Cammomil and white Lilly flowers; for two
months place them in the Sun: Then press them with a press; and weigh the Oil;
to which add a Pompion in Summer, the weight of the Oil, cutting away the
marrow and peel; and cutting it into pieces make it boil, until the Oil has
extracted all the moisture from the Pompion; to wit, its small pieces become
dry. Then you shall have in a readiness twelve pieces of new Iron red hot,
every one weighing half a pound, and put them in singly into the Oil; and so
twice made hot; you shall twice extinguish in the Oil; and then it will be
complete. 'Twill prove wonderful if the pained parts be anointed therewith
twice or thrice in a day.

CHAP. LXXXVI. His Vterine Powder.
TAke Rupture-wort one handful, Bayberryes husk'd, Parsnip-seeds, of each one
Ounce; Rue and Agnus Castus and Peony-seeds, grains of Paradise, of each half
an Ounce; Calamus Aromaticus, Cassia lignea, Mace, Cinnamon, Cloves, of each
three Drachms; Feculae Briontae, sal Jovis, of each two Drachms; mix them and
beat them into very sine powder, whereof you shall give from half a Dram to a
Dram, in Broths, Wine, Conserves, or the like, against all diseases of the
Womb.

We cannot make public all our Arcanaes, at this time, in this small treatise;
but if it shall please God to grant us two more years of life and health; I
have many observations worth noting to publish; and a Laboratory, wherein shall
be expounded most of the mysteries of Art; and cautions for errors, wherein
Artists offend. And although there are at this day many new Volums published in
the Italian and Latin, etc. languages concerning the spagyric Art which have
been collected from the Ancients; yet I also shall write of the same, but more
corectly.

The Chemical Cup so often nominated in his Observations, and so commonly
administered to all people, is not prepared, as some have supposed of the Vulgar
Regulus of Antimony; true it is prepared from a Regulus, but of the third
degree; which dissers much from the Vulgar; although many also use this not
without prejudice to the takers. I have been at Rome, Naples, Venice, and other
Cities of Italy, and other Provinces, and I sound many that would tell you they
knew the secret of the Chemical Cup: But all prepared it of the common Regulus,
or of that compounded with Mars; I discoursed many of them to penetrate,
whether any of them knew how to separate the Arsenical parts which the Regulus
conteines, from the same; but they judged, when the Antimony is fired with
Tartar and Nitre, that those Sulphurous foeces, which are then separated,
contained all the Impurity of the Antimony; and that was the Cup of the
ANcients; But truly they are far from the truth; for they will find none of
the classic and rational Authors using the simple Regulus, to make the Cup of,
but for other preparations. The Vulgar Regulus has not as yet left its
crudity; and made after the manner aforesaid it is called Regulus of the first
degree; whereof many compositions may be made; as the Starry Regulus, with
filings of Iron; as the noble Ambar; which is a Regulus; and so with Gold,
Silver, Tin, Iron; the other Regulus is made into an Ambar, with Iron, Brass,
Lead, Tin, Mercury and the Regulus; but how to attain to the top of the third
degree, hic labor, hoc opus; and then it may be granted for perfect; as
Clossius and Bazil Valentine celebrate it for the King of purging medicaments;
for it only draws so much out of the body as is hurtful to it; mundifies the
Blood; and corroborates the uncorrupted humors, as is observed in those that
have taken thereof; who although they vomit, yet are they not at all weakened
thereby; and in this it differs from other medicines. I celebrate these its
praises, because I write in the Latin language; and so they will not penetrate
the ears of the ignorant; for I am not to put weapons into the hands of
Children. I tell you truly for twenty two years past no other purging medicine
has entered my body, than Wine of the Chemical Cup; whereof I drink three or
four times in a year; and, by the grace of God am perplexed with no infirmity
at this time; and if you see it often mentioned in the Observations, this is
because it has gained very great honor.

Here truly I must not neglect by any means to discover the frauds of some,
which they are not a fraid to perpetrate; many of which make these Cups, and
distribute them: Yet those cannot attain to fly higher than the first degree;
but that their operation may appear very beautiful and shining; they add
marchesite of crude Silver, which does not only augment the beauty, but also
multiplies the Regulas to the half; and so being greedy of Gold, they cheat you
with a Regulus, and sell you Cups, as of the third degree: But these are most
diligently to be avoided; for the Marchesite in lieu of mundisying the Blood,
corrodes it; and though it quickly provoks bodies to vomit, it brings no small
damages thereto. The way to detect so great cheats, shall be more plainly laid
down in our Surgery.

The composition of our Chemical Cup, of our astringent Balsam, and astringent
Pills, is not in this treatise, but I reserve it for another; and therein also
shall be explicated the more hidden and noble Arcana; and these shall be the
most celebrated ones of my most beloved Master; and the three aforesaid shall
be the Captains: For I hope therein to lay down rare secrets of nature; to wit,
I have accurately investigated, with Virtuoso's and other curious Persons the
natural virtues of minerals, semiminerals, stones, animals and vegetables,
which work by an occult power; for those are your true specifies; from which I
have seen wonders; neither could I know any thing therefrom.

In this second work I shall put to light public Observations belonging to
Surgery; which have and shall happen until this work shall come forth; and
chiefly those in the Kingdom of Naples, and at Venice where I now live;
although I am not altogether fixed in this City: I am often at the consults of
most excellent Physicians; as the most excellent, Bernardus Florius, Bracchus,
Bravus, Cornelius and others; who have often been pleased to accept of my
advice.

I have made experience in this City of my astringent Balsam in the house of
the most illustrious, and most excellent the Count d' Avaux, Seigniour de
Longueville Ambassador of the Christian King to this most serene Republic: To
wit, the jugular veins were cut in a porket by his Surgeon; the greater
Artery in the thigh of a Dog; and the Artery nigh the jugular, was cut by me in
another Dog; and all were healed only with our astringent Balsam; to the
admiration of all people, in nine days time. And one Surdus a Bar^ar in St.
Vaw^'s was cured of a broken ar^ery with this our Balsam: And a Pilot, whom a
Surgion cutting of an Ulcer in his ^irile parts, cut an Artery, which could not
be closs'd with Fire; the flux of Blood was staid by our Balsam; and he
recovered.

Another experiment was made in the house of the most Illustrious and most
Excellent the Marquess of Fuentes, the Spanish Ambassador, in a Dog; who had an
Artery cut eight days before, and was cured. The most Excellent Pica, cut a
vein quite asunder, and while he called to the standers by to see the Dog,
during the space, almost all its Blood slowed out of its body before the Balsam
was applied, then the Balsam being applied that little Blood that remained
flowed no longer; but the Dog died the day following of an inanition with a
terrible convulsion; by reason he could take no nourishment.

FINIS.
Books Sold by Daniel Brown at the Black Swan and Bible without Temple-Barr.
A Prospect of Government in Europe, and Civil Policy, showing the Antiquity,
Power, Decay of Parliaments, with other Historical and Political Observations
relating thereunto, by T. R. 8 vo price 1^.

The Third Edition of the ^ife, Bloody Reign, and Death of Queen MART. In this
Edition is added an Account of the most Remarkable Judgments of God on many of
the Persecutors. Price Bound 1s.

Seldens Janus Anglorum.

The Mystery and Method of his Majesty's Happy Restoration laid open to
public View. By John Price Doctor of Divinity, one of the late Duke of
Albermarle's Chaplains, and Privy to all the Secret passages and particulars of
that Glorious Revolution. 8 vo. Price 1s. 6d.

The Imposter Exposed, in a Dissection of a Villainous Libel (here Printed at
large) Entitled a Letter to a Person of Honor concerning the Black-Box. 8 vo.
Price 1s. 6d.

A compendious History of the two late Plots, against the Established
Government. Price 1s.

Poems and ^ett^ns on several occasions (...). Price 1s.

(...) Councellor. The fourth ^^^^tion.

Pleasant Companion. The second ^^^^ition. Price (...).

(...), on the ^^^^ament.

PLAYS.
The (...), or the Mistake: Written by Mrs. (...).

Remulus and (...), on the Sabine War.

The City Heiress, or Sir Thomas Treat^all.

The Roundheads, or the Good Old Cause.

Three Farces Acted before the King and Court at (...).

The Merry Milk Maids of Islington, or the Rambling Gallants defeated.

Love lost in the Dark, or the Drunken Coupple.

The Politic Whore, or the Conceited Cuckhold.


