THE Arts of Empire, AND Mysteries of State Discabineted.

IN Political and Polemical Aphorisms, grounded on Authority and Experience.

AND Illustrated with the Choicest Examples and Historical Observations.

By the Ever-renowned Knight Sir WALTER RALEIGH, Published By JOHN MILTON Esquire

Quis Martem tunica tectum, Adamantina digne scripserit? LONDON, Printed by G.
Croom, for Joseph Watts at the Angel in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1692.

TO THE READER.
HAving had the Manuscript of this Treatise, Written by Sir Walter Raleigh,
many Years in my Hands, and finding it lately by chance among other Books and
Papers, upon reading thereof, I thought it a kind of Injury to withhold longer
the Work of so Eminent an Author from the Public; it being both answerable in
Style to other Works of his already Extant, as far as the Subject would permit,
and given me for a true Copy by a Learned Man at his Death, who had Collected
several such Pieces.

John Milton,

THE Principal Contents.
CHAP. 1. THE Definition and Division of Public Weals and Sovereign States,
according to their several Species or Kinds Page 1 Chap. 2. Of Sovereign or
Monarchick Government, with its Essential Marks and Specifical Differences P. 3
Chap. 3. Of Monarchies Seignioril, exemplified in the Turkish and West-Indian
Empire P. 6 Chap. 4. Of Monarchies Royal, with the Means to maintain them P. 8
Chap. 5. Of Monarchies Tyrannical P. 11 Chap. 6. Of Newfound Monarchies and
Principalities, with the Means to perpetuate them P. 12 Chap. 7. Of Councils
and Counselors in general P. 17 Chap. 8. Of Councils in some particular
Monarchies, Aristocraties and Democraties P. 18 Chap. 9. Of Officers and
Commissioners, with their respective Distinctions P. 21 Chap. 10. Of
Magistrates, their Qualifications and Elections P. 22 Chap. 11. Observations
intrinsically concerning every Public State in Points of Justice, Treasure and
War P. 24 Chap. 12. Extrinsick observations, showing how to deal with Neighbor
Princes and Provinces respectively, how to prevent their Designs, and decypher
their Intendments P. 30 Chap. 13. Observations confirmed by Authorities of
Princes and Principalities, Charactering an Excellent Prince or Governor P. 35
Chap. 14. Of the Princes intimate Counselors and Ministers of State, with
their several Requisites P. 41 Chap. 15. The Art of Ruling, or Mystery of
Regiment P. 48 Chap. 16. Of Princely Authority; wherein it consists, and how
far to be extended and delegated P. 51 Chap. 17. Of Power and Force; and how to
be raised and maintained P. 53 Chap. 18. Of Conspiracy and Treason; with the
Causes, and ways of Prevention or Discovery P. 55 Chap. 19. Of Public Hate and
Contempt, with the Occasions and Means to redress and avoid it P. 58 Chap. 20.
Of Diffidence and Dissimulation in the Management of State Affairs P. 67 Chap.
21. Of War Defensive and Invasive; with Instructions touching Laws of Arms,
Soldiers and Military Discipline P. 70 Chap. 22. Of Generals and Commanders,
and their requisite Abilities in Martial Enterprises and Expeditions P. 83
Chap. 23. Of Councils in War, and Directions Tactick and Stratagematick; with
Advice how to make an honorable Peace P. 87 Chap. 24. Of Civil War, with the
Causes and Remedies thereof P. 97 Chap. 25. A Collection of Political
Observations (confirmed by Reason and Experience) advertising Princes,
Statesmen, and Private Persons how to demean themselves in all Fortunes and
Events P. 107 Chap. 26. Maxims of State, or Prudential Grounds and Polemical
Precepts, concerning all Estates, and Forms of Policy in times of Peace or War,
etc. confirmed by Select Narrations, and Historical Parallels P. 184
ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Excellent Woman described by her True Characters, and their Opposites,
Printed for J. Watts.

THE ARTS of EMPIRE, AND Mysteries of State.
CHAP. I. The Definition and Division of Public Weals and Sovereign States,
according to their several Species or Kinds.
A Commonwealth is a certain Sovereign Government of many Families, with those
things that are common among them.

All Commonwealths are either Monarchies, or All Commonwealths are either
Aristocraties, or All Commonwealths are either Democraties. or

A Monarchy is that State where the Sovereignty rests in the Person of one
only Prince.

An Aristocraty, is where some small part of the People have in them as a Body
corporate, the Sovereignty and Supreme Power of the whole State.

A Democraty, is where all the People have Power and Authority Sovereign.

So does it appear, that the place and Person where the Sovereignty rests,
does cause the State to be either a Monarchy, an Aristocraty, or Popular
Government.

CHAP. II. Of Sovereign or Monarchick Government, with its Essential Marks, and
Specifical Differences.
SOvereignty is an absolute and perpetual Power in every public State, and he
is properly and only a Sovereign, that acknowledges no Superior or Equal, nor
holds of any other Prince, Person or Power, but God and his own Sword.

The first Mark of Sovereignty, is absolute Power and Authority to command all
Subjects in general, and every of them in particular, without consent of any
other Person or Persons, either greater or inferior to himself.

The second Mark of Majesty is Authority to make War, and conclude Peace at his
pleasure.

The third is Power to bestow all Honors and chief Offices at his pleasure.

The Fourth Mark of Sovereignty is Appellation.

The Fifth Mark and last, is power to pardon all Subjects by rigor of Law or
otherwise, condemned in Life, Lands, Goods or Honors.

These Powers are not to be imparted to any Officer, Deputy or other
Magistrate, but in the Prince's absence, and for some urgent occasion.

Monarchies are of three sorts, Signioril, Royal and Tyrannical.

The Diversity of Monarchies does not proceed from the Nature of the State, but
the diverse proceedings of those Princes that govern; for great difference
there may be between the nature of the Commonwealth and the Government thereof.
That Prince that gives the Magistracies Honors and Offices without respect of
Nobility, Riches or Virtue, may be said to govern popularly. And that Monarchy
may be said to be governed Aristocratically, when the Monarch imparteth the
principal Honors and Offices to the Noble and Rich Men only.

The same difference there is to be found in States Aristocratical and Popular;
for the one and the other may be both Signioril or Tyrannical.

A Monarch Signioril is he who by force of Arms and just War, is made Owner of
Men's Bodies and Goods, and governs them as a Master of a Family governs
base Servants and Slaves.

A Monarch Royal, is he whose Subjects are obedient unto his Laws, and the
Monarch himself obeys the Laws of God and Nature, suffering every Subject to
enjoy Liberty natural, with Property in Lands and Goods, governing as a Father
governs his Children.

A Monarch Tyrannical, is he who without regard to the Law of God or Nature,
commands Freemen as Slaves and uses their Lands and Goods as his own.

CHAP. III. Of Monarchy Signioril, Exemplified in the Turkish and West-Indian
Empire.
ALL People subject to Princes, are governed as Freemen by their Prince, and
certain other particular Lords of Lands and Liberties; who not by the Princes
Commission, but by Ancient Laws or Custom, have Inheritance and Tenements; or
else they are by one Prince and his Ministers commanded, which Ministers have
not by Law or Ordinance, any Authority or Interest of themselves, but being
like to the People (base Men and Slaves) they command only by Commission in the
Princes name; and the Authority of those Ministers does cease at the Princes
pleasure, so that the People do not acknowledge any Superior but the Prince,
nor owe any Service to other mean Lords: So as all the People stand without
Property in Lands or Goods; for example, the Empire of Turkey and the
West Indies.

The Provinces of this Monarchy are allotted to sundry Magistrates or
Ministers, and they altered and removed at the Princes pleasure; but it is
otherwise in a Monarchy Royal, because the Monarch is there accompanied with
many mean Lords. And albeit those mean Lords are Subjects unto the Prince, yet
have they particular Tenants, who may not, without just cause, be dispossessed
by the Prince; and those People having had dependency of their Lords and their
Ancestors, do ever bear unto them a certain natural Love and dutiful Respect;
whosoever therefore compares these Principalities, shall perceive, that to Conquer
a State Signioril there is great difficulty, but being conquered, it may easily
be maintained; for the difficulty to conquer such a State, proceeds from the
lack of mean Lords to call in and assist the Prince that does invade: Who
therefore desires to subdue a Nation thus governed, must of force assault all
the People, and rather trust in his own Strength than the Aid of the Country.
But if he can prevail, then one only Fear remains, which is the Prince's
Posterity, which necessarily must be extinguished, because the Prince's Race
only has Interest both in the People and Soldiers. But to enter a Monarchy
Royal, is an Enterprise of no great Difficulty, when he that does enter, has
the Friendship and Aid of some mean Lords to take his part, and prepare the
place where he is to arrive.

CHAP. IV. Of Monarchies Royal, with the Means to maintain them.
MOnarchies Royal are for the most part Ancient and Hereditary, and
consequently easy to be governed. For it is sufficient for the Prince to
maintain the old Laws, and on occasion temporize with those Accidents that
happen: Such a State cannot be taken from the Prince without excessive Force,
and if it be, it shall be soon recovered. Example, England and France.

But if a Monarchy newly conquered, be annexed unto an old, and not properly
Ancient, then it is with much more difficulty maintained.

First, For that Men naturally inclined to Variation, are easily induced to
take Arms against him that newly governs.

Secondly, Every new Prince is forced to exact as well upon those Subjects that
joined with him, as those that did resist him, and therefore shall offend both.
Example, Ireland annexed to the Crown of England, Sicilia and Naples to Spain.

The means to maintain such a Monarchy, is,

First, To extinguish the Race of him that was anciently Prince.

Secondly, To continue all Laws and Customs in the former Force; for so shall
the Subject find nothing altered but the Prince, and therefore will soon rest
contented; and the rather if that new Monarchy, and the ancient Dominion of the
Prince, be of one Language: But if the People be of a contrary Language and
Humor, then to hold it, there needs great Industry and Fortune; in that case
the best way is, that the Prince should inhabit there, as well to encounter all
Inconveniences proceeding from the Subject, as to preserve the People from
Oppression of his own Ministers. Another way is, to send thither certain
Colonies, and plant them in fit places, or else to settle some Garrisons both of
Horse and Foot; but Colonies are less chargeable to the Prince. As for the
People inhabitant (who must necessarily remove, they being a small number and
dispossessed) they cannot have power to offend; for in that case, this Rule or
Maxim shall be found true, that Men must be either kindly entreated, or with
all Extremity oppressed; because of light Injuries they may be revenged, but of
utter Oppression they cannot.

A third way to hold a conquered Dominion, is, to cherish and defend the
Neighbors of little Power, and oppress or keep under those that are most
Potent; and above all, to take order that no Foreign Prince or Power do enter;
for it is ever to be looked for, that so many of the Nation as are
discontented, either for Ambition or Fear, will be ever ready to bring in
Strangers: And to conclude this matter of Principality annexed, I say it
behooves every Prince possessed of such a State, never to increase the Power of
any Potent Nighbor, never to oppress those that are of small Power, never to
permit any Foreign Potentate to enter, but ever to plant Colonies and
Garrisons, or else to make that Dominion his chief Habitation.

CHAP. V. Of Monarchies Tyrannical.
TYrannical Princes are not advanced by Favor, neither do they trust unto
Fortune, but by degrees of War, or else by some other indirect means do aspire
unto Greatness; and therein do maintain themselves by all ways either Honest or
Dishonest, without respect of Justice, Conscience or Law either of Nations or
Nature: A Prince by such impious means aspired, and desiring to hold that he
has gained, will take order that the Cruelties he commits may be done
roundly, suddenly, and as it were at an instant; for if they be executed at
leisure and by piecemeal, then will the Prince's Fears continue long, and the
Terror in Subjects take deeper Impression, whose Nature is such, that either
they must be bound by Benefits, or by Cruelty made sure from offending:
Example, Dionysius and Agathocles.

CHAP. VI. Of new found Monarchies and Principalities, with the means to
perpetuate them.
SOme other Princes there are, that from private Estate have aspired to
Sovereignty, not by unnatural or impious proceedings as the former, but by
Virtue and Fortune, and being aspired, have found no great Difficulty to be
maintained; for such a Prince having no other Dominion, is forced to settle
himself where he is become a Prince: But here is to be noted, that albeit such
a Man be Virtuous, yet wanting Fortune, his Virtue proves to small purpose,
and Fortune without Virtue does seldom work any great Effect. Howsoever it be,
a Prince being aspired, both by the Aid of the one and of the other, shall
notwithstanding find some difficulty to hold what he has gotten; because he is
forced to introduce new Laws and new Orders of Government differing from the
old, as well for his own Security, as confirmation of the Government; for
avoiding of which Dangers, he is to consider whether he be of himself able to
compel his Subjects to obey, or must pray in aid of others: If he can do the
first, he needs not doubt, but being driven to the other, his Greatness
cannot long continue; for albeit a matter of no difficulty, it is to persuade a
People; yet to make them constant, is a work well near impossible. Example,
Theseus, Cyrus, Romulus.

The second sort of new Princes are such as be aspired by Favor or Corruption,
or by the Virtue or Greatness of Fortune or Friends: A Prince by any or all
these means advanced, and desirous to hold his Estate, must endeavor by his own
Virtue to maintain himself without depending upon any other; which may be done
by this means: First, To assure all Enemies from offending. Secondly, To win
the Love and Friendship of so many Neighbors as possibly he may. Thirdly, To
compass all Designs tending to his Honor or Profit, and bring them to pass
either by Fraud or Force. Fourthly, To make himself honored and followed of
Captains and Soldiers. Fifthly, To oppress all those that would or can offend.
Sixthly, To be obsequious and liberal to Friends, magnanimous and terrible to
Foes. Seventhly, To cass all old and unfaithful Bands, and entertain new.
Eighthly, To hold such Amity with Kings and Princes, as they ought reasonably
to favor him, or else they would offend; easily they cannot. Example,
Giovannio, Torrigiani, Caesar, Borgi.

The third and last means whereby private Persons do aspire to Principalities,
is not Force and Violence, but mere good Will and Favor of Men. The cause or
occasion thereof, is only Virtue or Fortune, or at least a certain Fortunate
Craft and Wittiness, because he aspireth either by Favor of the People, or by
Favor of the Nobility; for these contrary Humors are in all Commonwealths to be
found. And the reason thereof is, that the great Men do ever endeavor to
oppress the People, and the People do labor not to be oppressed by them. Of
these diverse Appetites one of these three Effects do proceed, viz.
Principality, Liberty, or Licentious Life. Principality may come either by love
of the Multitude, or of the great Men; for when any of these Factions do find
it self oppressed, then do they soon consent to make one a Prince, hoping by
his Virtue and Valor to be defended. Example, Francesco Sforza, Alessandro de
Medici.

A Prince in this sort aspired, to maintain his Estate, must first consider
well by which of these Factions aforesaid he is advanced; for if by Favor of
great Men he be aspired, then must he meet with many Difficulties; for having
about him diverse Persons of great Quality, and such as were but lately his
Equals, hardly shall he command them in such sort as it behooves: But if the
Prince be advanced by the People, few or none shall hardly disobey him. So it
appears that a Prince made by the Multitude, is much more secure than he whom
the Nobility prefers; for common People do not desire to enjoy more than
their own, and to be defended from Oppression; but great Men do study not only
to hold their own, but also to command and insult upon Inferiors.

Note that all Monarchies are Principalities.
But all Principalities are not Monarchies.
CHAP. VII. Of Councils, and Counselors in general.
A Senate or Council is a certain lawful Assembly of Counselors, to give
advice to him or them that have in the Commonweal Power Sovereign.

A Counselor is called in the Latin Senator; which Word signifies in effect
an old Man: The Grecians and Romans also most commonly composed their Councils
of ancient and expert Persons; for if they, or the greater part of them had
been Young Men, then might the Council have more properly been called a
Juvenate than a Senate.

The chief and most necessary Note required in a Counselor is to have no
dependence of any other Prince or Commonweal; either Oath, Homage, Natural
Obligation, Pention, or Reward: In this Point the Venetians have been ever most
precise, and for that reason, do not admit any Cardinal or other Clergyman to
be either of or at their Councils, therefore when the Venetian Senate is
Assembled, the Usher being ready to shut the Door, cries aloud, Fuora Preti,
Depart Priest. Note also that in every State, of what Quality soever, a Secret
or Cabinet-Council is mainly necessary.

CHAP. VIII. Of Councils in some particular Monarchies, Aristocraties, and
Democraties.
THE King of Spain, for the Government of his Dominions has Seven Councils, (
viz.) the Council of the Indies, the Council of Spain, the Council of Italy and
the Low Countries, the Council of War, the Council of Orders, the Council of
Inquisition, and the Council Royal.

In France are Three Councils, ( viz.) the Council Privy, the Council of
Judges, which they call Presidents et Conceliers de Parliament, and the great
Council, which they call Assemblies du troys Estates.

Of Councils in Aristocraties.
In Venice, beside the Senate and great Council, are Four Councils, ( viz.) the
Sages of the Sea, the Sages of the Land, the Council of Tenn, the Three
Presidents of Quarantia, and the Senate: All which Councils do amount to One
hundred and twenty Persons, with the Magistrates.

The Great Council of Ragusa consists of Sixty Persons, and has another
Privy Council of Twelve.

Of Councils in Democraties.
Genoua has Three Councils: the Great Council of Two hundred, the Senate which
consists of Sixty, and the Privy Council which has Twenty six Counselors:
So it does appear that in all Commonwealths, be they Monarchies, Aristocracies,
or Popular States. The Council-Privy is most necessary, and often used; Also
this difference is to be noted between the Councils in Monarchies, and the
Councils in Aristocracies and States Popular; that is to say, that all
Deliberations fit to be published, are in a Monarchy consulted and resolved
upon in the Council Privy, and after ratified by Common Council; But in
Optimacies or Popular Government the Custom is contrary.

Here also is to be noted, that albeit the Use and Authority of every Senate a
Privy Council is most needful, yet has it no Authority to command but in the
name of those in whom the Sovereignty rests: For if Counselors had power to
command absolutely, then should they be Sovereigns, and consequently all
Execution at their Pleasure; which may not be without detracting from Majesty,
which is a thing so Sovereign and Sacred, as no Citizen or Subject of what
quality soever, may touch or approach thereunto.

CHAP. IX. Of Officers and Commissioners with their respective Distinctions.
AN Officer is a Person public, that has Charge ordinary and limited by Law.

A Commissioner is also a Person public, but his Charge is extraordinary and
limited by Commission.

Officers are of two sorts, and so be Commissioners; the one has power to
command, and are called Magistrates: the other has Authority to execute: so
the one and the other are Persons public: yet are not all public Persons
either Officers or Commissioners.

Commissioners are ordained to govern in Provinces, in War, in Justice, in
disposing the Treasure, or some other Function concerning the State; but all
Commissions do spring and proceed from the Sovereign, Magistrates and
Commissioners. And here is to be noted, that every Commission cease if he
that granted the Commission does dye, or revoke it, or if the Commissioners
during his Commission shall aspire to Office and Authority equal to his that
made it.

CHAP. X. Of Magistrates, their Qualifications and Elections.
A Magistrate is an Officer having power to Command in the State; and albeit
that every Magistrate be an Officer, yet every Officer is not a Magistrate, but
they only that have power to command.

Also in making Officers of and Magistrates in every Commonweal, Three things
are specially to be observed ( viz.) who does make them, what Men they are that
should be made, and the form and manner how they are made.

The first appertains to him or them in whom the Sovereignty rests; the
second also belongs to Majesty; yet therein the Laws are commonly followed,
especially in Aristocracies and States Popular; In the one the Magistrates are
chosen out of the most Wealthy or most Noble: In the other, elected out of the
whole Multitude.

The form and manner of choosing Magistrates in Aristocracies and States
Popular, is either by Election, by Lot, or by both, and their Office is to
compel those that do not Obey what Sovereignty commands: For all force of
Commandment lies in Compulsion.

Commandment likewise is of two sorts; the one may be called Sovereign and
Absolute, above Laws, above Magistrates, and above People. In Monarchies such
Command is proper to the Prince only; in Aristocracies it rests in the
Nobility: And in Democracies the People have that power.

The second Commandments are Subject both to Sovereignty and Law.

Here is to be noted, that every Magistrate may recall his own Commandment, and
forbid what he did Command, yet cannot revoke that which he has Judged.

Commissions determine in presence of him that granted them.
Also in the presence of the Sovereign, all Authority of Magistrates cease;
and in presence of great Magistrates the inferior have no power; and
Magistrates equal cannot do any thing but by Consent, if his Colleagues or
Fellow-Magistrates be present.

CHAP. XI. Observations intrinsically concerning every Public State in points
of Justice, Treasure and War.
THE First concern matter Intrinsic.

The Second touch matter Extrinsick.

Matters Intrinsic are Three.
The Administration of Justice. The Managing of the Treasure. The disposing of
things appertaining to War.
Matters Extrinsick are also Three.
The Skill how to deal with Neighbors. The Diligence to vent their Designs. The
way how to win so much Confidence with some of them, as to be made partaker of
whatsoever they mean to enterprise.
Touching Administration of Justice.
The good and direct Administration of Justice, is in all Places a principal
part of Government; for seldom or never shall we see any People discontented
and desirous of Alteration, where Justice is equally administered without
respect of Persons; and in every State this Consideration is required, but most
of all in Countries that do front upon other Princes, or were lately conquered:
Hereunto the Princes Vigilance and the Magistrates Uprightness are especially
required; for oft-tentimes the Prince is deceived, and the Magistrates
corrupted; it behooves also the Prince to maintain the Judges and Ministers of
Justice in their Reputation, and yet to have a vigilant Eye upon their
Proceedings, and the rather if their Authority do include Equity, and from
their Censure be no Appeal; and if their Office be during Life, and they are
Men born and dwelling in the same Country; all these things are duly to be
considered of the Prince; for as to call the Judges into question, is as it
were to disgrace the Judicial Seat; so to wink at their Corruptions were matter
of just discontent to the Subject: in this case therefore the Prince cannot do
more than by his Wisdom to make choice of Good Men; and being chosen, to hold
them in good Reputation so as the ordinary course of Justice may proceed; for
otherwise great Disorder, Contempt, and general Confusion will ensue thereof.
Secondly, he is to keep his Eye open upon their Proceedings; and lastly to
reserve unto himself a Supreme Power of Appellation.

Touching the Treasure.
The want of Money is in all States very perilous, and most of all in those
which are of least Strength, and do confine upon Nations with whom they have
commonly War, or unassured Peace, but most perilous of all to those Governments
which are remote from the Prince, or Place where they are to be relieved.

The means to Levy Treasure are Four.
First, The Customs and Impositions upon all forts of Merchandise and Traffic
is to be looked unto and advanced.

Secondly, The excessive eating of Usury must be suppressed.

Thirdly, All superfluous Charges and Expenses are to be taken away.

Lastly, The doings and accounts of Ministers are severally to be examined.

Touching the matter of Custom and Impost thereof, assuredly a great Profit is
in every State to be raised; chiefly where Peace has long continued, and where
the Country affords much plenty of Commodities to be carried out, and where
Ports are to receive Shipping.

The moderating of Interest is ever necessary, and chiefly in this Age, by
reason that Money abounds in Europe; since the Traffic into the Indies; for
such Men as have Money in their Hands great plenty, would in no wise employ the
same in Merchandise, if lawful it were to receive the utmost Usury, being a
Course of most Profit and greatest Security.

The taking away of superfluous Expenses is no other thing than a certain wise
and laudable Parsimony; which the Romans and other well governed States did
use. These Expenses consist in Fees, Allowances, and Wages granted to Ministers
of little or no Necessity; also in Pensions, Rewards, Entertainments and
Donaries, with small Difficulty to be moderated, or easily to be suppressed.

So Henry the Fourth of France by putting his Courtiers to Board-wages was said
to make Money with his Teeth.
By abridging or taking away of these needless Expenses a marvelous Profit will
be saved for the Prince; but if he continue them, and by imposing upon the
People do think to increase his Treasure or Revenue, besides the loss of their
Love, he may also hazard their Obedience, with many other Inconveniences.

Touching War.
Whatsoever Prince or Commonweal is Neighbor to any People which can, will,
or were wont to offend, it is necessary to have not only all things prepared
for defense of his Person and Country, but also to forecast and use every
caution and other diligence: For the Inconveniences which happen to
Government, are sudden and unlooked for; yea, the Providence and Provision
required in this Case ought to be such as the Expenses all other ways employed
must stay to supply the Necessity of War.

CHAP XII. Extrinsick Observation, showing how to deal with Neighbor Princes
and Provinces respectively, how to prevent their Designs, and decipher their
Intendments.
THIS first Point of matter Extrinsick is of such quality as being well handled
procures great good, but otherwise becomes dangerous; for the Proceeding must
be diverse according to the diversity of the Ends which the Prince or Governor
intends; for if he desire to continue Peace with his Neighbors, one way is to
be taken; but otherwise he is to work that seeks occasion to break, and to
become an Enemy to one or more of his Neighbors. If he do desire to live
peaceably withal, then he is to observe these Rules ( viz.)

First, To hold and continue firmly all Contracts and Capitulations.

Secondly, To show himself resolved neither to offer nor take the least touch
of Wrong or Injury.

Thirdly, With all care and favor to further Commerce and reciproke Traffic
for the profit of the Subject, and increase of the Princes Revenue.

Fourthly, Covertly to win so great Confidence with Neighbors, as in all
actions of unkindness among them he may be made Umpire.

Fifthly, To become so well believed with them as he may remove such
Diffidences as grow to his own disadvantage.

Sixthly, Not to deny Protection or Aid to them that are the weakest, and
chiefly such as do and will endure his Fortune.

Lastly, In Favoring, Aiding and Protecting (unless necessity shall otherwise
so require) to do it moderately, so as they who are to be aided, become not
Jealous, and consequently seek Adherency elsewhere, which oft-times has opened
way to other Neighbors that desire a like occasion.

How to prevent their Designs.
This Point in time of War is with great diligence to be looked unto; also in
time of Peace to prevent all occasions that may kindle War is behoveful; for to
foresee what may happen to the Prejudice of a Princes Profit or Reputation, is
a part of great Wisdom. The means to attain the Intelligence of these things
are two.

The First is by Friends, the next by Espials; the one for the most part
faithful, the other not so assured.

These matters are well to be considered; for albeit the Nature of Man desires
nothing more than curiously to know the doings of others, yet are those things
to be handled with so great Secrecy and Dissimulation as the Princes Intent be
not in any wise suspected, nor the Ministers made odious; for these sometimes
to win themselves Reputation, do devise causes of Difference where no need is,
divining of things Future which prove to the Prejudice of their own Prince.

To win Confidence with Neighbors.
This is chiefly attained unto by being Loved and Honored; for these things do
work so many good Effects, as daily Experience suffices without any express
Example to prove them of great Force.

The ways to win Love and Trust, is in all Actions to proceed Justly, and
sometimes to wink at Wrongs, or set aside unnecessary Revenges; and if any
thing be done not justifiable, or unfit to be allowed, as oftentimes it
happens, there to lay the Blame upon the Minister, which must be performed
with so great show of Revenge and Dissimulation, by reproving and punishing the
Minister, as the Princes offended may be satisfied, and believe that the cause
of Unkindness proceeded from thence.

Now only it rests that somewhat should be said touching Provision, to the
end the People may not be drawn into despair by Famine, or extreme Dearth of
Victual, and chiefly for want of Corn, which is one principal Consideration to
be regarded, according to the Italian Proverb, Pane in Piazza, Giustitia in
Palazzo, siverezza per tutto: Whereunto I could wish every Prince or Supreme
Governor to be thus qualified (viz.) Facile de audienza: non facile de
credenza, desioso de spedition, essemplare in costunii proprii, and inquei de
sua casa tale chevorra governare, e non esser governato da altro; he della
raggione.

CHAP. XIII. Observations confirmed by Authorities of Princes and
Principalities, Charactering an excellent Prince or Governor.
EVery good and lawful Principality is either Elective or Successive: Of them
Election seems the more Ancient; but Succession in diverse respects the
better: Minore discrimine sumitur Princeps quam quaeritur. Tac.

The chief and only Endeavor of every good Prince, ought to be the Commodity
and Security of the Subjects, as contrariwise the Tyrant seeks his own
private Profit with the Oppression of his People: Civium non servitus sed
tutela tradita est. Sal.

To the Perfection of every good Prince, two things are necessarily required (
viz.) Prudence and Virtue; the one to direct his Doings, the other to govern
his Life: Rex eris si recte feceris. Hor.

The second care which appertains to a good Prince, is to make his Subjects
like unto himself; for thereby he is not only honored, but they also the better
governed: Facile imperium in bonos. Plaut.

Subjects are made good by two means ( viz.) by constraint of Law, and the
Princes Example; for in all Estates, the People do imitate those Conditions
whereunto they see the Prince inclined: Quicquid faciunt principes, praecipere
videantur. Quintil.

All Virtues be required in a Prince, but Justice and Clemency are most
necessary; for Justice is a Habit of doing things Justly, as well to himself as
others, and giving to every one so much as to him appertains: This is that
Virtue that preserves Concord among Men, and whereof they be called good: Jus
and acquit as vincula civitatum. Cic.

The Author of the Epistle Dedicatory to the Duchess of Suffolk, prefixed to
Mr. Latimer's Sermons, says, that Lawyers covetousness has almost devoured
England.
It is the Quality of this Virtue also, to proceed equally and temperately; it
informs the Prince not to surcharge the Subjects with infinite Laws; for
thereof proceeds the Impoverishment of the Subjects and the Enriching of
Lawyers, a kind of Men which in Ages more Ancient, did seem of no Necessity:
Sine causidicis satis foelices olim fuere futur acque sunt urbes. Sal.

The next Virtue required in Princes is Clemency, being an Inclination of the
Mind to Lenity and Compassion, yet tempered with Severity and Judgment; this
Quality is fit for all great Personages, but chiefly Princes, because their
occasion to use it is most; by it also the Love of Men is gained: Qui vult
regnare, languida regnet manu. Sen.

After Clemency, Fidelity is expected in all good Princes, which is a certain
Performance and Observation of Word and Promise; this Virtue seems to
accompany Justice, or is as it were the same, and therefore most fit for
Princes: Sanctissimum generis humani bonum. Live.

As Fidelity follows Justice, so does Modesty accompany Clemency; Modesty is
a Temperature of Reason, whereby the Mind of Man is so governed, as neither in
Action or Opinion he over-deemeth of himself, or any thing that is his; a
Quality not common in Fortunate Folk, and most rare in Princes: Superbia
commune nobilitatis malum. Sal.

This Virtue does also moderate all External Demonstration of Insolence, Pride
and Arrogance, and therefore necessary to be known of Princes, and all others
whom Favor or Fortune have advanced: Impone foelicitati tua fraenos, facilius
illam reges. Curt.

But as Princes are to observe the Bounds of Modesty, so may they not forget
the Majesty appertaining to their Supreme Honor, being a certain Reverend
Greatness due to Princely Virtue and Royal State; a Grace and Gravity no less
beseeming a Prince than Virtue it self; for neither overmuch Familiarity, nor
too great Austerity, ought to be used by Princes: Facilitas autoritatem,
severitas amorem minuit. Tac.

To these Virtues we may apply Liberality, which does not only Adorn, but
highly Advance the Honor due to Princes; thereby also the good Will of Men is
gained; for nothing is more fitting a Prince's Nature than Bounty, the same
being accompanied with Judgment, and performed according to the Laws of
Liberality: Perdere multi sciunt, donare nesciunt. Tac.

It seems also that Prudence is not only fit, but also, among other Virtues,
necessary in a Prince; for the daily use thereof is in all Humane Actions
required, and chiefly in Matters of State and Government: Prudentia imperantis
propria and unica virtus. Arist.

The Success of all Worldly Proceedings, does show that Prudence has compassed
the Prosperous Event of Humane Actions, more than Force of Arms or other Power:
Men's una sapiens plurium vincit manus. Eurip.

Prudence is either natural, or received from others; for whosoever can Counsel
himself what is fit to be done, needs not the Advice of others; but they that
want such Perfection, and are nevertheless capable, and are willing to know
what others inform, ought to be accounted wise enough: Laudatissimus est qui
cuncta videbit, sed laudandus est is qui paret recte monenti. Hesiod.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Princes intimate Counselors and Ministres of State, with
their several Requisites.
ALbeit the excellent Spirit of some Princes be such as does justly deserve the
highest Commendation; yet for that every Course of Life needs the Aid of Men,
and the Mind of one cannot comprehend the infinite Care appertaining to public
Affairs; it behooves Princes to be assisted: Magna negotia, adjutoribus egent.
Tac.

The Assistants may be properly divided into Counselors and Ministers; the one
to Advise, the other to Execute: Without Counsel, no Kingdom, no State, no
private House can stand; for Experience has proved, that Commonweals have
prospered so long as good Counsel did govern, but when Favor, Fear or
Voluptuousness entered, those Nations became disordered; and in the end subject
to Slavery: Quiddam sacrum profecto est Consultatio. Plato.

Counselors are Men specially selected to give Advice to Princes or
Commonwealths, as well in Peace as in War; the chief Qualities required in such
Men, are Fidelity and Knowledge; which two concurring do make them both Good
and Wise, and consequently fit for Counsel: Prudentis proprium munus recte
consulere. Arist.

The Election of Counselors is and ought to be chiefly among Men of long
Experience and grave Years; for as Youth is fittest for Action in respect of
Corporal Strength; so elder Folk having felt the Force of every Fortune, and
observed the Course of Worldly Proceedings do seem most meet for Consultation:
Consilia senum, facta juvenum. Plato.

Albeit we say that the Excellency of Wisdom should be in Counselors; yet do
we not require so quick and fiery a Conceit as is more apt for Innovation than
orderly Government: Hebetiores quam acutiores melius Remp. administrant. Thucyd.

To Fidelity and Experience we wish that our Counselors should be endued with
Piety, Liberty, Constancy, Modesty and Silence; for as the Aid and Assistance
of God is that which governs all good Counsels, so liberty of Speech, and
magnanimous uttering of what is good and fit, is necessary in Counselors.
Likewise to be constant and not to vary in opinion, either for Fear or Favor,
is very commendable: Also as Modesty in giving Counsel escheweth all Offenses,
and gains good Will, so Secrecy is the best and most secure means to govern
all public Affairs: Res magnae sustineri non possunt ab eo qui tacere nequit.
Curt.

The first Obstacle to good Counsel is Pertinacy or Opiniativeness; a Condition
far unfit for Counselors; yet some Men are so far in love with their own
Opiniastre Conceits, as that they cannot patiently endure Opposition. Secondly,
Discord must from Counselors be removed, because private Offense many times
impeacheth public Proceedings. Thirdly, Affection is an Enemy to Counsel, the
same being commonly accompanied with Anger, wherewith nothing can be rightly or
considerately done. Lastly, Avarice seems a Vice worthy to be abhorred of all
Counselors, because it drives away both Fidelity and Honesty, the principal
Pillars of all good Counsel: Pessimum very affectus and judicii venenum, utilit
as. Tac.

To good Counsel other Impediments there are, which square not with Wisdom; for
all Crafty and Hazarding Counsels do seem in the beginning likely to succeed;
but afterward and chiefly in the end do prove hard and of evil Event. It
therefore seems behoveful to be wary in resolving, and bold in executing:
Animus vereri qui scit, scit tuto aggredi. Pub.

Another Let to good Consultation is immoderate Desire, which every wise Man
must endeavor to restrain: Cupiditate pauca recte fiunt, circumspectione
plurima. Thucyd.

Thirdly, Haste is an Enemy to good Deliberation; for whosoever greedily desires
any thing, proceeds rashly; and rash proceeding ends ever in Repentance:
Scelera impetu, bona consilia mora valescunt. Tac.

Of Ministers of State.
Having already spoken of Counselors, somewhat is to be spoken of Ministers; I
mean those that either publicly or privately serve the Prince in any Function;
in choice of which Men, care must be had; First, That they be Persons honestly
born; for no Man descended of base Parentage may be admitted, unless in him be
found some noble and excellent Virtue: Optimus quisque Nobilissimus. Plato.

Secondly, They ought to be of honest Condition, and of good Fame; for that
Commonweal is better and more secure, where the Prince is not good, than is
that where his Ministers are Evil. It seems therefore that Ministers should
be Men of good Quality and Blameless: Emitur sola virtute potestas. Claud.

Thirdly, Consideration is to be had of their Capacity and Fitness, for that
Function wherein they are to be used; for as some Men are apt for Learning, so
others are naturally disposed to Arms. Also it is necessary that every one
Square with the Office whereunto he is appointed, in which matter some Princes
have used great Caution; for as they little liked of Men Excellent, so they
utterly detested the Vicious; the one they doubted to trust in regard of
themselves, the other were thought a public Indignity to the State. Wise Men
have therefore resolved, that those Wits which are neither over-haughty and
singular, nor they which be base or dull, are fittest for Princes Secrets and
Services; howsoever we may hereof say with Tacitus: Nescio quomodo Aulica haec
comitia affectus dirigit, and fato quodam ac sort nascendi, ut caetera, ita
principum inclinatio in hos, offensio in illos est. Tac.

And because the Course and Quality of Men's Lives serving in Court, is of all
other the most uncertain and dangerous, great Heed and Circumspection ought
therein to be used; for whosoever serves negligently, forgetting the dutiful
Endeavors appertaining to the place, seems to take a way of no good speed:
Quanto quis obsequio promptior, tanto honoribus and opibus extollitur. Tac.

It shall also become such a Man to look well unto his own Profit, and behave
himself rather Boldly than Bashfully: Malus minister Regii imperii pudor. Sen.

To be Modest, and closely to handle all Actions, is also a course well
beseeming a Courtier; neither shall he do well to attribute any good Success to
his own Virtue or Merit, but acknowledge all to proceed from the Prince's
Bounty and Goodness, by which means Envy is eschewed, and the Prince not robbed
of his Honor: Haec est conditio Regum, casus tantum adversos hominibus
tribuant, secundos virtuti suae. Prove. Emped.

And to conclude these Precepts Summarily, I say it behooves all Ministers and
Servants in Court to be Patient, Wary and of few words: Fraudum seeds Aula. Sen.

CHAP. XV. The Art of Ruling, or Mystery of Regiment.
TO Govern, is a certain Skill how to command and continue Subjects in due
Obedience, so as offend they ought not, or if they will they cannot; wherein
two special things are to be considered ( viz.) the Nature of Men, and the
Nature of the State; but first the Condition of the Vulgar must be well
conceived: Noscenda natura vulgi, and quibus modis temperanter habeatur. Tac.

The Disposition of Men is diverse; some are apt to Anger, some are Hardy, some
Fearful; it therefore behooves the Prince to accommodate his Government to the
Humor of People whom he governs: Principis est virtus maxima nosse suos. Mart.

Likewise the Nature of Commonweals is mutable and subject to change, and
Kingsare not only accompanied with Fortune, but also followed with Hate, which
breeds a continual Diffidence, chiefly toward those that are nearest to
Majesty: Suspectus semper invisusque dominantibus quisquis proximus destinatur.
Tac.

Moreover the Vulgar sort is generally variable, Rash, Hardy, and void of
Judgment; Ex opinione multa, ex veritate pauca judicat. Cic.

To confirm a Government, Force and Arms are of greatest necessity; by force I
mean the Guards and Arms which Princes use for their Defense or Ornament; Miles
in foro, Miles in curia principem comitari debet. Tac.

To this may be added Fortification and strong Buildings, in these days much
used by new Princes, and others also to whom People yield, not willing
Obedience. In ancient times Princes planted Colonies as well to suppress
Rebellion in Conquered Countries, as to front suspected Neighbors: Coloniae
vera seeds servitutis. Tac.

The Government of Princes is also greatly increased by a Virtue, which I call
a commendable Affection in Subjects, proceeding of Love and Authority: These
effects do grow from the Princes own Merit, but their being lives in the mind
of the People; this Love is gained by Lenity, Liberality, and Mercy; yet is
every of them to be tempered: Nec aut reverentiam terrore, aut amorem
humilitate captibis. Plin.

Affection is also no way sooner won then by Liberality, the same being used
with Judgment and Moderation. Bellorum sociis, periculorum consortibus, sivi de
te been ac fortiter -- -- meritis. Sen.

By Indulgence likewise, and Princely Affability, the love of Men is gained;
for the Multitude desire no more than necessary Food and Liberty, to use
ordinary Recreations: Vulgo, sicut pueris, omne ludicrum in pretio est. Sen.

CHAP. XVI. Of Princely Authority; Wherein it consists, and how far to be
extended and delegated.
AUthority is a certain reverent Impression in the Minds of Subjects and others
touching the Princes Virtue and Government; it rests chiefly in Admiration
and Fear: Ingenita quibusdam gentibus erga reges suos veneratio. Curt.

Authority consists in three things; ( viz.) the Form of Government, the
Strength of the Kingdom, and the Condition of the Prince; for in them all
Reputation and Security rests: Majest as Imperii, salutis tutela. Curt.

Whosoever desires to govern well, it behooves him to use Severity, Constancy and
Restraint; for over much Lenity introduces Contempt, and certain hope of
Impunity; the Condition of Men being such as cannot be restrained by Shame, yet
it is to be commanded by Fear: Salutaris severit as vincit inanem speciem
clementiae. Cic.

Yet ought Severity to be used with great respect and sparingly, because over
great Terror breeds Desparation: Poena ad paucos, metus ad omnes perveniat.
Cic.

To govern constantly is nothing else but to continue the old and ancient Laws
in force without Change or Innovation unless exceeding great Commodity or
urgent Necessity shall so require: for where extreme Punishments are used,
Reformation is always needful: Nocet interdum priscus rigor and nimia
severitas. Tac.

Also to restrain Authority is a matter of great Necessity and worthy a Wise
Prince; else he makes others partakers of the Honor and Power to himself only
due, the same being also dangerous: Periculosam privati hominis nomen supra
(immo and juxta) principes extolli. Tac.

It seems also perilous that great Authority given to private Men should
belong; for thereby oft-tentimes they are made Insolent and apt to Innovation:
Libertatis sive principatus magna custodia est, si magna imperio diuturna esse
non sinas. Live.

Authority is also reinforced and enlarged by Power, without which no Prince
can either take from others or defend his own: Parum tuta sine viribus
Majestas. Live.

CHAP. XVII. Of Power and Force; and how to be raised and maintained.
POwer and Strength is attained by these five ways, Money, Arms, Counsel,
Friends and Fortune; but of these the first and most forcible is Money: Nihil
tam munitum quod non expugnari pecunia possit. Cic.

Next to Money Arms are of most use as well to defend as to offend; to keep,
and to conquer; for oft-tentimes occasion is to be offered as well to take from
others, as to hold what is our own: Sua retinere privatae est domus, de alienis
certare Regia laus est. Tac.

Also of great and necessary use is Counsel, to devise how Arms ought to be
employed or enforced: Arma concilio temperanda. Tac.

Likewise Friends and Confederates do greatly increase the Virtue of Power, the
same being such as have both wit and ability to aid: In caducum parietem ne
inclina. Adri.

The last, yet not the least part of Power consists in Fortune; whereof daily
Experience may be seen; for the Success of all humane Actions seem rather to
proceed from Fortune than Virtue: Omni ratione potentior fortuna. Curt.

To these Particularities concerning Power, we may add the Qualities of the
Prince, which greatly Grace his Authority; these are partly internal, and
partly external: by the one I mean the Virtues of the Mind, by the other a
certain seemly Behavior and comely gesture of the Body; of the first kind I do
suppose Piety and Providence to be the chief, for Piety makes a Prince
Venerable, and like unto God: Oportet principem res divinas videri curare serio
and ante omnia. Arist.

Providence is a Forecast and likely conjectures of things to come, supposed to
be in those Princes that in their Actions proceed slowly and circumspectly, it
seems also a course of Princely Discretion to be retired and not ordinarily
to converse with many: Autoritatem absentia tueare. Suet.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Conspiracy and Treason, with the Causes and ways of Prevention
or Discovery.
COnspiracy is commonly addressed to the Princes Person; Treasons are addressed
against his Government, Authority, Country, Subjects, or Places of Srength.
These Mischiefs are easily feared, but hardly eschewed; for albeit open Enemies
are openly encountered, yet Fraud and Subtilty are secret Foes, and consequently
not to be avoided: Occulta pericula neque praevidere neque vitare in promptu
est. Salust.

The danger of Conspiracy proceeds of diverse Causes, as Avarice, Infidelity
of Subjects, Ambition in Servants, and Corruption in Soldiers, therefore with
great difficulty to be avoided: Vitae tuae dominus est, quisquis suam
contempsit. Sen.

Notwithstanding it seems that either by Inquisition, Punishment, Innocence,
or Destiny, the evil Affection of Men may be oft-tentimes discovered: 1. For
whosoever will curiously inquire and consider the Actions and ordinary Speechees of
Men (I mean those that be Persons of Honor and Reputation) may oft-tentimes
vent the Mine that lurketh in the Minds: Quoniam raro nisi male loqunti mali
faciunt. Lips.

2. Punishment is likewise a thing so terrible that the Consideration thereof
with the hope of Reward does often discover those dangerous Intentions:
Cruciatu aut praemio cunct a pervia sunt. Tac.

But as it is Wisdom in Princes to give ear to Informers, so are they not
always to be believed; for Hope, Envy, Hate, or some other Passion oft-tentimes
draws them to speak untruly: Quis innocens esse potest si accusare sufficit?
Tac.

3. The third and likeliest Defense against Conspiracy is the Princes own
Innocence; for never having injured any Man, it cannot be thought there lives
any Subject so lewd as will endeavor to hurt him: Fidelissima custodia
principis ipsius innocentia. Plin.

4. The last and best Bulward to withstand the force of this Mischief we call
Destiny; which proceeding from the Fountain of Divine Providence, may be truly
called the Will of God; in whose only Power it rests to protect and defend
good Princes: Ille erit a latere tuo, and custodiet pedem tuum ne capiaris.
Salo.

Treasons are most commonly enterprized by covetous Persons, who preferring
private Profit before Fame or Fidelity, do not fear to enter into any impious
Action: To this humor ambitious Men dissentious, and all such as be desirous of
Innovation, are inclined: Pulcra loquentes iidem in pectore prava struentes.
Hom.

To these Offenders no Punishment is equal to their impious Merit, can be
devised, being Persons odious as well to Friends as Foes: Proditores etiam in
quos anteponunt, invisi sunt. Tac.

CHAP. XIX. Of Public Hate and Contempt, with the Occasions and Means to
redress and avoid it.
HAving briefly touched the Virtues and Means whereby Princes are maintained in
Authority and Honor, let something be said of the Causes from whence their
Ruin does proceed; the chief whereof seems to be Hate and Contempt: Hate
comes of Fear, which the more Common it is, the more Dangerous: Nulla vis
imperii tanta est, quae premente metu possit esse diuturna. Cic.

The causes of Fear are Punishments, Impositions and Rigor; and therefore it
behooves a Prince not only to shun them, but to eschew those Actions whereby he
may reasonable incur their Suspision: Sentias enim homines ut metuant aut
oderint, non minus opinione and fama, quam certa aliqua ratione moveri. Cic.

Yet Punishment, Imposition and Censure are in all States necessary, although
they show and seem terrible, and consequently breed a certain Desperation in
Subjects, unless they be discreetly and modestly used; for extreme and frequent
Punishments taste of Cruelty; great and many Imposts savor of Covetousness;
Censure of Manners when it exceeds the quality of Offenses, does seem Rigor
in these matters; therefore it behooves the Prince to be moderate and
cautelous, chiefly in Capital Punishment, which must be confined within the
Bounds of Justice: Sit apud principem parsimonia etiam viliffimi sanguinis. Sen.

But if for Security sake the Prince be forced to punish, let the same be done
with show of great Sorrow and Lothness: Tanquam invitus and magnocum tormento
ad castigandum veniat. Sen.

Let all Punishments also be slowly executed; for they that are hastily
punished do seem to have been willingly condemned; neither ought any Capital
Punishment to be inflicted but only that which is profitable to the
Commonweal, and for Example sake: Non tam ut ipsi pareant, quam ut alios
pereundo deterreant. Sen.

In punishing also a specil respect must be had, that no show of content or
pleasure be taken therein: Forma rabiei est sanguine and vulneribus gaudere.
Sen.

Also in Punishing, equality must be observed, and the nature of the Punishment
according to the Custom: Nec eisdem de causis alii plectantur, alii ne
appellentur quidem. Cic.

But in punishing public Offenses wherein a Multitude have part, the Execution
ought to be otherwise, and as it were at an instant, which may happily seem
terrible, but in effect is not: Frequens vindict a paucorum odium reprimit;
omnium irritat. Sen.

Another means to satisfy a People offended is to punish the Ministers of
Cruelty, and with their Blood to wash away the common hatred. Piaculares
publici odii victimae. Plin. By this King David did appease the Gibeonites.

The next cause of Discontent comes of Impositions, under which word is
comprehended all Levies of Money, a matter nothing pleasing to People, as that
which they esteem equal to their own Lives: Pecunia anima and sanguis est
mortalibus. Plaut.

First, to remove Hate conceived of this cause, there is nothing better then
public Expostulation of Necessity: for what Commonwealth or Kingdom can be
without Tributes? Nulla quies gentium sine armis, nec arma sine stipendiis, nec
stipendia sine Tributis haberi queunt. Tac.

The second Remedy against Hate for Impositions is to make moderate Levies and
rare. For as Tiberius the Emperor was wont to say, a Sheep should be fleeced
not flead: Qui nimis emungit, elicit sanguinem. Tac.

Thirdly, also to eschew the Offense of People, it behooves the Prince to have
a vigilant Eye on Informers, Promoters, and such fiscal Ministers, whose
Cruelty and covetous Proceedings do oft-tentimes occasion great Hate; but this
mischief may be, though hardly, encountered, either by choosing honest Officers,
or (proving otherwise) not only to remain them but to use them as Spunges:
Exprimendi post quam biberint. Suet.

In all Impositions or Taxations, no Cruelty or Force ought to be used, the
second cause to kindle Hate: and to meet with that mischief, nothing is better
than to proceed moderately, and without Extremity: Ne Boves ipsos, mox agros,
postremo corpora servitio aut poenae tradant. Tac.

The fourth Remedy is the Princes own Parsimony, not giving so largely to
private Persons as thereby to be forced to take from the Multitude: Magnae opes
non tam multa capiendo, quam haud multa perdendo, quaeruntur. Maecaenas.

The last help against Hate is in Taxation to proceed equally, indifferently,
and without Favor or Respect; and that the Assessors of Taxes may be elected of
the meaner fort of People: Populis maximam fidem rerum suarum habet. Tac.

Touching Censure, which we numbered amongst the causes whereof Hate is
conceived, much needs not to be spoken, because the same is discontinued, or
rather utterly forgotten; yet does it seem a thing necessary, being a certain
Observation and Controlement of such evil Manners and Disorders, as were not by
Law corrigible; these Officers were of the Romans called Magistri pudoris and
modestiae. Livi.

To the Function of Censures these two things are anciently subject Manners,
and Excess; under Manners I comprehend Wantonness, Drunkenness, Dicing,
Brawling, Perjury, and all such Lewdness as Modesty condemns. These Disorders
were anciently punished by the discretion of Censors in all Ages and Sexes, to
the end that Idleness might be generally avoided. Universa plebs habeat negotia
sua, quibus a malo publico detineatur. Salust.

Excess includes Riotousness, expense of Money, Prodigal Housekeeping,
Banqueting and Superfluity in Apparel, which things are the Mothers of many
Mischiefs. It also seems in some sort perilous to the Prince that the Subject
should exceed either in Covetize or Consuming: Nemo nimis excedat, five
amicorum copia, sine opum. Arist.

The Punishment inflicted upon these sorts of Offenders, were either Ignominy,
or Pecuniary Punishments: Censoris judicium damnato nihil affert nisi ruborem.
Tac.

The first and chiefest means to remove these Inconveniences, is the Princes
own Example, whose Life being well censured, easily reduces others to order.
Vita principis censura perpetua. Plin.

Secondly, Those Disorders may be taken away without danger, if the Censures do
proceed by degrees and leasurely; for the Nature of Man may not suddenly be
altered. Vitia quaedam tollit facilius princeps, si eorum sit patiens. Sen.

These are the chiefest Rules whereby to eschew Hate; but impossible it is for
any Prince or Minister utterly to avoid it; for being himself good, he
incurreth the Offense of all bad Folk, if he be Evil, Good Men will hate him;
this Danger therefore Wise and Virtuous Princes have little regarded; because
Hate may be gained as well by good as evil Doing: Odia qui nimium timet,
regnare nescit. Sen.

One other means to remove this Error, is, to reward the good and well
deserving Subjects; for no Man can think him Cruel, that for love to Virtue
uses Austerity; which will appear, when he bestows Bountifully on the Good:
Praemio and poena Respublica continetur. Solon.

The other Vice which indangereth the State of Princes, we call Contempt, being
a certain base and vile Conceit, which enters into the Subjects, Strangers or
Servants, of the Prince and his Proceedings; for the Authority of a King may be
resembled to the Powers of Man's Mind, whereunto the Hands, the Feet, the Eyes,
do by consent obey: Vires imperii in consensu obedientium sunt. Livi.

The Causes of Contempt do proceed chiefly from the Form of Government,
Fortune, or the Prince's Manners; the Form of Government becomes Contemptible,
when the Prince, desiring to be thought Merciful, rules rather Pitifully than
Justly; which manner of Proceeding takes away all Reverence in the People, and
in lieu thereof, enters Liberty, or at least a certain Boldness to offend:
Facult as faciendi quod cuilibet visum, non potest comprimere ingenitam
singulis hominibus pravitatem. Tac.

Also to be Mutable, Irresolute, Light and Inconsiderate in bestowing the
Honors and Offices of State, makes the Prince Contemptible: Qui praesentibus
fruitur, nec in longius consultat. Arist.

But if Contempt be caused by Fortune, or as may be said more reasonably, by
Destiny, and that those Friends do fail, who ought in Duty to defend the Prince
and his Authority, then is there small hope to eschew Contempt: Fato obnoxia
virtus. Plaut.

The Prince's Manners do breed Contempt, when he yields his Affections to
Sensuality and Sloth, or if he incur the Suspicion of Simplicity, Cowardice, or
any such Vice, unworthy the Dignity he bears: Common People do sometimes also
disesteem the Prince for external and light causes, as Deformity of Person,
Sickness or such like: Mos vulgi est, fortuita and externa ad culpam trahere.
Tac.

CHAP. XX. Of Diffidence and Dissimulation in the Management of State Affairs.
ALbeit roundness and plain dealing be most worthy Praise, chiefly in private
Persons; yet because all Men in their Actions do not so proceed, it behooves
Wise Men and Princes, above others, at occasions to Semble and Dissemble; for
as in all Actions a Prince ought to be Slow and Advised; so in Consent and
Believing, Haste and Facility is most dangerous; and though Credulity be rather
an Error than a Fault, yet for Princes it is both Unfit and Perilous. Wherefore
it imports them to be defended with this Caution, Nihil credendo, atque omnia
cavendo. Cic.

Notwithstanding he must not show himself Diffident or Distrustful utterly; but
as I wish he should not over-slightly believe all Men, so ought he not for
small causes distrust every Man: Multi fallere docuerunt, dum timent falli. Sen.

Dissimulation is as it were begotten by Diffidence, a Quality in Princes of so
great Necessity, as moved the Emperor Tiberius to say, Nescit regnare, qui
nescit dissimulare.

The Necessity of Dissimulation is chiefly to be used with Strangers and
Enemies; it also shows a certain Discretion in Magistrates, sometimes to
disguise with Friends when no Offense does thereof follow: Doli non sunt doli,
nisi astu colas. Plaut.

This kind of Craft, albeit in every Man's Conceit not praisable, is
nevertheless tolerable, and for Princes and Magistrates (the same being used to
good ends) very necessary. But those Cunnings which are contrary to Virtue,
ought not of Honest Men to be used; neither dare I commend Adulation and
Corruption, though they be often used in Court, and are of some Learned Writers
allowed: Decipere pro moribus temporum, prudentia est. Plin.

By great Subtilty and Frauds, contrary to Virtue and Piety, I mean Perjury and
Injustice, which though all Men in Words detest, yet in Deeds are used of many,
persuading themselves, by Cavillations and Sophistications, to excuse the
Impiety of their False Oaths; as it is written of Lysander, Pueros talis, viros
juramentis circumvenire solebat. Plut.

CHAP. XXI. Of War Defensive and Invasive; with Instructions touching Laws of
Arms, Soldiers and Military Discipline.
THE Art Military is of all other Qualities most necessary for Princes, for
without it they cannot be defended; force of Men only suffices not, unless the
same be governed by Council, and Martial Wisdom: Duo sunt quibus resp.
servatur; in hosts fortitudo, and domi concordia. Tac.

Military knowledge concerns War, and every War is either Foreign or
Domestical. Touching Foreign, it must be considered when it must be begun, how
to continue it, and when to be ended; to begin War, a Prince is to take heed
that the Cause be Just, and the Enterprise advisedly entered into: Sunt enim and
belli sicut pacis jura, justeque ea non minus ac fortiter gerere debes. Livi.

The Laws of Arms are in all Commonweals to be duly observed; for to enter
Fight rashly and without respect to Reason, were Beastly; also to Kill or Slay
would work no better Effect, than that all Nations should without Mercy Murder
one another: Barbaro ritu coedem coede, and sanguinem sanguine expiare. Sal.

No War therefore is to be made, but such as is Just; and in every Just War
these three things are to be looked into ( viz.) That the Author be of
Authority, That the Cause be Good, and the End Just; for in all States, the
Prince, or they in whom the Sovereignty rests, are the Just Authors of War;
others have no such Authority: Si quis privatim sine publico scito, pacem
bejumve fecerit, capitale esto. Plato.

Wars are of two sortt; Defensive and Offensive; the one to Resist, the other
to Invade; against Defense nothing can be said, because it is Natural and
Necessary. Est non modo justum sed etiam necessarium cum vi vis illat a
defenditur. Cic.

Defensive War is of two sorts, either to defend thine own, or thy Friends; for
it is reason that every one should keep securely that which to him
appertains; and therewith also by Arms to defend the Liberty of Country,
Parents and Friends: Nullum bellum a civitate suscipitur nisi aut pro fide aut
pro salute. Cic.

The like reason leads us to assist and protect Friends; for the common
Obligation of Humane Society does so require: Qui enim non obsistit si potest,
injuriae, tam est in vitio, quam si parents aut patriam, aut socios deserat.
Cic.

Invasion is also just and allowable, but not ever; for whosoever has been robbed,
or spoiled of his Lands or Goods, may lawfully seek Repossession by Force; yet
so as before any Force be used, he first civilly seek Restitution, wherein if
Justice be denied, then is the use of Arms necessary: Justum bellum quibus
necessarium; and pia arma quibus nulla nisi in armis relinquitur spes. Live.

Likewise Invasion is lawful against Barbarians, whose Religion and Impiety
ought to be abhorred, chiefly if they be Potent and apt to offend; for the
cause of such War is Compulsion and Suppression of Evil: Cui licentia
iniquitatis eripitur, utiliter vincitur. August.

Finally, To conclude this matter of Invasion, I say, That no Revenge, no
desire of Honor or Empire, are any lawful Causes of War; but the intent thereof
ought to be directed only to Defense and Security: For Wise Men do take Arms to
win Peace, and in hope of Rest they endure Travel: It a bellum suscipiatur ut
nihil aliud quam pax quaesit a videatur. Cic.

Having said somewhat against unjust War, let us speak of Temerity and
unadvised War, an Enterprise worthy discommendation: Omnes bellum sumunt
facile, agerrime desinunt; nec in ejusdem potestate initium and finis est. Sal.

A wise I rince therefore ought neither to undertake any unlawful Invasion, nor
without sober and mature Deliberation enter into any War, as he that is
unwilling to offend, yet of Courage enough to defend: Nec provoces bellum, nec
timeas. Plin.

To make War three things are required, Money, Men and Arms; and to maintain a
War, Provision and Council, are needful: Therefore a wise Prince, before he
begins a War, does carefully consider what Forces and charge thereunto
belongs: Diu apparandum est bellum, ut vincas melius. Pub.

Above all other Provisions, care must be had, that Bread be not wanting; for
without it neither Victory nor Life can be looked for: Qui frumentum
necessariumque commeatum non praeparat, vincitur sine ferro. Vegetius.

Lastly, It behooves a Prince always to have Arms in readiness, I mean,
Harness, Horses, Weapons, Artillery, Engines, Powder, and every other thing
necessary either for Service on Horse or Foot: We may add hereunto Ships, and
Shipping of all sorts, with every Furniture of Offense or Defense; for these
Preparations make a Prince formidable, because no Man dare do or attempt Injury
to that King or People, where Preparation is ever ready to revenge: Qui
desiderat pacem, praeparat bellum. Cass.

By Men we mean a Multitude of Subjects armed, trained to defend or offend:
These are of two sorts, Captains and Soldiers; and Soldiers are either Footmen
or Horsemen; the one of great use in the Champion, the other in Mountainous
places; also for defense or assault of Towns or Grounds fortified most
necessary, and consequently meet for Service in all places, which moved Tacitus
to say, Omne in pedite robur. Tac.

For sudden Service, Horses do seem most meet, and the Execution of any
Enterprise is by them most speedily performed: Nevertheless the Actions of
Footmen do seem most certainly executed, chiefly if they be well armed, and
skilfully lead; for so Experience has of late time proved; besides, that they
are of less Expense and of greater number: In universum aestimanti plus in
pedite robur. Tac.

Having thus proved, that both Horse and Foot be necessary, let us remember,
that unless they be serviceable, great Numbers are to small purpose: Manibus
opus est bello, non multis nominibus. Livi.

To make Soldiers serviceable, consists in good Choice and good Discipline;
the one at this day little regarded: Emunt militem, non legunt. Livi.

Soldiers ought to be elected out of the most honest and able Number of Bodies,
and every Company composed of Men known one to the other; for thereby they are
made the more Confident: But hereof is small heed taken, for commonly they are
Purgament a urbium suarum. Curt.

Touching Discipline, it seems that thereof the external Form, and not the
certain Substance, is observed: For as in former Ages Soldiers endeavored to be
Virtuous and Modest, so now they rather study to excel in Riot than in Martial
Knowledge: Exercitus lingua quam manu promptior, praedator est sociis, and ipsa
praeda hostiam. Sal.

For as much as Soldiers are made good by Election and Choice, it seems that
the Foundation and Ground of Service consists in the Discretion and Judgment
of those that have Authority to make Election; yet will we add, that they must
be chosen of Natural Subjects, for Strangers are Covetous, and consequently
Corruptible; they are also Mutinous and Cowardly: Their Custom likewise is to
Rob, Burn and Spoil both Friends and Foes, and to consume the Princes Treasure:
Ossa vides regum vacuis exsucta medullis. Juven.

But the Native Soldier is Faithful and Obedient, Resolute in Fight, Loving to
his Country, and Loyal to his Prince: Gentes quae sub regibus sunt, pro Deo
colunt. Curt.

Native Soldiers are of two sorts, ( viz.) They that be in continual Pay, and
they that are trained ready to serve, but do notwithstanding attend their own
private Affairs, until they be called: The first are for all Princes necessary:
In pace decus, in bello praesidium. Tac.

Of this sort no great number ought to be, as well to eschew Disorder, as also
to save Expenses. The second kind of Foot Soldiers are to be levied in
Villages, as People more patient of Pains, and fit for the Wars; yet so
judiciously disposed as the Citizens: Odio praesentium and non cupidine
mutationis. Tac.

Touching the number of these extraordinary Soldiers, that must be referred to
Discretion: Bellum parare, simul and aerario parcere.

To conclude, I say these numbers of ordinary and extraordinary Foot ought to
be according to the number of the People, not inserting any Gentlemen; for
Service on Horseback is to them only proper: Alas rusticis non tribuo; in
nobilitatem and in divites haeo a pauperibus onera inclines. Livi.

The most certain Notes whereby to conceive the Disposition of Men fit to
become Soldiers, are these Five, The Country where they are Born, their Age,
Proportion of Body, their Quality of Mind, and their Faculty. Touching,

First, Their Country, it is a thing apparently proved, that Mountainous
Regions, or Barren places, and Northern Habitations, do breed Wits well
disposed to the War: Locorum asperit as hominum quoque ingenia durat. Curt.

Secondly, The Age most apt for the War, was anciently observed to be about
eighteen Years, and so the Romans used: Facilius est ad virtutem instruere
novos milites, quaem revocare praeteritos. Veget.

Thirdly, The Stature of a Soldier ought to be observed: Marius liked best the
longest Bodies; Pyrrhus preferred large and well proportioned Men; but Vegetius
in his Choice, rather esteems Strength than Stature: Utilius est fortes milites
esse quam grandes. Veget.

Fourthly, The Mind or Spirit of a Soldier ought to be considered, for that
Mind which is quick, nimble, bold and confident, seems apt for War: He is
also of good Hope, that loves Honor more than Ease or Profit: In brief, Is qui
nihil metuit nisi turpem famam. Sal.

Lastly, It is to be marked in what Art or Faculty a Man has been bred; for it
may be presumed that Fishers, Fowlers, Cooks, and others trained up in
Effeminate Arts, are unfit for Martial Endeavor: And as these Men were, in
respect of their Trade, thought unmeet, so in old time, Slaves and
Masterless-Men were repulsed from Arms, as Persons Infamous: Sed nunc tales
sociantur armis quaeles Domini habere fastidiunt. Veget.

How Soldiers ought to be chosen, these few words we have spoken, may suffice.
Let us therefore say somewhat of Discipline. Choice finds out Soldiers, but
Discipline does make and continue them fit for Service: Paucos viros fortes
natura procreat, bona institutione plures reddat industria. Veget.

Discipline is a certain severe Confirmation of Soldiers in Discipline.
their Valor and Virtue, and is performed by four means, Exercise, Order,
Compulsion and Example. The two first appertain to Valor, the third to Virtue,
the last to both: But of Exercise, first, I say, That a Soldier being chosen
ought to be informed in Arms, and used in Exercise and Action; the word
exercitium imports nothing else: Exercitus dicitur, quod melius fit
exercitando Varro.

Order consists in dividing, disposing, and placing of Men aptly on all
Occasions to be commanded, as the Leaders shall direct: This matter requires a
large Discourse, and therefore I refer it to skilful Captains and Writers, as
Polybius, Vegetius, De la Nonne, and others.

Compulsion and Correction, is that which bridleth and governs the Manners of
Soldiers; for no Order can be observed amongst them, unless they be Continent,
Modest and Abstinent; for Continency is chiefly to be showed in their Diet, and
moderate Desires: Degenerat a robore ac virtute miles assuetudine voluptatum.
Tac.

The Modesty of a Soldier is perceived by his Words, Apparel and Actions: For
to be a Vaunter, or Vainglorious Boaster, is far unfit in him that professes
Honor or Arms, seeing true Virtue is silent: Viri militiae nati, factis magni,
ad verborum linguaeque certamina, rudes. Tac.

The Apparel of a Soldier shows Modesty, if therein he do not exceed; for
albeit it fitteth well the Profession of Arms, to be well armed and decently
apparelled; yet all Superfluity savoreth of Ignorance or Vanity: Horridum
militem esse decet, non coelatum auro argentoque sed ferro. Livi.

Abstinence is also fit for all Soldiers; for thereby guided, they refrain from
Violence and Insolency; by that Rule also they are informed to govern
themselves civilly in the Country where they serve, and likewise in their
Lodgings: Never taking any thing from the Owner, nor committing any Outrage:
Vivant cum provincialibus jure civili, nec insolescat animus qui se sensit
armatum.

The last mark of Discipline we called Example, under which word is
comprehended Reward and Punishment: For Men are rewarded whenever they
receive for any excellent or singular Service, Honor or Riches: And for Evil,
they have their due when they taste the Punishment thereunto belonging:
Necessarium est acrius ille dimicet, quem ad opes and dignitates ordo militiae
and imperatoris judicium consuevit evehere. Veget.

Likewise as Gold and Glory belongs to good and well deserving Soldiers; so
Punishment is due to those that be Vicious and Cowardly; for nothing holds
Soldiers in Obedience so much as the Severity of Discipline: Milites
imperatorum potius quam hostem metuere debent. Veg.

CHAP. XXII. Of Generals and Commanders, and their requisite Abilities in
Martial Enterprises and Expeditions.
OF Soldiers let this little suffice, we will now speak of what Quality
Chieftains and Leaders ought to be, for upon them depends the Welfare of
whole Armies: Militaris turba sine duce, corpus sine spiritu. Curt.

A Chief or General in War, is either of his own Authority Chief, or a General
that commands in the Name of another. Of the first sort are Emperors, Kings
and Princes; of the other, be their Deputies, Lieutenants, Colonels, and indeed
all general Commanders in the War: Now whether it be more Expedient that the
Prince should command in Person or by Deputy, diverse wise Men have diversely
thought, therefore it may be thus distinguished; if the War do then only
concern some particular Part or Province, then may the same be performed by a
Lieutenant; but if the whole Fortune of a Prince do thereupon depend, then is
he to command in his own Person and not otherwise: Dubiis bellorum exemplis
summae rerum and imperii seipsum reservat. Tac.

It therefore imports the Prince sometimes by his own Presence, sometimes by
his Deputation to perform that Office; but however occasion shall require, it
ever behooves that one only Commander ought to be, (for Plurality of Chieftains
does rarely or never work any good Effect) yet with this Caution that he be of
Experience, and Wise: In bellica praefectura major aspectus habendus peritiae
quam virtutis aut morum. Arist.

The Qualities required in a Chiestain are these, Skill, Virtue, Providence,
Authority and Fortune: By Skill we mean he should be of great Knowledge, and
long Experience, or to make a sufficient Captain; the Information of others, or
his own reading is not enough: Qui norit quis ordo agminis, quae cura
exploandi, quantus urgendo trahendove bello modus. Cic.

Military Virtue is a certain Vigor or Force both of Body and Mind to exercise
Soldiers as well in fained War as to fight with the Enemy; and summarily a
Captain ought to be Laboriosus in negotio, fortis in periculo, industrius in
agendo, celeris in conficiendo. Cic.

Next to Virtue we placed Providence as necessary in great Captains; for being
of such Wisdom, they will not hazard nor commit more to Fortune than necessity
shall enforce; yet true it is, Fools and vulgar Folks, that commend or
discommend Actions according to Success, were wont to say, Cunctatio servilis,
statim exequi, Regium est. But advised and provident Captains do think,
Temeritas praeterquam quod stulta, est etiam infelix. Livi.

Albeit Providence be the best mean of good Speed, yet some Captains of that
Quality and in Skill excelling, have been in their Actions unlucky, when others
of less Sufficiency have marvellously prevailed; we may therefore reasonably
say with Cic. Quod olim Maximo, Marcello, Scipioni, Mario and ceteris magnis
Imperatoribus non solum propter virtutem, sed etiam propter fortunam soepius
imperia mandata, atque exercitus esse commissos. Cic.

Lastly, We wished Authority to be in Chieftains, for it greatly imports what
Opinion or Conceit the Enemy has of such a Governor, and likewise how much his
Friends and Confederates do esteem him; but the chief and only means to
maintain Authority, is Austerity and Terror: Dux Authoritatem maximam
severitate sumat, omnes culpas militares legibus vindicet, nulli errantium
credatur ignoscere. Veget.

Also Experience has proved, that such Chieftains as were affable and kind to
their Soldiers, were much loved, yet did they incur a Contempt; but on the
other side, those that commanded severely and terribly, although they gained no
good Will, yet were they ever obeyed: Dux facitis inutilis. App.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Councils in War, and Directions Tactick and Stratagematick,
with Advice how to make an honorable Peace.
AFter Men found and framed fit for the War, to small or no purpose shall they
serve, unless they be employed by Wisdom or good Council: Mon minus est
Imperatoris consilio quam vi persicere. Tac.

Council in War is of two sorts, direct Council and indirect; the first shows
a plain and orderly course for proceeding, as to lay hold on occasion; for as
in all other Humane Actions occasion is of great Force: Occasio in bello solet
amplius juvare quam virtus. Veget.

As Occasions presented are means of good Success, so Fame works great
Effects in the Wars, therefore it behooves a Captain to be Constant, and not
apt to believe the vain Rumors and Reports of Men: Male imperatur, cum regit
vulgus duces suos. Sen.

Confidence is also to be eschewed, for no Man is sooner surprised, than he who
fears least; also Contempt of the Enemy has been occasion of great
Discomfitures, therefore as a Captain ought not to fear, so should he not
contemn his Enemy: Nimia fiducia semper obnoxia. AEmyl.

As Security, and overmuch Estimation of our own Virtue or Valor is hurtful, so
does it import every good Captain to be well informed, not only of his own
Forces but also of what Strength the Enemy is; likewise it behooves him to know
the Situation of the Country, and the Quality of the People, with every other
Circumstance. Moreover, the Generals Honor and Capacity ought to be known, with
the Condition and Nature of the Enemy: Impetus acres cunctatione languescunt,
aut in perfidiam mutantur. Tac.

Temerity in War is also dangerous, for wise Captains were wont not to
Enterprise any thing without Deliberation and good Opportunity, unless they
were thereunto by Necessity enforced: In rehus asperis and tenui spe,
fortissima quaque consilia tutissima sunt. Livi.

Some wise Men, not Superstitiously but Discreetly, do think prodigious Signs
from Heaven, or on Earth, are not to be neglected, neither are Dreams in time
of War to be contemned: Nam amat benignitas numinis, seu quod merentur homines,
seu quod tangitur eorum affectione, his quoque rationibus prodere quae
impendent. AEmi.

A wise Captain will also wait Opportunities, and spy out fit times when the
Enemy is wearied, or pretending fear, draw him into danger; which Advantages,
with many other, are gained chiefly by observing of time: Quia si in occasionis
momento, cujus praetervolat opportunitas, cunctatus paulum fueris, nequicquam
mox omissam querare. Livi.

Next the Observation of Time, the Place is to be well considered, whether it
be for thine Advantage or thine Enemies: Amplius prodest locus saepe quam
virtus. Veget.

Thirdly, It imports much, that Men be well ordered, trained, and prepared
for the Fight; for the want of Art is cause of many Disadvantages, and many
times a small Supply of choice Soldiers on Horseback or Foot, does seem to the
Enemy very Terrible; likewise a sudden Shout or Conceit has amazed a whole
Army: Milites vanis and inanibus, magis quam justis formidinis causis moventur.
Curt.

Fourthly, It were to good purpose, that in ordering of Men for Fight, Soldiers
of one Country or Nations, should be ranged together, and above all, to foresee
that the least loss of Blood be among the Natural Subjects, and so handle the
Matter, that the chief Slaughter light upon Strangers and Mercenaries: Ingens
victoriae decus, citra domesticum sanguinem bellanti. Tac.

The Generals own Courage and lively Disposition to Fight, will greatly animate
the Multitude of Soldiers, as a contrary Countenance or Appearance of Fear,
will exceedingly Amaze and Daunt: Necesse estad fugam parati sint, qui ducem
suum sentiunt desperare. Veget.

It were also for thy great Advantage, that the Forces should be ordered for
the Fight, before the Enemy be prepared.

First, For that thou may the better perform, what thou think fit to be
done.

Secondly, That thereby thine own Forces will thereof receive great Courage,
being readiest to assail the Enemy, and to begin the Fight: Plus animi est
inferenti periculum, quam propulsanti. Livi.

After Victory it is not the best Policy to execute the Enemies with extreme
Cruelty, but proceed Moderately, for it shall suffice the Victory is thine:
Clausis ex desperatione crescit audacia, and cum spei nihil est, sumit arma
fermido. Veget.

Lastly, I would advise that the General should be wary in his Actions, and in
every Enterprise to frustrate the Soldiers from Spoils and Pillage: Saepe
obstitit vincentibus pravum inter ipsos certamen, omisso host spolia
consectanda. Tac.

Of direct Councils, let that we have said suffice. We will now speak of
Councils Indirect, commonly called by the Greek Word, Stratagems or Subtle
Practices: Which manner of Proceeding, has been, in times past, of diverse
Grave Writers condemned: Vir nemo mentis altae clanculum velit occidere hostem.
Eurip.

Notwithstanding the Opinion of this, and diverse other Writers worthy Credit,
it seems reasonable, and in Piety allowable, that Stratagems and Subtilties
may be used in the War, yet with such Caution, as the same may stand with
Fidelity and Honor; for Fraud being used, contrary to Contracts and Agreements
made with the Enemy, is mere Treachery: As to Poison him or her, a Murderer to
kill him, were plain Impiety: Faederatum injuste fallere, impium. Livi.

Also out of the War covertly to kill a particular Enemy by secret Assault or
Practice, is not warrantable, either by Faith or Honor; yet to use all Craft,
Cunning and Subtilty in open War, is both allowable and praisable; and so is
thought by Christian Writers: Cum justum bellum suscipitur, ut aperte pugnet
quis aut ex insidiis, nihil ad justitiam interest. Aug.

The same is also approved by diverse Authors of good Credit: Confice sive dolo
seu stricto cominus euse. The same is also affirmed by Xenophon, Reipsa nihil
utilius in bello dolis.

Thus having briefly touched what Counsels are required in War, let us consider
how Victory is to be used, for the end of every good War is Peace; to the
enjoying whereof, three things are required, Wariness, Mercy and Modesty;
because overgreat Confidence may happily impeach the end of good Success: Res
secundae negligentiam creant. Livi.

I also wish the Victory to be handled Mercifully, because all Conquests are in
their own Nature cruel enough: And the Ire of Insolent Soldiers, forces the
Conquered to become Desperate: Gravissime mor sus irritate necessitatis. Curt.

To proceed Modestly, is also an honorable Quality in him that conquereth; for
in prosperous Fortunes, Men do hardly refrain covetous and proud Doings; yea,
some good and great Captains have in like cases forgotten what did best become
them: In rebus secundis etiam egregii Duces insolescunt. Tac.

After Victory follows Peace: For if War did ever continue, no State or
Government could stand: Therefore how great, or how long soever the War be, the
end must be Peace; the name whereof is not only Sweet, but also Comfortable:
Pax una triumphis innumeris potior.

Peace is not only good and profitable to him that is Victorious, but also to
those that are victored: Pacem reduci velle victori, expedit, victo necesse
est. Tac.

Nevertheless until good and honorable Peace be offered, Arms may not be laid
aside: Wherein I wish Tully's Advice to be followed: Bellum gerendum est; si
bellum omittemus, pace nunquam fruemur. Livi.

In Treaty of Peace, two things must be considered: First, That the Conditions
be Honorable. To condescend to any Base Conditions, is unto a Princely Mind not
only great Indignity, but also Intolerable: Cum dignitate potius cadendum, quam
cum ignominia serviendum. Plut.

It also imports, the Peace should be simple, true and unfeigned; for all
feigned and dissembling Amity is to be doubted: Pace suspect a tutius est
bellum. Mithrid.

The fittest Season to speak of Peace, is either when the War begins, or
during the time that the Enemies be of equal Force; for if the War continues,
it must behove the Weaker to yield to Necessity: Not unlike the Ship-master,
who to save himself does cast the greatest part of his Loading into the Sea:
Necessitati pare, quam ne dii quidem superant. Livi.

Finally, Having generously defended thy self, and performed all things
required in a magnanimous Captain, and finding nevertheless thy Force
insufficient, it cannot be dishonorable to accept Peace. Wherefore laying aside
Hatred and Hope, which are but weak Supporters, thou may recommend thee and
thine to the approved Discretion of an honorable Enemy: Victores secundae res
in miserationem ex ira vertunt. Livi.

Now for as much as every Peace promises Rest and Quiet, as well to the
Victorious as to the Victored; we may add thereunto, that the Prince Victorious
receives thereby Honor, Profit and Security. For although his Happiness may
occasion Hope of great Success, yet in respect of Fortunes Mutability, it shall
be Good and Glorious to listen to Peace: Decorum principi est cum victoriam
prope in manibus habeat, pacem non abnuere, ut sciant omnes te and suscipere
just bellum, and finire. Livi.

It seems also the more Honorable; for who so is Victorious, does give Peace
and not take it: He also shows himself Discreet by using a Moderation in
Victory, and no Extremity in Spoiling, which our Wise and Godly Writers have
commended: Pacem contemnentes, and gloriam appetentes, pacem perdunt and
gloriam. Bern.

Peace is also Profitable for the Victorious, because continual War breeds
Weariness, and of violent Proceeding Desparation and Peril comes: Maximi and
mortiferi morsus esse solent morientium bestiarum. Sen.

Likewise Peace is more assured than any Victory. Hope of the one is in thine
own Power; the other in the Hand of God: Add thereunto the force of Fortune,
which has great power in all Humane Actions: In rebus secundis nihil in
quenquam superbe ac violenter consulere decet, nec praesenti credere Fortunae,
cum quid vesper ferat, incertus sis. Sen.

Also Conditions of Peace ought to be reasonably and freely bestowed: For no
People can live contented under such a Law as forces them to loath the State
wherein they are. Misera pax bello been mutatur. Sen.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Civil War, with the Causes and Remedies thereof.
THE greatest and most grievous Calamity that can come to any State is Civil
War; for therein Subjects take Arms against their Prince or among themselves,
whereof follows a Misery more Lamentable than can be described. Non aetas,
non dignitas quenquam protegit, quo minus stupra caedibus, and caedes stupris
misceantur. Tac.

The first Cause of Civil War proceeds of Destiny, for God in his own Divine
Providence foreseeth many Years before, that great and mighty Empires shall be
ruined. In se magna ruunt: laetis hinc numina rebus Crescendi posuere modum --
Lucan.

The second Cause is, Excess, Riot, and Dissolute Life; for nothing breeds
Civil Fury so soon as over great Happiness; also pompous Apparel, Banqueting
and prodigal Spending consumes Riches, and Plenty is turned into Poverty; for
by these means are Men brought into Desperation. Rapacissimo cuique ac
perditiffimo, non agri aut faenus sed sola instrumenta vitiorum manebunt. Tac.

Now to consider how Destiny might be eschewed, were in vain: For such a Remedy
no Wit or Wisdom can devise, being the Decree of God, no doubt it is
inevitable. Ita fato placuit, nullius rei eodem semper loco stare fortunam. Sen.

There is nothing exempt from the peril of Mutation; the Earth, Heavens, and
whole World is thereunto Subject. Certis eunt cuncta temporibus; nasci debent,
crescere, extingui. Sen.

Touching the second Causes of Civil War some Remedies may be used, because it
proceeds of Faction, Sedition or Tyranny. I call Faction a certain
Association of diverse Persons combined to the Offense of others. It proceeds
often of private or public Displeasure, and more often of Ambition. Nemo eorum
qui in Rep. versantur, quos vincat, sed a quibus vincatur, aspicis. Sen.

1. Factions are of two sorts; for either they consist of many or of few
Persons: both be dangerous, but the former more apt to take Arms; and that
Party which proves weakest, prays Arms of Foreign Forces.

2. The other Faction wherein are fewer partakers, be commonly great Personages
or Men of more Importance than ordinary People; and that proves most Perilous
and Bloody. Nobilium factiones trahunt ad se, and in parts, universum etiam
populum. Arist.

Albeit some wise Men have held Opinion that Factions are necessary, yet cannot
that conceit be reasonably maintained, unless it be upon Confines, and in such
places where Conspiracy is feared, which Cato in his private Family used.
Semper contentiunculas aliquas aut dissensum inter servos callide serebat,
suspectum habens nimiam concordiam orum, metuensque. Plut.

Factions against the Nobility, are sometimes suppressed by forbidding Colors,
or unknown Bagdes to be worn, also to inhibit Names or Watch-words of Mutinies
is necessary, which was Mecaenas Counsel to Augustus; and Aristotle thinks it
fit that Laws should be made against the Factions of Noblemen. Nobilium
contentiones and parts etiam legibus oportet prohibere conari. Arist.

Another Cause of Civil War, we call Sedition, which is a sudden Commotion or
Assembly of Common People against their Prince or his Magistrates: the Original
of which Disorders may proceed of diverse Causes, but chiefly of Oppression.
Imminentium periculocum remedium, ipsa pericula arbitrari. Arist.

Again, Fear may be the occasion of Sedition, as well in him that has done
Injury, as in him that looks to be injured, and is desirous to prevent it
before it comes. It may proceed also of over great Mildness in Government. Non
miseriis licentia sed licentia, tantum concitum turbarum, lascivire magis
plebem quam saevire. Livi.

Sedition many times arises of Poverty, or of the Artificers, whose Arts are
grown out of Use, and Consequently no means whereof they can live. Semper in
civitate, quibus opes nullae sunt, bonis invidem, vetera odere, nova expetunt,
odio rerum suarum mutari omnia student. Sab.

Lastly, Sedition comes of Tyranny, Insolency, or Mutinous Disposition of
certain Captains, Cavaliers, or Ringleaders of the People; for albeit the
Multitude is apt to Innovation, yet does it stand firm, until some first Mover
takes the matter in hand. Multitudo omnis, sicut mare, per se immobilis. Livi.

Of these Movers some are Ambitious, who wanting other means to Aspire, hope by
practice of Sedition, to compass their Designs; or else they are Unthrifts, who
having consumed their own, seek by Violence to possess themselves of other
Men's: Or else they are vain and light Persons, that without Cause or Reason,
attempt Innovation, themselves know not for what. Non tam praemiis periculorum,
quam ipsis periculis loeti, pro certis and olim partis, nova, ambiguae
ancipitia maelunt.

Thus having told the Causes of Sedition, I wish the Remedies were prepared.
Omne malum nascens facile opprimitur, inveteratum fit plerumque robustius. Cic.

The first way to suppress Sedition, is Eloquence and excellent Persuasion,
which oft-tentimes works great Effects among the Multitude; chiefly when it
proceeds from some Reverend and grave Person, for his Wisdom and Integrity of
Life honored: For the Prince himself is not to take Office in hand, unless
necessity so enforce: Integra autorit as principis majoribus remediis servetur.
Tac.

If Persuasion cannot prevail, then Force must compel: But before such violent
Proceedings, Use, Art and Cunning, either to appease the People, or at least to
disunite them; and rather if the Prince do offer fair and promise plausibly.
Verba apud populum plurimum valent. Tac.

It is lawful also in such Cases for Princes to use Subtilty; and the same not
prevailing, to wash away the Stain thereof with Clemency: For when Arms laid
down, and every one yielded, general Punishment were needless. Omnium culpa
fuit, paucorum sit poena. Tac.

The last Cause of Sedition we named Tyranny, which is a certain violent
Government, exceediug the Laws of God and Nature. The difference between Kings
and Tyrants is this; the one imployeth Arms in defense of Peace, the other
uses them to terrify those of whom his Cruelty has deserved Hate. Auferre,
trucidare, rapere, falsis nominibus imperium, at que ubi solitudinem fecerint,
pacem appellant. Tac.

The quality of Tyrants is to esteem Promoters more then good Ministers,
because those Men are the Scourge of infinite others. They are also Protectors
of impious. Persons, and stand in daily doubt of Noble and Virtuous Men.
Nobilitas, opes, amissi gestique honores, procrimine: Et ob virtutes
certissimum exitium. Tac.

Tyrants do also endeavor to suppress the knowledge of Letters and Civil Life,
to the end all Arts should be exiled, and Barbarism introduced. Pellunt
sapientiae professores, and omnes bonas arts in exilium agant. Tac.

These and such like, be the Conditions of Tyrants, who for the most part are
deposed and slain; for as Kings live long and deliver their Dominions to their
Children and Posterity: So Tyrants being feared and hated of all Men, cannot
continue in their Estate.

Adgenerum Cereris sine ceede and vulnere pauci
Descendunt reges and sicca morte Tyranni. Juvin.
The Remedies of these Mischiefs which proceed from the Violence of such a
Prince, are Persecution or Patience. Many generous Spirits have used the first;
persuading themselves rather to dye, than endure the sight of a Tyrant. Also
the Grecians did think it a Service acceptable to Murder the Person of such an
impious Prince. Graeci homines deorum honores tribuebant iis qui Tyrannos
necaverunt. Cic.

Nevertheless, in Christian Consideration, the other Course is to be taken: Let
Patience therefore encounter this mischief; for seeing all Kings, as well the
bad as the good be sent by God, they must be endured. Res est gravis occidere
regalem stirpem. Homer.

Persecution is not only perilous, but for the most part unfortunate: For
therefore present Revenge is taken by that Prince that succeeds. Facinoris
ejus ultor est, quisquis successerit. Tac.

The Murder of Tyrants is also followed with many inconveniences worse than
Civil War it self. Principes boni, votis expetendi, qualescunque tolerandi. Tac.

For as Fire, Floods, and other inevitable Plagues are necessarily to be
suffered: So evil Princes in their Covetousness and Cruelty ought to be
patiently endured, because their Office is to command, and Subjects must Obey.
Indigna, digna habenda sunt, Rex quae facit. Sen.

And as it is the use of vulgar People to find Faults in the long Reign of
Princes; so the Ambition of great Subjects is desirous of Novelty. Praesens
imperium subditis semper grave. Thucyd.

To conclude, we say that the best Remedy against Tyranny, is Patience: For so
long as Men are, so long will Vices be. Regum ingenia toleranda, neque usui
crebrae mutationes. Tac.

CHAP. XXV. A Collection of Political Observations (confirmed by Reason and
Experience) advertising Princes, Statesmen and private Persons how to demean
themselves in all Fortunes and Events.
TO the Perfections of Men, Three things are necessarily required; Nature,
Nurture and Use: The first gives Capacity, Aptness and Understanding; which
are Graces from Above. Nurture, is Learning, Knowledge, Art, or Order. Use, is
Practice, Experience, and orderly Observation; whereof may be conceived, that
Nature alone suffices not; nor can Nurture work any good effect, where natural
Aptness wants; and they can frame no Perfection, unless Experience be also
conjoined. Nemo nascitur sapiens, sed sit. Sen.

Ambassadors, Negotiants, and generally all other Ministers of mean Fortune, in
Conversation with Princes and Superiors, must use great respect, showing
themselves rather Ceremonious than Presumptuous, and acknowledge their
Obligation great, for the Favor and Grace, they find in those which might
command them.

It is no wisdom ever to commend or discommend the Actions of Men by their
Success; for oft-tentimes some Enterprises attempted by good Counsel, end
unfortnately; and others unadvisedly taken in hand, have happy Success. Who so
then commends inconsiderate Counsels for their fortunate Event, thereby
encourages Men to jar and discomfort the wiser sort to speak what they know,
and by Experience have proved.

In Actions public, and every other matter of great moment, the beginning is
well to be considered: For afterward it lies not in our power, without
dishonor to abandon what was begun.

The time does not always serve, nor is apt occasion always offered to
Enterprise what would; yer who so does expect every Opportunity, shall either
attempt nothing at all, or if he do, the same for the most part turns to his
own disadvantage.

When any Resolution is taken, either with over great haste, or too much
Affection, seldom it receives good success: For he that does the one, has no
leisure to consider; the other transporteth the Mind so as it cannot conceive
more than that which presently presses.

To these we add others, I mean some of them that have leisure, and are void of
Affection, yet for want of natural Capacity, or for continual Negligence in
their doings, never bring any thing well to pass.

Who so desires to be beloved in a Commonwealth, must rest content with that
which Men do give, and the Laws allow him to take: So shall he neither incur
Danger nor Envy: for indeed, that which is taken or extorted from others, and
not that which is given, does make Men hated.

Arms, Laws and Religion, may not in any well governed State be disjoined;
every one of them in particular maintains them all united.

In Actions of War, Courage and Conduct are of great Necessity; yet all good
Government consists in using the Virtues Moral; and in handling the matter of
Martial Policy, it is fit to imitate the Proceedings of ancient and approved
Captains.

Among Mortal Men, there is nothing more common than to believe the Estate of
one Man to be better than another; for hereof it comes, that every one
endeavoreth rather to take from others with travel, than to enjoy his own with
rest.

The state of Princes is good, being well used; so is the Fortune of private
Men, if therewith they be contented. The rich Man lives happily, so long as he
uses his Riches temperately; and the poor Man that patiently endures his
Wants, is Rich enough.

Whenever a Man is so dangerously distressed, as either proceeding or
standing, he lives in like peril, then does it behove him in any wise, to
resolve upon Action. The reason is, that so long as nothing is done, the same
Accidents that caused his Dangers, do still remain in their former force; but
if he endeavor to enterprise somewhat, either he may meet with means to make
him secure, or at the hardest, show himself of so great Courage and Wit, as he
dare and can attempt a way to do it.

It seems a thing of great difficulty, or rather impossible for any Prince or
Magistrate to eschew the evil speech and bad report of Men; for if they be good
and virtuous, then they incur the backbiting of lewd Persons; if evil, then
will all good Men exclaim against them.

All Commonwealths ought to desire Peace, yet it is necessary ever to be
prepared for the War; because Peace disarmed is weak, and without Reputation:
Therefore the Poets feign, that Pallas the Goddess of Wisdom did always appear
armed.

Every Prince (well advised) ought to govern his Subjects and Servants in such
sort, that by his Affability and Virtue they may be induced rather to serve
voluntarily, then for Pay or hope of Preferment. For otherwise doing,
whenever the Prince shall want means to pay, the Subjects likewise will fail
of good will to serve. But he that faithfully loves, does neither in
Prosperity become Arrogant, nor in contrary Fortune retire, or complain of the
small favor he finds: For (till death) Love and Life remain at the Princes
Commandment.

Where poor Men find Justice, evil Men are punished, Measures and Weights be
just, Youth well nurtured, and old Folk free from Avarice, there is the
Commonwealth good and perfect.

In War between Neighbors, Neutrality is commendable; for by that means we
eschew many Troubles and great Expenses, so long as the Forces of either side
be so equal in strength, as we need not to fear the Victory of any: For so long
their Discord is our Security, and ofttentimes offers us means to increase
our own State and Reputation.

The chief Reasons to move War, are, the Justice of the Cause, the Facillity of
Success, and the Profit of the Victory.

In all Humane Actions it behooves to accommodate the Council of Men unto
present Necessity, and never to expose Security to manifest Peril, nor hope of
that which without great Difficulty or Impossibility cannot be obtained.

It is the Nature of Men, having escaped one Extreme, which by force they were
constrained long to endure, to run Headlong into the other Extreme, forgetting
that Virtue does always consist in the mean.

The Multitude is inclined to Innovation, and easily induced by false
Persuasion, and consequently easily transported by Seditious Leaders.

Men are naturally disposed to fear those things which threaten Danger and
Terror; yet unless these Perils, by some new Accident, be daily revived, that
Fear by little and little vanishes, and Security recovereth the place.

Whosoever finds himself contemned, or not respected, becomes Discontent; which
Humor in generous Minds, breeds oftentimes Adventerous Imaginations, whereof
Audacious Attempts have followed, chiefly in Persons of Authority and
Reputation; for he that hops no Good, fears no Evil: Yet true it is, that
dangerous Enterprises, the more they be thought upon, the less Hope they give
of good Success, for which reason Conspiracies not suddenly executed, are for
the most part revealed or abandoned.

All People do naturally imitate the Manners of their Prince, and observing his
Proceedings, resolve to Hate or Love him: But if they happen once to Hate the
Prince, then his Doings, Good or Evil, are afterward not Good; but if at the
beginning he gained the Love of the People, then every bad Action is reputed a
Virtue; as though he could not be induced to do amiss without good Cause or
Reason.

Greatly are Princes deceived, if in the Election of Ministers, they more
respect their own particular Affection, than the Sufficiency of the Person
elected.

A Prince having conquered any new Dominion, is thereby rather incumbered than
strengthened, unless the same be after well governed; and seldom is it seen,
that a Principality, by ill means gotten, has been long enjoyed.

As to the Perfection of the whole Body, soundness of Head only suffices not,
unless the other Members also do their Office; even so it is not enough that a
Prince be Faultless, but it behooves also that the Magistrates and Ministers
should perform their Duty.

Great Princes rarely resist their Appetites, as for the most part private Men
can; for they being always honored and obeyed, do seldom with Patience endure
the want of any thing reasonable, as being persuaded that what they desire is
Just, and that their Commandment has power to remove all Difficulties.

All Men are naturally Tam been quam male facta praemunt. Mart.
good, when no respect of Profit or Pleasure draws them to become Evil. But
this Worlds Corruption, and our Frailty is such, as easily and often for our
particular Interest we incline to the worst; which was the cause that wise
Lawmakers found out Reward and Punishment; the one to incite Men to Good, the
other to fear them from being Evil.

A Tyrant indeavoreth to maintain his Estate by three means. First, He
practices to hold all Subjects in extreme Awe, and to be basely minded, to the
end they should want Courage to take Arms against him. Secondly, He kindles
Diffidence and Discord among the Great Men; thereby to remove occasion of
Conspiracy and Combination. Lastly, He holds them Disarmed and Idle, so as
they neither know nor can attempt any thing against him.

To govern, is nothing else but to hold Subjects in Love and Obedience; for in
respect of the end, they ought not, and in regard of the other they cannot
attempt any thing contrary to the Governor's Will and their Duty.

The Laws and Ordinances of a Commonweal made at the beginning thereof when
Men were good, do often prove unprofitable when they are become evil; and
therefore new Laws are made according to the Accidents which happen.

The Discontent and Disorder of People is ever occasioned by the Inequality of
their Goods, because the Poorer sort would be made equal to the Rich; but the
Offense that grows among great Men is the desire of Honor; for they being
equal, do endeavor to aspire to equal Authority.

A Prince that desires, by means of his Ambassador, to deceive any other
Prince, must first abuse his own Ambassador, to the end he should do and speak
with more Earnestness, being indeed persuaded that the Intent and Meaning of
his Master is Simple, which happily would not, were he privy that his Prince's
Meaning were to Dissemble. This course is also commonly holden by those, that
by Employment of a third Person, would persuade any thing Feigned or False.

For the Performance of Conditions of Treaty of Peace, or League of Amity, the
Promises, Vows and Oaths of Princes are of great Effect; and because Fidelity
in a Man is not ever certain, and time does daily offer Occasions of Variation,
there is no Assurance so Secure and Good, as to stand so prepared, as the Enemy
may want able means how to offend.

To resolve in Matters Doubtful, or answer Requests which we are not willing to
grant, the least offensive way is not to use direct Denial, but by delays
prolong the time, and so in effect, afford good Expectation.

The old Proverb says, Magistratus virum ostendit; which is no less true than
Ancient; for Men in such Fortune, are occasioned not only to make proof of
their Sufficiency, but also to discover their Affections; and the more their
Greatness is, the less respect they have to contain those Passions which are
natural.

Albeit great Troubles and continual Adversity seem Insupportable, yet is there
nothing more Dangerous, than overmuch Prosperity; and being pressed by new
Appetites, they disturb their own Security.

In speaking of Occurrents doubtful, it is always Wisdom to feign Ignorance, or
at least allege that we believe them not; for most commonly they are utterly
untrue, or far other than vulgarly is believed.

The Actions of Men are commonly liked or disallowed according to the bad or
good Success; attributing that to Council which sometimes is due to Fortune.

The Multitude of Men were wont to be more pleased with sudden than slow
Resolutions; and many times account those Enterprises Generous, which are
rashly and inconsiderately attempted.

Great Difference there is between Subjects Desperate, and others which are
only Discontented; for the one desire nothing but present Alteration, which
they endeavor with all Hazard; the other wish for Innovation, inciting any
Motion or Practice, because their Intent is to attend time, and that occasion
may present it self.

A Benefit bestowed on him who thinks himself greatly injured, does not
suffice to raze the same out of his Memory, chiefly if the Benefit be given at
such time as no mere Motion, but Necessity may seem the occasion thereof.

That Peace ought to be desired, which removed Suspicion, which assures us
from Peril, which brings Quiet certain, and acquitteth us of Expenses; but
when it works contrary Effects, it may be called a dangerous War, covered
with the name of Deceitful Trust, not unlike a perilous Poison ministered in
lieu of a wholesome Medicine.

The Effect of things, and not External show, or seeming, ought to be regarded;
yet it is credible what great Grace is gained by courteous Speech and
Affability; the reason whereof is, as I suppose, that every Man believes he
does merit more than indeed he is worthy, and consequently holds himself
injured, whenever he finds Men not to afford him like Estimation.

Men ought in any wise, to refrain to do or say any thing which may offend, for
which respect it were great Folly, either in presence or absence, to utter
displeasing Speech, unless necessity inforceth.

The Matters whereof Counselors are chiefly to consider, are five, The
Prince's Revenue, Peace and War, Defense, Traffic, and what Laws are to be
made.

In giving Council diverse things are to be observed; but amongst them are two
of most Importance: First, It behooves, that he who is counseled should be
Wise; for seeing Counsel is nothing else but a certain considerate Discourse of
things to be done or not done, if he who is to take Counsel be not of
Discretion, then will he refuse all good Advice offered, and rather incline to
that which his own Fancy affects, because the want of Judgment draws him to
take Pleasure in vain things; and as one incapable of what is good and true,
will follow that which is Evil and False: So on the other side, if he that
gives Counsel be not Faithful, then will he a Thousand ways disguise and
dissemble the Truth, and consequently miscarry the Mind of him that is
Counseled; yea in the end utterly abuse him.

The Affairs and Proceedings of the World, are so variable, and accompanied
with so many Chances and Changes, as impossible it seems to judge what is
best; theresore Experience informs, that the Conjectures of the most Wise,
prove vain and uncertain. I therefore mislike the Judgment of those Men, that
will let slip Opportunity of present Good (though it be small) for fear of a
future Evil, notwithstanding it be greater unless the Evil be very near at
hand, or certain. For if that do not follow which is feared, then will thou
repent to have omitted that which was desired.

Whenever a general Opinion is conceived, of the singular Virtue and
Knowledge of any Man, although he be indeed Ignorant, and far unworthy that
Account, yet it is hard to remove such a settled Conceit: The Reason is, That
Men having at the first given Credit to common Report, do make thereof so deep
an Impression, as afterward, without great Difficulty, cannot be removed.

The Bodies of Men, Munition and Money, may justly be called the Sinews of War,
yet of them the two first are more necessary, for Men and Arms have means to
find Money and Meat; but Money and Meat cannot so easily find Soldiers and
Swords.

One wise General having but a Thousand Men, is more to be feared and esteemed,
than twenty Commanders of equal Authority; for they being commonly of diverse
Humors, or judging diversely, do never, or very rarely, what is to be done, and
consequently lose much time before any Resolution can be taken.

A Prince of mean Force, ought not in any wise to adventure his Estate upon one
days Fight; for if he be Victorious he gains nothing but Glory; but if he
lose, he is utterly ruined.

The most part of Men are delighted with Histories, for the Variety of
Accidents therein contained; yet are there few that will imitate what they
read, and find done by others; being persuaded that Imitation is not only hard
but impossible, as though the Heavens and Men were changed in their Motion, or
Order and Power, which they anciently had.

The Nature of Men is such, as will not endeavor any thing Good, unless they be
forced thereunto; for where Liberty abounds, there Confusion and Disorder
follow. It is therefore supposed, that Hunger and Poverty make Men Industrious;
but good Laws enforce them to be Honest; for if Men were of themselves good,
then Laws were needless.

There are two kinds of Adulation: The first proceeds from a Subtle Malice:
The second comes by an ordinary use of Conversation; the one tends to Profit
and Deceiving; the other has no farther Design, than a Respect or Fear to
offend; whereunto the most Honest are in some sort bound. Whosoever binds himself
to Flattery, does thereby bewray his Intent, either to gain, or not to lose
that he has. For the Person flattered, is always superior to him that does
Flatter, or at least one as may in some sort stand him in stead. It may
therefore be inferred, that only Men of base and miserable Condition, and such
as cannot help or hurt, be free from Flatterers. And contrariwise, Magnanimous
and Fortunate Folk, proud Men, and such as content themselves with their
present Estate, are seldom found to be Flatterers.

Every wise Prince does presuppose, that Times of Trouble may come, and that
all such Occasions he shall be forced to use the Service of Men diversely
qualified. His Study therefore is, in the mean time so to entertain them, as
when those Storms arise, he may rest assured to command them; for whosoever
persuades himself, by present Benefits, to gain the good Will of Men, when
Perils are at hand, shall be deceived.

In ancient times Princes and Governors were wont, when Peace and Security were
most like to continue, to find or feign Occasions to draw their Subjects to
Fear, to the end that Doubt might move them to be more careful of their own
well-doing; for well they knew it a general Defect in Men, to be reachless, and
never willing to use Industry; unless by necessity they were constrained.

All Histories do show, and wise Politicians do hold it necessary, that for the
well governing of every Commonweal, it behooves to presuppose that all Men are
Evil, and will declare themselves so to be, when occasion is offered; for
albeit some Inconvenience does lie hid for a time, it proceeds from a covert
occasion, which for want of Experience, was not found, until Time the Mother of
Truth discover it.

Neutrality is always a thing Dangerous and Disallowable, because it offends
all Parties: He that is Strong looks to be assisted in his Greatness; and he
that is Weak, not being defended, holds himself offended; the one is not
assured from Foes, and the other holds no Friends.

Albeit Neutrality procure present Quiet and Security, during the Troubles of
others; yet after the same falls out a Disadvantage, because it entertaineth
a certain Falseness, and so in short space will be perceived; not unlike those
Men that borrow upon Usury; for albeit they enjoy a certain time, without
Trouble or Charge, yet the same being Spent, and the day of Payment come, they
then feel the great Danger which their short Pleasure has purchased.

Whosoever examineth all Humane Actions shall find, that in eschewing one
Inconvenience, we presently incur another.

As for Example, if we endeavor to make our Dominions Mighty, it behooves to
have the same fully replenished with People, and well armed, and so being, they
are not easily governed. On the other side, if our Country be not well Peopled,
or Disarmed, then it is easily holden in Obedience; yet therewith so Weak, that
it can neither increase the Bounds thereof, nor defend it self. It is therefore
necessary, in all our Deliberations, to consider what Inconvenience is least,
and choose that as the best; for to find all Perfect, Void and Secure of
Suspect or Imperfection, is impossible.

A Prince being instantly required to take part with other Princes, the one
being in Arms against the other, if he deny both, incurreth Suspicion of both,
and may be thought to have Secret Intelligences with one or both of them; so as
either of them shall account him an Enemy, and consequently he that proves
Victorious will be revenged; and the other holding him suspected, will not
acknowledge his Friendship.

It is the use of Men to presume much upon their own Merit, and seeing the
Success of some others to be such, as without Cause or Desert, are aspired to
Dignity thereby encouraged, they promised to themselves the like: Nevertheless
being entered into the course of their Design, and finding many Crosses and
Impeachments they do not a little repent their Overweening and Presumption, but
also many times utterly abandon their rash and unadvised Enterprise; neither
can I think, that the Virtue or Sufficiency of any Man without the Favor of the
Heavens, can advance him; for as the Poet says, Nec velle javat, potiusve
nocet, si fata repugnant.

Whosoever serves a Prince far from his Presence, shall with great Difficulty
content him. For if he commit any Error, it shall be aggravated: Besides that,
the Instructions sent unto him cannot be particularly conceived, because the
State of wordly things does daily alter. Also to serve aloof, is a thing full
of Danger and far from Reward; which Inconvenience may for the most part be
avoided by him that attends near to his Prince's Person.

Let no Man that comes to serve in Court, assure himself by his Wisdom to be
advanced or eschew all Encounters. Neither is he to bear himself so careless as
to commit all to Fortune, but be persuaded that this worldly Life is like to a
Voyage by Sea; wherein albeit Art with the favor of the Wind may do much, yet
can we not assure our selves to arrive safe in the Haven appointed; for daily
Experience does show, that some strange Ships in the calmest Weather, are
drowned or impeached by the way, when others much weaker and disarmed pass
securely.

Among Men worthy of Commendations, those have merited best that first planted
true Religion: next they that framed Kingdoms and Commonwealths; the third
place is due to such as have augmented or enlarged their Dominions; lastly,
Learned Men deserve Fame and Memory: and as every of these are worthy of Fame
and Honor; so ought they to be accounted Infamous that introduce Atheism, or
the Subversion of Kingdoms, or are become Enemies to Learning and Virtue.

Whosoever takes in hand to govern a Multitude either by way of Liberty, or
Principality, and cannot assure himself of those Persons that are Enemies to
that Enterprise, does frame a State of short Perseverance: yet true it is that
such Princes be unfortunate, as for their own security are enforced to hold a
course extraordinary, and have the Multitude their Enemy; for he that has few
Foes may with small dishonor be assured; but he that is generally hated can by
no means live assured; and the more Cruelty he uses, the weaker his
Principality proves.

In commending another Man, great Moderation is to be used; for as contumely
offends him against whom it is used; so great praise, besides that it is
uttered with danger to his Judgment that speaks it, the same does
oft-ten-times offend him that hears it. For Self-love which commonly
possesses Men, causes the Good or Evil we hear, to be measured with our own.
And consequently every Man that is touched with like deserts and defects, does
grow offended that his Commendation is not set forth, and fears lest his
Imperfection should be discovered.

It is often, or rather ever seen, that the force of Leagues not used in their
first heat, becomes cold; because Suspicion soon enters, which in short space
will destroy whatsoever was concluded, and may not without long time be
rejoined.

The power of Ambition which possesses the Minds of Men, is such, as rarely or
never suffers them to rest: The reason thereof is, That Nature has framed in
them a certain Disposition to desire all things, but not to obtain them; so as
our Desires being greater than our Power, therefore following Discontent and
evil Satisfaction. Hereof also proceeds the Variation of Fortune; for some
Men desiring to get, and others fearing to lose that they had gotten, do
occasion one Man to injure another, and consequently Public Wars do follow; by
means whereof, one Country is ruined, and another enlarged.

Princes of great Power, and chiefly those that are Inhabitants of the North,
having many Children, were wont to be much inclined to the Wars, as well to win
unto themselves Honor, as also to get Possessions for their Sons; which manner
of Proceedings did oft-tentimes remove such Disturbance as the Plurality of
Brethren brings. These and other reasons induced Princes to attempt War
against those Kingdoms, which in cheir opinion seemed easily conquered, or
whereunto they can pretend little; for by color thereof they may the rather
justify their Proceedings.

When a Prince deferreth to answer an Ambassador, it proceeds from some of
these Respects; either because he will take time to resolve himself of somewhat
whereof he doubts, or that he intends covertly to deny that which is
demanded, or that he esteems not the Prince that does demand, or that he
disdaineth the Person by whom the demand is made, or else that he intends to
hear from his own Ministers to be better resolved: Wherefore a discreet
Negotiator ought in such cases to consider which of these Reasons move the
Prince where he is employed, to entertain him with delays, and make his
dispatch accordingly.

The sufficiency of good Counselors consistetd in fonr things.

First, They ought to be wise and skilful how to handle their Affairs,
directing all doings to public Commodity.

Secondly, To be just in their Proceedings, giving to every one that which to
him appertains.

Thirdly, To be stout, and void both of partial respects and fear.

And lastly, To be temperate and moderate in their Desires.

Whosoever desires to govern well and securely, it behooves him to have a vigilant
Eye to the Proceedings of great Princes, and to consider seriously of their
Designs: For it is matter of small difficulty to live in Peace with him who
desires our Amity, and provideth for others that endeavor to offend us.

The Intelligences that Princes study to attain, are procured by diverse means:
Some are brought by report, some vented by Conversation and Sounding, some by
means of Espials; but the most sure and credibe Occurrents, are those which
come from Ambassadors, chiefly those that either for the Greatness of their
Prince, or their own Virtue, be of most Reputation. For those Men conversing
daily with great Personages, and pondering diligently their Manners, Words,
Wisdom, and the order of each Man's Proceedings, yea, of the Prince himself,
may with Commodity attain unto matters of great Importance sooner than they
that are Writers of Rumors, or that take upon them to Conjecture of things to
come.

Whenever a People is induced to commit so great an Error, as to give
Reputation to one only Man, to the end he should oppress all those great Men
whom they hate, they thereby give him opportunity to become their Prince; and
so being assisted with their Favor and Aid, he may likewise extinguish all the
rest of the Nobility; and they being extirpated, he will also endeavor to
tyrannize over the People, by whose help he aspired.

So many as are not consenting to the Tyranny, rest Enemies to the Person of
the Tyrant, who can by no means gain the Love of all. For impossible it is,
that the Riches of any Tyrant should be so great, and the Honors he can give so
many as may satisfy all. Hereof it comes, that those Tyrants that are favored
of the People, and disfavored of the Nobles, are most secure; because their
Tyranny is supported with a greater Strength (having the Multitude their
Friends) then is the Tyrant whom the Humor of the Nobles only has advanced.

A dangerous thing it is in all Commonwealths by continual punishing, to hold
the Minds of Subjects in Suspicion; for Men ever fearing their Ruin, will
(without respect) determine to save themselves, and as Men desperate, attempt
Innovation. All Capital Executions ought therefore to be executed suddenly, and
as it were at one Instant, so to assure the Minds of Men from further
Molestations.

The Intent of every Wise Prince that makes War, either by Election or
Ambition, is to gain and hold what is gotten: Also to use the matter so as
thereby he may enrich himself, and not impoverish his own People or Country.

He that inlargeth his Dominions, does not always increase his Power; but he
that increases in force as well as in Dominion, shall thereby grow great;
otherwise he gained no more than is shortly to be lost, and consequently he
ruineth himself: For who spends more in the War, than he gains by Victory,
loses both Labor and Cost.

Every Prince and Commonwealth must above all things take heed, that no
Necessity how great soever, do persuade him to bring into his Dominion any
Auxiliary Soldiers; because the hardest Conditions the Enemy can offer, are
more easy than is such a Resolution.

A Prince shows his Ruin at hand, whenever he begins to break the Laws
and Customs, which are ancient and have been long time obeyed by the People of
his Dominion.

That Prince which cares to keep himself secure from Conspiracy, ought rather
to fear those to whom he has done overgreat Favors, than them whom he has
much injured: For these want Opportunities, the other do not; and both their
Desires are as one; because the Appetite of Commanding, is always as much or
more than the desire of Revenge.

Whenever a Prince discovers a Conspiracy, he must well consider the quality
thereof, measuring the Force of the Conspirators with his own; and finding them
many and mighty, the knowledge thereof is to be dissembled, until the Princes
Power be prepared to oppose them; otherwise he hazardeth his own security.

It has been by long Experience found better to send one General to an Army,
though he be of mean Sufficiency, than to give the same Authority to two or
more Excellent Personages with equal Commission.

He that coveteth to be overmuch loved, oft-tentimes becomes contemptible; and
he that endeavoreth to be overmuch feared, is ever hated: And to hold the mean
between them, cannot be exactly done, because Nature will not so permit.

Whosoever aspireth to any Dignity, must resolve himself to endure the Envy of Men,
and never to be moved for any Offense conceived against him, though they that
be offended, be his dear Friends: Neither shall he for the first affront or
encounter, relinquish his hope; for he that constantly makes head against the
assault of Fortune, shall after with Facility arrive where he designed.

In giving Council to a Prince or Commonwealth, and therefore desiring to
eschew Danger and Offense, no other mean is to be taken than that the
Counselor shall without Passion or Persuasion pronounce his Opinion, and never
to affirm any thing as a Resolution, but with modesty to defend that he
speaks; so as the Prince which follows his Advice, may seem to do it
voluntarily, and not forced by the importunity of him that gave the Counsel.

A discreet Captain being in the Field against the Enemy, of whose Virtue he
has had no Proof, ought first by light Skirmishes to feel of what Virtue he
is; and not to Enterprise any general Adventure, to the end that Terror or Fame
should not daunt nor discourage his own Soldiers.

Albeit Fraud be in all Actions detested, yet is the same in Martial
Enterprises commendible and glorious: For that Captain who compasses his
Designs by Wit or Stratagem, is no less commended than he that Vanquisheth the
Enemy by Violence and Force.

In times of Extremity, when Resolution must be taken for the having or utter
Loss of the State, then no regard is to be had of Justice or Injustice, Mercy
or Cruelty, Honor or Ignominy, but rather setting aside all Respects, that
course is to be followed which defended the Lives and Liberties of Men.

Whosoever desires to know what will be hereafter, let him think of that is past;
for the World has ever been in a circular Revolution: Whatsoever is now, was
heretofore, and things past or present are no other than such as shall be
again: Redit orbis in orbem.

A Prince that desires to obtain any thing at the hand of another, must if it
be possible urge a sudden Answer, and lay before him that is moved, a Necessity
to resolve presently, giving him to understand that denial or delays may breed
a perilous and sudden Indignation.

There is nothing more difficult, doubtful and dangerous than to attempt
Innovation: For he that takes in hand an Enterprise of such quality, makes
all those his Enemies which lived well under the old Order, and finds them
cold Defenders that affect his Novelties, which coldness proceeds chiefly of
Incredulity; for Men are not easily induced to believe a new thing till
Experience has proved it to be good.

There is no Art nor Knowledge so seemly and necessary for a Prince as the Art
Military with the Ordinances and Discipline thereof: For that is the only Skill
required in him that commands, and such a Virtue as does not only maintain
them that are born Princes, but often advances private Men to that Dignity.

The deep Impressions which old Injuries make in the Minds of great Men cannot
with new Benefits be razed out; it is also to be remembered that Injuries be
done all together: For they offend the less, and will be forgotten the sooner;
but Benefits should by little and little be bestowed, so shall the Memory of
them long continue.

A small pleasure or displeasure presently done, does move more than a great
good turn bestowed in times past; for the taste of things present does make a
deeper impression in the Minds of Men, than does the Memory of things past, or
expectation of things to come.

It is a matter of small difficulty to sound the coffeehouse of other Men.
For every one does willingly tell the well and ill deserving of Friends, and
likewise how much or how little Foes can do, if we have Patience to hear, which
Patience is the beginning of all good Speed; but he that delights to speak
much, and hear little, shall ever inform others more than himself can learn.

Among other dangers which a Prince incurreth by being disarmed, the greatest
is, that thereby he becomes contemptible; for no comparison there is between
Men armed and them that are disarmed: and no reason there is that he that is
armed should yield Obedience to him that is disarmed, neither is it like that a
Prince disarmed can be secure from his own Subjects armed.

A Prince Ignorant of Martial knowledge, among other Misfortunes cannot be
esteemed or trusted of his own Soldiers; it behooves him therefore as well in
time of Peace as War to exercise Arms, which may be done by two means; the one
by Action of Body, the other by Contemplation of Mind. The Body may be
exercised in Hunting, Hawking, and such like Pastimes; thereby to be made apt
to endure Travel: his Mind likewise may be informed by Reading of Histories,
and the Consideration of Actions performed by excellent Captains, observing the
occasion of their Victories or Losses, to the end he may imitate the one, and
eschew the other.

He that does not as other Men do, but endeavors that which ought to be
done, shall thereby rather incur Peril than Preservation; for whosoever labors
to be sincerely Perfect and Good, shall necessarily Perish, living among Men
that are generally Evil.

A Prince that uses Liberality to his prejudice, ought not to regard the
Infamy of Miserable, because his Parsimony will in time enable him to be
Liberal, and so may declare himself to be, having by Parsimony increased his
Power, and therefore without imposing upon the People, may defend himself from
all such as will make War; so shall he use Liberality to all them from whom he
takes nothing, who are infinite; and use Miserliness to those only to whom he
gives, who are but few.

There is nothing that consumes it self like to Librality; for if it be long
used, it takes away the means to continue it, and consequently does make Men
poor and basely minded: Or else to eschew Poverty, they shall be forced to
Extortion and become Odious.

It is better to incur the name of Covetous (which is a Scandal without hate)
then with desire to be accounted Liberal, deserve the Infamy of Oppression (an
Ignominy accompanied with hatred.)

A Prince ought to be slow in believing, and advised in proceeding; he should
also beware not to make himself over much feared, but in all his Actions show
great Wisdom tempered with Courtesy; so shall not over much Confidence induce
him to be careless, nor over much diffidence render him intolerable.

Whosoever observes, shall see that Man offended, less respect him whom they Love,
than him whom they fear. For Love is maintained by a certain reciproque
Obligation, which because Men are Evil, uses to be by every occasion of Profit
broken. But Fear is continued by a certain dread of Punishment which never
fails.

A Prince that holds in the Field an Army wherein are great numbers of
Soldiers, ought not to care though he be accounted Cruel: For without such an
Opinion conceived, he cannot keep his Forces united, nor apt to attempt any
Enterprise.

Men for the most, do use rather to judge by their Eyes, than by their Hands,
for every one may see, but few can certainly know. Every one sees what thou
seem to be, but few can understand what thou art indeed; and these few dare
not oppose themselves to the Opinion of many which have the Majesty of Estate
to defend them. Also in the Actions of all Men, and chiefly Princes, from whom
is no Appellation, the End is ever observed. Machiavel.

A Prince being forced to use the Condition of Beasts, must among them make
Choice of the Fox and the Lion; for the Lion cannot take heed of Snares, and
the Fox is easily overcome by the Wolves: It behooves him therefore to be a Fox
to discover the Snares, and a Lion to terrify the Wolves.

A Prince newly advanced cannot observe those Rules, which are the Cause that
Men be accounted Good; he being many Times constrained for defense of his State
to proceed contrary to Promise, contrary to Charity, and all Virtue; and
consequently it behooves him to have a Mind apt to Alteration, as the Wind and
Variation of Fortune shall direct; yet ought he not to abandon the Good, if so
he can, but be ready to use what is Evil, if so he shall be enforced.

Every Prince ought to have two Ears, the one Intrinsic, in respect of
Subjects; the other Extrinsick, in respect of Foreign Potentates, from whom he
may be defended with Good Arms, and Good Friends: Also Matters Intrinsic will
ever stand well, so long as all things abroad rest firm.

A Prince that is favored of the Multitude, need not to doubt Conspiracy; but
contrary wise, where the People is generally Discontented and Hates the
Prince, then may he reasonably doubt every Thing, and every Person; for no Man
is so Poor, that wants a Weapon wherewith to offend.

When any Occasion is presented to have that thou desire, fail not to lay
hold thereof; for these Worldly Things do vary, and that so suddenly, as hard
it is to assure our selves of any thing, unless the same be already in Hand: On
the other Side, if any Trouble threaten thee, defer it so long as thou may;
for Time may occasion some Accident to remove all Dangers.

The Prince that doubts the Fidelity of his Subjects, must of Force build
Fortresses; but he that fears Foreign Force more than his own People, were
better to leave them unbuilt. Howsoever it be, that Prince that desires
generally to be Respected and Esteemed, must perform some notable Enterprise,
and give Testimony of great Virtue and Valor.

A Prince shall do well at all Times to be counseled so as no Man do presume
to give Counsel but when the Prince does ask it. It is also to be noted, That
he who is not of himself Wise, cannot be well counseled of others, unless
happily he yield to some Wise Men the Government of his whole Affairs. For Good
Counsels from whomsoever they proceed, shall be thought to come from the
Prince, and not the Wisdom of the Prince to proceed from the Counsel of others.

He that takes Delight to be Employed in Public Affairs, must by all Means
endeavor to continue in such Services: For often one Business depends on
another, whereunto the Florentine Proverb may be applied, Di cosa, nasae cosa,
and il tempole governa.

Some Men have not only desired, but also compassed Honor and Profit; yet
being in Possession of both, were not therewith so satisfied, as they hoped to
be; which being believed, would happily extinguish the immeasurable Ambition
wherewith many Men are possessed.

By Experience I have learned, That great Folly it is to account That Ours
which we have not, or spend presently in Hope of future Gain. Therefore
Merchants, during the Adventure of their Goods, do not increase Domestical
Expenses, but Fearing the Worst Assure what is in Hand.

For such Men as have gained unto themselves Reputation and are accounted
virtuous, to maintain that Conceit, and eschew Envy, there is nothing better
than a Life retired from daily Conversation, and chiefly of the Multitude.
Fugiat sapiens commercia vulgi.

The End that moves a Prince to make War, is to Enrich Himself, and Impoverish
the Enemy: Neither is Victory desired for other Purpose than thereby to become
the more Mighty, and make the Enemy Weak: Consequently wheresoever thy Victory
does Impoverish thee, or thy Gain therein does Weaken thee, it follows that
either thou pass or undergo that Mark whereunto the Intention of War was
directed. And that Prince is by Victory Enriched, that can Oppress the Enemies
Power, and become Master of his Goods and Possessions. And that Prince is by
Victory Impoverished when the Enemy, notwithstanding he be Victored, can still
Maintain himself, and the Spoils and Possessions are not taken to the Use of
the Prince Victorious, but imparted unto his Soldiers. For then may he be
thought in his own Losing Unfortunate, and in Victory Unhappy; for if he be
Vanquished, then must he endure the Offense by Foes: And being Victorious shall
be forced to abide the Wrong offered by Friends; which as they be less
Reasonable, so are they also less supportable, because he is still by
Impositions forced to burden the Subjects, whereof may be inferred, That the
Prince, having in him any Generosity, cannot justly rejoice at that Victory
which causes the Subject to lament.

Who so desires to obtain any thing, hops to compass his Desire, either by
Entreaty, Presents, or Threatening; for so shall he, to whom the Request is
made, be moved either with Compassion, Profit, or Fear: Nevertheless, with
Covetous and Cruel Men, and such as are in their Opinion Mighty, none of these
can prevail. And consequently in vain do they labor, that go about by Suit to
stir them to Pity, by Gifts to gain them, or by Threats to fear them.

Who so is persuaded that any Common weal can continue disunited, does greatly
deceive himself: True it is, That some Divisions do maintain the Estate, but
other do indamage the same. They which do Harm, are such as with Sects and
Partakings be accompanied; they which help without Sects and Partakings, be
maintained. A wise Governor therefore, albeit he cannot so exactly foresee but
some Enemies will arise in the State, yet may he take Order that no Factions
may thereby grow. It is therefore to be noted, that the Citizens of every
Estate, may aspire to Reputation, either by Private or Public Means.
Reputation by Public Means, is gained chiefly in the War, either by obtaining
Victory in some Battle, or surprising of some City; or else by performing some
Embassage diligently, prosperously: But Private Reputation is gotten by doing
Favor to this or that Man, and protecting them from Magistrates, giving them
Money, advancing them unworthily to Honor and Office; and by great Feasts,
entertaining the Multitude; of which manner of Proceeding, Sects, Factions and
Partakings do grow: And as Reputation thus gained is dangerous, so the other
without Faction is profitable; because the same is founded on Common Welfare,
and no private Profit: And albeit among Citizens of this sort, will often arise
great Hate, yet wanting Followers for their particular Profit, the State shall
not be endangered, but rather strengthened; for every Man endeavoring to
deserve well, will hold himself within the Bounds of Civil Life, and by
Virtuous Merits labor to be advanced.

To persuade or dissuade particular Persons, is a Matter of no Difficulty: For
if Words suffice not, yet Authority will prevail: But hard and perilous it is
to remove a False Opinion conceived by a whole Multitude, for therein fair
Speech and no Compulsion must be used.

The best means which wise Captains can use to make their Soldiers resolute, is
to take from them all Hope; which Resolution may also be increased with the
Love of our Country and Confidence in the Captain: For Confidence grows by
the Valor of Men, and Discipline in former Victories, and Trust reposed in the
Leader. The Love of our Country is Natural, but the Affection we bear to the
Captain, proceeds rather from his Virtue, than the Benefits he has bestowed.
Necessity also may do much, and chiefly that where no Choice is left, but
either overcome by Arms or dye in Desperation.

There is nothing of so great Force to hold an Army united, as the Reputation
of the Captain, which proceeds only from his Virtue; for neither Dignity nor
Authority without Valor can work that Effect.

The first Care that a Captain must have, is to hold his Soldiers well punished
and paid; for where Payment fails, Punishment ought not to be inflicted: And
consequently no Reason it is to punish him for Robbery, whom want of Pay
enforces to shift; but where the Soldier is paid, and not punished (offending)
then will he, without Respect, become Insolent toward his Captain; whereof
ensue Mutinies, Discord, and utter Ruin.

It is a Custom, very honorable, not to promise more than thou will assuredly
perform: Yet true it is, that whosoever is denied (though justly) does rest
ill-contented; for Men indeed are not governed by Reason: Otherwise it is for
him that promises; and so good Promises shall stand in stead of Performance:
Besides that, he may find Excuse enough, because the most part of Men are so
simple, that fair Words alone have Power to abuse them, chiefly when they
proceed from a Person of Reputation and Authority. The best way, therefore, is
not to promise precisely, but entertain the Suitors with Answers general, and
full of good Hope: Yet not such as shall directly and absolutely bind.

The greatest and most material Displeasures that use to arise between the
Nobility and People, are caused by the diversity of Humors, the one laboring
to command, the other endeavoring not to obey; so as all Troubles and
Disorders in every Commonweal, do thereof receive Nutriment.

The City which is maintained rather by Factions than Laws, so soon as one
Faction is become strong, and without Opposition, the same of necessity must be
divided in it self: for those particular Causes which were at the first taken,
are not of Force enough to maintain it.

It is the nature of Men not to endure any Discommodity, unless Necessity do
thereunto enforce them: Which may apparently be perceived by their Habitations;
for as the Fear of War draws them to Places of Strength (for their Defense)
so that Peril being past, they do for the most part remove themselves to
inhabit Countries of more Commodity and Profit.

It may seem strange, and no even Measure (yet approved by Experience) that
where many offend, few are punished. Also petty Errors are severely corrected,
but great and grievous Crimes be rewarded. In like manner, where many receive
Wrong, few seek Revenge. For Injuries universal, are with more Patience than
particular Offenses endured.

All, or the greatest part of Men that have aspired to Riches or Power, have
attained thereunto either by Force or Fraud: And without they have by Craft or
Cruelty gained, to cover the foulness of their Fact, they call Purchase as a
Name more honest. Howsoever he, that for want of Will or Wit uses not those
Means, must rest in Servitude and Poverty. The Reason thereof is, That as
Nature has laid before Men the chief of all Fortunes, so she disposes them
rather to Rapine than honest Industry, and more subject to bad than good
Endeavors: Hereof it comes, that one Man eats another, and he that is
weakest must always go to the worst.

Where Necessity forces, Boldness is reputed Wisdom, and in great Enterprises
Peril is not to be made account of. For those Attempts that begin with Danger,
always end with Honor, or Reward; also from one Peril there is no way to
escape, but by entering into another.

A wise Man ought not to desire to inhabit that Country where Men have more
Authority than Laws: For indeed that Country deserves to be desired where every
one may securely enjoy his own; not that, where with facility it may be taken
away; and that Friends for fear to lose their own, are enforced to forsake them.

Some Magistrates either by over great Zeal or Ignorance take a Course of
Rigor, which being for the present favored, they are ever the more employed,
as Men meet to extirpate Inconveniences.

But thereby the Subjects are often drawn into Desperation, and consequently
have recourse unto Arms, as their uttermost Resuge. In this case a Wise Prince
for appeasing the People is forced to disallow his Ministers, and sometimes
also to inflict public Punishment.

A Prince naturally suspicious, and having about him Persons inclined to Envy,
is easily induced to mistrust those Men that have served him with most
sufficiency: Which Danger they cannot eschew, because they who are worthiest
Commendation are oftentimes envied by such Persons as have access unto the
Prince.

Who so cannot endure both Envy and Hate, must refrain to enterprise great
Matters: For great Honors being desired of many, it behooves him that aspireth
unto them, to be for his Dignity envied, and for his Authority hated; which
Authority, albeit the same be well used, yet they who hate or envy (persuading
themselves it might be better handled) endeavor to oppress that Power, as
fearing it will be worse.

Among other things which works the Inconveniences of Common weals, Ambition
and Desperation are chief; of both, Desperation is worst: For Ambition may
attend Occasion, Desperation will not, as that cannot endure Delays. Historians
desiring to write the Actions of Men, onght to set down the simple Truth, and
not say any thing for Love or Hatred: Also to choose such an Opportunity for
writing as it may be lawful to think what they will, and write what they think,
which is a rare Happiness of the Time.

In commending or disallowing the Actions of Men, it is a course very requisite
to consider the Beginning, the Proceeding, and End: So shall we see the Reasons
and Causes of things, and not their bare Events only; which for the most part
are governed by Fortune.

It is a matter of much Necessity, that every Man, and chiefly a Prince should
in his first Actions, give some Testimony of Virtue; for falling at first into
obloquie, do he well or ill, all isill-taken.

The Custom of the Common People is to judge rather by their Eyes than by their
Ears: Which is the cause they allow more of external Show than inward Virtue:
And true it is, where excellency of Mind, and Beauty of Body concur, the
Commendation due to such a Person is far the greater. Gratior est pulchro
veniens e corpore virtus.

A Prince or great Personage that constantly endures Adversity, deserves
great Praise: Yet greater Commendation is due to him that bears himself
modestly in his Happiness. For Miseries are often born with Patience, but
Felicity corrupts.

To be descended of Princes, or great Personages, is a matter of mere Fortune,
and so to be esteemed: But Adoption proceeds from the Judgment of Men,
therefore seems incorrupt, and seldom abused.

It has been long observed, and is a Rule which rarely fails, that he shall
be ever suspected of the Prince in possession, whom Men account worthy to be a
Prince in Reversion.

It has been a Use very ancient to give Credit to Astrologers, and other such
Persons, who by their Star-Learning or Blind Divination, take upon them to tell
of things to come. The Reason thereof is, That the most part of Men believe
that soonest which they least understand; and if they see the Event of a
Prediction, though it happens by mere Chance to fall out according to that
was premised, thereupon they settle so firm an Impression, as albeit many other
fail, yet the good Conceit of their Cunning cannot be removed.

Liberality is a Virtue which gains Love, but much are they deceived whom
Riot in lieu thereof abuses. To cast away and consume is soon learned, but to
give in good Order few have the Skill.

In Time of sudden Mutiny, Conspiracy, and Offense of People, the wisest
Resolution is not to oppose Force to prevent Fury, but rather give Space for
the Bad to amend, and the Good to consent: For Treasons prevail on the sudden,
but good Council gathers Forces by Leisure.

Mature Deliberation ought ever to be used; but when Arms are to determine,
speedy Execution is the best: Because no Delay in that Enterprise is fit which
cannot be commended before it be ended.

Who so is pleased to observe the proceedings of Men in Authority, shall
observe that some of them hold a plain course without respect; others
projecting for time to come, do forecast how to hold their present good fortune
or at least to escape danger: For they mistrusting present Prosperity and
fearing a change, prepare beforehand some private Friends to oppose against
public hatred: Whereof may be inferred, that no care is taken of Innocence,
but every one studieth how to pass without punishment.

In Captains and all Military Commanders, three things are required, Virtue,
Discipline, and Authority; but in private Soldiers Obedience and Courage only
suffices; for by due obeying, and no curious scanning the Leaders directions
are maintained; and the Army in danger is always most valiant, which before
the danger is most quiet. Let the Soldier therefore be well armed and valiantly
minded. To advise and direct must be the Captains care.

It is a matter of no great moment, yet always worthy the noting, that any
exterior Behavior, or Garment presenting Pride or Greatness, chiefly in
Persons lately advanced, though no Man be thereby interessed or injured, does
move in others a certain offense: For the nature of Man is such, as beholds
the new prosperity of others with an envious Eye, and wishes a moderation of
Fortune no where so much as in those we have known in equal degree with our
selves.

In all Enterprises of War (if present necessity does not otherwise require)
Leisure and Deliberation ought to be used; for often it suffices in lieu of
Wisdom, to take the advantage of other Men's folly.

All Men that are to consider of great Actions, ought to be informed whether
that which is undertaken be profitable for the Commonweal, honorable to
themselves, and easy to be effected; or at least not greatly difficult. Also
he that persuadeth, is to be examined whether besides bare Words and Counsel,
he will join his own Peril; and if Fortune favor the attempt, to whom the
principal Glory shall redound.

The Perils which accompany private Enterprises, are far unlike to those which
he does enter that aspireth to Principality. For in private attempts a Man may
pause or proceed as he will: But to him that aspires to Empire there remains no
middle course, but either by Victory to triumph as a Prince; or being
vanquished to endure death as a Traitor.

Let no Man in his Prosperity, give much credit to common Applause or Service,
assured by any of whom in meaner Fortune he has had no experience; for the
base People are learned in no Lesson, only without difference of Truth or
Falsehood to flatter Men in Authority, and with Shouts and Words of great
rejoicing make show of great Affection.

As overmuch haste is dangerous, so too great delay oftentimes proves
disadvantagious; for albeit consultation ought to forego action, yet to Dispute
long and in the end reject the advice of either side, or take a middle course
(which in cases of doubt and danger is worst) was ever accounted great
discretion.

There is no course more comely, nor any resolution so well beseeming a wise
Man, having made proof of his own Virtue (and finding in Age no Fortune due to
such effect) as to retire himself from the Court and Company; for so shall he
shun the Inconveniences of Contempt and the Discommodity of Travel ( Jucunda
senectuti otia) yet true it is, that whosoever has lived a Prince or governed as a
public Person, cannot expect security in a private Estate.

Whenever danger draws near, and terror is at hand, all Men look about, but
none willingly adventure. For in such Cases every Man will give Council, but
few will take part of the peril.

In Commonwealths where Sects or Partialities be, the Leader of any side is
able to kindle Civil War; yet is he unable to moderate the Victory: For to stir
up dissentions and troubles, the worst Man most commonly bears the stroke; but
peace and quietness are not established but by Men of rare Gifts and excellent
Virtue.

It may seem strange and contrary both to courtesy and Christian profession,
that Men are far more mindful of Injuries done unto them, than of benefits
received by them. The reason thereof is, that Thankfulness is accounted a
burden, but Revenge is sweet, and reckoned a great gain.

Of reconciled Foes, and such as know that our harms were caused by their
means, we oft-times expect favor, as persuaded that new Friendship will repair
the loss of old displeasure: But the matter does seldom so fall out; for the
quality of Man's nature is ever to hate those whom he has hurt, and love them
whom he has made beholding. Quos laeserunt oderunt. Tac.

To common Persons and such as are ignorant in Matters of State, every Taxation
and Imposition seems heavy or superfluous; yet the wiser sort know, that the
end of all public endeavor is to confirm People in Peace, and Peace cannot be
maintained without Arms, nor Arms without Pay, nor Pay without Impositions.

As fortunate Folk are envied, so are the poor contemned; which Rule reaches
also to Princes: The one lives in Plenty with War, the other in Poverty with
Peace. For seldom is it seen, that those People are assaulted where nothing is
to be gained, and whose base Beings afford no other spoils than Blood and
Beggary.

Wisemen have observed that in matter of State, and the managing thereof, three
Things are especially to be looked unto: The first is, Occasion; the second,
the Intentions of other Men; the third, our own Affection. For there is nothing
that slippeth away so soon as Occasion, nothing so difficult as to judge what
an other Man intends; nor any thing more nocent than our own immoderate
desires.

It has been ever a course observed by wise Princes, but much more by
Aristocracies and Popular States, against Force and Fury of the Multitude, to
defend themselves with Silver and Gold.

How much more it imports all Princes to lead a virtuous Life, and give daily
example of Piety and Justice, appears apparently in the Proceedings of the
Roman Bishops; who by the welldoing of some few of them at the first, became
greatly honored; but afterward they became contemptible: For the Reverence
which Men did bear to the sanctity of their Lives failing, it was impossible of
so contrary Manners and Examples to look for like effects.

The success of the War chiefly depends on the Reputation of the Prince,
which declining, the virtue also of the Soldiers fails: Likewise the fidelity
of the People decays, and their Money to maintain the War, cease;
contrariwise, the Courage of the Enemy is increased, they that stood doubtful
become resolved, and every difficulty augmenteth.

The Authority which Princes give, is chiefly in respect of Wisdom and Valor:
Yet true it is, that for the most part they account them the wisest Men that
can best accommodate themselves to their Humor.

The greatest Distress and Difficulty which can come to any Army, does proceed
of these Causes: Want of Money, scarcity of Victuals, hatred of People, discord
of Captains, disobedience of Soldiers, and their flying to the Enemy, either of
necessity or freewill.

A Prince or great Magistrate having long maintained the reputation of Wisdom
and Virtue, must take heed that no rash or dangerous Resolution do taint the
Honorable Fame of his former Life: For to be transported with Anger against
his own Profit, is lightness; and to esteem small dangers more than great, is
want of Judgment.

A Prince or Person of great Estate, must be wary not to inure the conceit of
double dealing: For little Sincerity and Trust is looked in his Actions, of
whom there is an opinion of Craft and Falsehood conceived.

Experience has always proved, that whatsoever the most part of men desire,
rarely comes to pass: The reason hereof is, that the effects of Human Actions
commonly depend on the will of a few; and their Intentions ever differing from
the greater number, the end and success cannot be other than as pleases the
few that are to direct them.

There is nothing more dangerous than to enterprise a War, or other Actions of
Importance upon popular persuasion; for such expectations are vain, and such
designs fallible: Also the Fury of the Multitude is great, when danger is
little or far off; but Perils growing great and near, their Courage quaileth,
as they whose Passions have no Rule or Measure.

It is strange to see how apt Men are to doubt displeasure threatened by
Enemies, chiefly when they draw near; for the People do naturally overmuch
fear Dangers at hand, and esteem less than is fit of things present: Also to
make small account of those that are far from them, because diverse Remedies may
be hoped as well by time, as other accidents.

The offensive Words or Answers of Indignation, proceeding from great Princes,
ought never to admit displeasure into the Minds of them against whom they are
spoken: For having by Speech uttered a great part of Choler, the edge of their
Deeds becomes the calmer, and more easily appeased: Such is the condition of
noble and generous Spirits.

To judge right of other Men's merit, seems of great difficulty; for time and
trial is thereto required: Also it is not easy to answer the expectation of
Men, but oft-times inconsiderate, and not measured in due proportion.

It is a part of great discretion to divide the seasons of Affairs and
Vacations: For as it fitteth well a Prince or Person of Dignity in times of
Audience and Judgment, to be grave, heedful, and austere: So those Offices
performed, all show of Authority and sad looks ought to be set apart; for by
that means, neither courteous Behavior shall detract from the Reverence due to
his place, nor severity diminish the Love which to his Behavior appertains.

Magistrates must look into all things, but not exact all things to rigor.
Light Faults may be pardoned, but great Offenses severely corrected; yet not
always proceeding to punishing, but often contented with Repentance. To be bitter
in rebuking is also fit for a Magistrate, showing himself sour to the bad, and
sweet to the good; framing both Countenance and Condition according to the
Merit of Men, and be persuaded that it is more honest to offend, than to hate.

Soldiers must be encouraged in all Fortunes to stand resolved, and not to be
daunted with any passed misadvantage; ever attending a Time and Opportunity of
Revenge; which commonly comes to pass where Men's Minds are united: For common
Danger must be repelled with Union and Concord.

Among other Reasons wherewith Soldiers are encouraged, Necessity and Distress
does often enforce them: For as Men of Virtue perform the Actions of Arms for
Honor, so the Coward must do them for his Security.

All Enterprises attempted by Arms, are Honorable; but those that are done in
Countries remote, are more praiseable: For the less they be in Knowledge, the
greater is the Glory to Archieve them.

To be truly and faithfully loved, is a thing greatly to be desired; for Terror
and Fear are weak Works of Affection: For they being taken away, he that
cease to fear, will soon begin to hate; and as they that by Force are kept
under, obey with ill Will; so they that govern without Line justly, rule
against Right.

Some Men either deserving to be accounted of excellent Wisdom, or singular in
that Skill whereof they make Profession, do ordinarily love the Proceedings of
others; taking that Advantage of their ill Success: Yet sure it is, that
Disaster and unhappy Event of some Actions, proceed not of Disorder, nor Human
Imperfection, but from a certain Fatal Fury, which neither Counsel nor
Constancy of Men can withstand.

It is a matter of much difficulty, or rather impossible for any Prince to
maintain the Law, Civil or Military, without Severity: For where Men hope to be
easily pardoned, there are they apt to offend. Contrarily, where Men's Actions
are precisely fitted, there do they live in overgreat Aw, and Hatred does
always accompany such Severity. The best course therefore is to punish Offenses
severely, and reward virtuous Merits liberally; so shall Fear be converted to
reverend Respect, and none have cause to complain: For as it lies in each Man's
Power to shun offending, so is it in their Power also to deserve well, and
merit Reward.

Whosoever, after mature deliberation, has resolved what Course to hold in the
Action he has in hand, must not after repent, or fear any Difficulty: For such
Thoughts would break the Vigor of the Mind, and impeach the Proceedings of
that which was resolved. And albeit some Differences do happily arise, yet must
he believe that every other course would have been accompanied with the same or
greater Impediments.

Young Men for the warmness of their Blood, and for not having before-time been
deceived by Fortune, more willingly enterprise Actions rather honorable than
severe. But Old Men as well for that their Heat is cooled, as also for having
attempted many things in vain, make choice of Enterprises severe, rather than
those that are followed with Fame and Glory.

The greatness of one Prince is nothing else but the Ruin and Distress of
another: Likewise his Strength is the Weakness and Oppression of others.

Some Conquests are of such Quality, as albeit a victorious Captain merit
triumphal Honor; yet a modest refusal becomes his greater Glory.

The Dignity of Magistrates is not assured without Arms; for when Obedience
fails, no other means is left to continue a People united.

As willing Obedience in Subjects is the Prince's Strength, so is the same
their own Security: For as by the Princes Authority the People are governed, so
by their Consent he is maintained.

Three things Men covet with immoderate Desire, Lands, Riches, and Honors; but
as seldom they compass their full Content, so are they for the most part to
endure a Destiny far other than they wished.

Strange it is, yet by Experience proved true, That in Time of Danger, Fortune
(or rather Destiny) so much amazeth the Judgment of Wise Men, as seldom they
conceive what Resolution is best to be taken.

No great Free-City can long continue quiet, unless the same be used to foreign
Assaults: For wanting Foes without, some inward Enmity will arise, not unlike
to strange Bodies of Men, which being secure from external Injury, are
nevertheless by their own Poise oppressed.

As every Pilot of ordinary Skill knows in calm and quiet Seas to direct the
Course of his Ship; so every Governor of Capacity does understand how the
Affairs of State are in peaceable Times to be handled: But when Tempests are,
and Subjects bent to Sedition; the one requires an excellent Sailer, the other
the Aid of some excellent Wisdom.

It often happens, that Public Duty is opposite to private Friendship; so as we
are either forced to omit the Offices due to our Country, or draw our dearest
Friends into Danger: In which case we are to prefer public Respect, before
particular Obligation.

The nature of base People is such, as either they obey slavishly, or command
insolently: For Liberty being the Mark whereat they aim, is by them of that
Quality, neither moderately desired nor discreetly continued; and always there
are some seditious Leaders to be found, who of Disorder are inclined to kindle
the Ire and Offense of Ignorant People. Dux rebus motis, facile invenitur.
Salust.

Experience has often proved, That Men in best Fortune, and such as esteem
themselves most secure, even then fall soonest into Disadventure, because those
Dangers unfeared be as it were contemned, and not regarded.

To enter needless Dangers, was ever accounted Madness; yet in Times of extreme
Peril and apparent Distress, Bold and Hazardous Attempts are greatest Security.

The diverse Adventures which happen to Men, may well inform, That much better
it is, chiefly in Arms, to be governed by Reason than by Fortune.

A certain Peace is ever accounted better Security than Victory hoped or
expected. Melior tutiorque certa pax quam sperata victoria. Live.

If to our Prosperity God were pleased to add the Grace of Wisdom, we should
thereby judge not only of what is past, but also of all that can succeed
hereafter.

Rarely or never can we consider truly of worldly proceedings, unless first we
have felt the deceits of Fortune. Discord or Dissension in any State or City,
offers opportunity to such men as are ambitious to work their will: For the
humor of Sects and Partialities is such, as the weaker Faction does ever choose
rather to call for aid of Strangers, than yield to the Dominion of an adverse
Party.

Ancient Customs may not violently and suddenly be taken away. Fortune which
alters all things, will by little and little wear them out of use.

To be often in fight, and converse much with men, breeds a kind of Satiety:
therefore it behooves persons of great Estate and Authority to be retired, lest
overmuch familiarity should derract from the reverencc due to honorable Estate.

The natures of men not content to live according to their Fortune and Birth,
are of all others most prone to Envy; because they hate the virtue and welfare
of all such as are in estimation above them.

Great heed is to be taken, that no Citizen or Subject, be suffered to aspire
to such greatness, as cannot be forced to obey the Laws; and no order there is
of more necessity, than that every man of what quality soever, may be without
respect accused and judged.

For conservation of particular Greatness and Dignity, there is nothing more
noble and glorious, than to have felt the force of every Fortune.

It is the quality of wise men only, to know how to use Prosperity, and never
to trust too much to the favors of present Happiness. A man well advised in his
Prosperity, bears not himself toward others either proud or violent; nor
must he believe in his own present felicity, for the Day knows not what the
Night brings: He only is to be reputed a man, whose mind cannot be puffed up by
prosperity, nor dejected by any adverse Fortune.

Men of Choleric humor are easily moved with insolent Speeches, but wise men
laugh them to scorn.

The way whereby a Prince eschues the hate of Subjects, is, not to take from
them their Lands or Goods; yet albeit the blood of some few be tainted, unless
the same be accompanied with Confiscation (which a Prince is rarely forced to
use) it seldom causes him to become odious.

A Rule most cerain it is that he who commands any thing unpleasing, must by
severe means cause it to be observed; and who desires to be obeyed, must know
how to command: And he only knows how to command, that does compare his own
force with those that are to obey; wherein finding a proportion, then he may
boldly proceed, otherwise forbear.

In Actions of difficulty great courage is to be used, and who so compasses
any thing by violence, cannot maintain it by mildness, nor command by
affability: He therefore that is of nature soft, should do best to refrain all
extraordinary commands, and in matters ordinary employ the virtue of his mild
spirit; because ordinary punishments are not imputed to the Prince or his
Magistrates, but to the Laws and Ordinances of State.

When Necessity presses, desperation is deemed Wisdom, and generous Minds do
not account of danger, because those Attempts which begin with Peril, do for
the most part end with Glory.

He that endeavors to be good among many that are evil, or will uphold that
which those labor to pull down of Force, works his own undoing. All
Commonwealths alter from order to disorder, from disorder to order again; for
Nature having made all worldly Things variable, so soon as they have attained
their utmost perfection and height, they must descend; so from good they fall
back to evil; and from evil they return to good. War begets Quiet, Quiet
Idleness, Idleness Disorder, Disorder Ruin; likewise Ruin Order, Order Virtue,
Virtue Glory and good Fortune.

WiseMen have observed that Arms were before Learning, and Captains before
Philosophers; for good and well regulated Armies having gained Victory,
established Rest and Security, whereof the Study of Letters and Liberal
Sciences ensued.

That Country deserves to be loved of all Men, which loves all Men
indifferently, and not that Country which respecting the best part, advances a
few: No Man therefore is to be blamed, if for such cause he desire rather to
abandon than embrace his Country.

Commonwealths are Bodies mixed, yet have they of Bodies simple some
resemblance: And as in these, many Infirmities grow, which without violent
Medicines cannot be cured; so in the other many Mischiefs arise, which a good
and godly Patient should offend to leave uncured, though therein he use both
force and fire.

Those Wars be most just which are most necessary; and those Arms are most
merciful where no hope of help remains but in them only.

In Actions which promise either public Glory, or private Honor, Men may be
reasonably persuaded to adventure life and living, because great hope there is
to die with Reputation, or live to recover that Peace which War has consumed:
But where Men are no less oppressed by insolency of Commanders, than by
insolency of Foes, there is the Calamity doubled, and of two evils the danger
of War seems least; for that has end, the other is infinite.

Who so persuades himself to be no less esteemed in evil than good Fortune, is
deceived: For promises made, during distress, are rarely performed, unless the
same necessity continue.

The intent of every Prince, or other State that makes War, is to enrich
himself, and impoverish the Enemy: Neither is Victory for other occasions
sought, nor the possessions of the Enemy to other end desired, than to make
themselves mighty, and their Enemy weak. It follows then, that so often as the
Victory impoverishes them, or the gains weaken them, either they pass or come
short of that Mark whereat the War was aimed.

Ancient and well-governed Commonwealths were wont by their Conquests to fill
the Treasuries with Gold and Silver, to give reward to Soldiers, to spare the
People from Tributes, to make Triumphs and Public Feasts: But in later times
the Wars have used, first, to consume the Treasure, and after impoverish the
People without assuring them from their Enemies.

A Prince or State that leaves promises unperformed, by reason of unexpected
Impediments, and for no ill intent, ought not to be blamed: Neither are such
accidents any just cause or color why Friends should abandon their
Confederates.

Where Magistrates govern justly, Subjects obey dutifully; where private
Persons grow rich, and Princes enlarge their Empire; there is the Commonwealth
blessed, and the People fortunate.

CHAP. XXVI. Maxims of State, or Prudential Grounds and Polemical Precepts,
concerning all Estates, and Forms of Policy in Times of Peace or War, etc.
confirmed by Select Narrations and Historical Parallels.
ALL Cities and Towns of State are builded either by People dwelling in or
about the Place where they are builded, or else they are made by Strangers: Of
the first are Athens and Venice, of the other Alexandria and Florence.

The Fortune of every City builded, and Virtue of the Builder, appears by
Choice of the Place, and Quality of Laws: For as fertile Places occasion Men to
be slothful, unless by good laws they be forced to labor, so Barrenness
compels them to Industry; which Reason induces Wise Men to plant Habitations
in either: Examples of the first are Ferrara and Rome, of the second Ragusa and
Genoa.

All Laws whereby Commonwealths are governed were either made by some one
excellent Man, and at an instant; or else they were ordained at sundry Times,
according to such Accidents as besel. Example, The Laws of Sparta made at the
beginning by Lycurgus, the Laws of Rome at sundry Times.

The Government of every City in Time becomes corrupt; Principality changes
into Tyranny: The Optimacy is made the Government of the People; and the
Popular Estate turns to licentious Disorder; which Instability or Alteration
moved some Lawmakers to take Order that in the Government of their City there
should be a Mixture of all three, and was the Cause that the Policy of Sparta
continued 800 Years, when the Popular State of Athens endured not one hundred.
Example, The Laws of Sparta made by Lycurgus, and the Laws of Athens by Solon.

Whosoever takes in hand to frame any State or Government, ought to presuppose
that all Men are Evil, and at occasions will show themselves so to be. Example,
The Envy of the People of Rome to the Nobles, and their Insolency toward them
appeared not so long as the Kings governed; but the Tarquins being Banished,
Opportunity was thereby offered, that the Malice of the one and the other
became discovered.

The diverse Honors of the Nobility and People, the one desiring to command,
the other not to obey, are the Cause of continual Troubles, unless some third
Mean there be of more Authority than either, to bridle the Force of both.
Example, The Kings in Rome expulsed, forth with arose much Mutiny, and could
not be suppressed till the Tribum Plebis were created; whose Authority wrought
the same effect which the Kings had done. Some States endeavor to enlarge
their Dominions, and some others labor only to maintain that Estate they
anciently possessed. Example of the first was the City of Rome, of the second
Sparta.

All States desiring to live at Liberty, think fit that every Man should be
permitted to accuse any Citizen that offend eth, which manner of proceeding
works two excellent Effects: First, That the People should not dare for Fear of
accusing to attempt ought against the State; or if they do, they shall be
presently and without Respect punished. Secondly, by Liberty of accusing, every
Man has Means to utter the Offense where with he can charge others, which he
could not; unless it were lawful to take such an ordinary Course, and
consequently be driven to ways extraordinary, particular Revenge, or calling in
Foreign Forces. Example, Coriolanus and Appius, Claudius at Rome, Lucanncve at
Chinsi, Francisco Valeri in Florence.

As Accusations are in every State necessary, so Slanders are dangerous, and
worthy of Punishment; the Difference betwixt Accusations and Slanders, is, that
the one is publicly performed before Magistrates, with good Proofs and
Witnesses to maintain the Truth of the Accusation; but Slanders are as well
publicly performed as dispersed in secret, and Places of Repair, without
Witness and Justification, so as every Man may be slandered, but few are
orderly accused. Example, Appius Claudius accused by L. Virginius; Furius
Camillus, slandered by Manlius Capitolinus.

The only means to suppress Slander is, to give Authority to some Persons of
Repute, to compel every Slanderer to become an Accuser; and if the Accusation
prove true, then to reward the Accuser, or at least not to punish him. Example,
Manlius the Slanderer of Camillus for his untrue Information punished.

A Rule most certain and assured it is, That every Kingdom and State at the
first well framed, or after well informed, does take the Perfection thereof
from the Wisdom of some excellent Man, who ought not to be blind though in a
Matter of great Moment he happily uses some extraordinary Violence or
Proceedings; for he that employeth Force to mend and not to mar, deserves
Commendation. Example, Romulus, Lycurgus, Cleomenes.

There lives no Man so simple or wise, so wicked or well-disposed, but prefers
those Persons that are praiseable before those that are blameable:
Notwithstanding for that well-near all Men are beguiled in discerning what
indeed is Good, deeming that Honorable which in Truth is otherwise: they
suffer themselves either willingly or ignorantly to be carried into a Course
which merits rather Infamy than Commendation. Example, Every Man wishes
himself Timoleon, or Agesilaus, rather than Dionysius or Phalaris; rather a
Titus or Trajan, than Caligula or Vitellius.

Who reads Histories treating of great Actions shall perceive that good Princes
indeed are more secure and better defended by the Love of the People, and
Fidelity of Counselors, than were they that entertained many Legions and Men
of War. Example, Of all those Emperors which reigned after Caesar until
Maximiinus, the greatest number were for their Vices taken and slain, only
Galba and Pertinax excepted, who were good Emperors.

A Prince of great Knowledge both in Arms and Wisdom, so firmly setleth the
Foundation of Government, as albeit his Successor be of the less Virtue, yet
may he be maintained even by the Memory of his Predecessor: But if it happen
that the third Prince prove not more like the first than the second, then all
that is past goes to Ruin. Example, The Martial Valor of Romulus was the
cause that Numa might govern safely in Peace: Which Tullus could not have done,
had he been unlike to Romulus; nor should Bajazet Emperor of Turkey have
enjoyed the State of his Father Mahomet, and left the same to his Posterity, if
Selim his Son had not been more like to his Grand - father than to Bajazet his
Father.

The Succession of two excellent Princes, chiesly if they be of long life,
works wondrous Effects: The like is seen in Optimacies and Popular States,
where the Governors successively elected be Men of great Virtue and
Understanding. Example, The first appeared in Philip of Macedon, and Alexander
his Son, the second in the Consuls of Rome.

In every State, where Soldiers are not, the Fault thereof proceeds from the
Governors. Wise Princes were therefore wont even in Times of Peace to cause
Warlike Exercises to be used; for without them the most Warlike Nations become
not only Ignorant in Martial Knowledge, but also effeminate. Example, Pelopidas
and Epaminondas in Thebes, and King Tullus in Rome as well in Peaceable as
Troublesome Times used the exercise of Arms.

No Prince or State well advised, hazards his whole Estate upon the Valor of
some few Persons, nor ought to Strength of strait Places, where the Enemy is to
pass. Example, Tully King of Rome, and Metius King of Alba, condescended that
three of their Nobility for either side, chosen should enter Combat, and that
Nation which was Victorious should command the other. Francis the French King
going to recover Lombardy, was by the Switzers attended into two or three
Places in the Mountains, hoping there to repulse him, but the King taking
another way, passed securely and prevailed.

Every State well governed does reward Men of good Merit, and punish all
Offenders; and if any Person of good Desert shall wilfully be a Delinquent, the
same Man ought not withstanding his former service, be punished. Example, The
same Horatio that in Combat gained the Victory against the Albani, having
insolently slain his own Sister, was notwithstanding his egregious Act and the
fresh memory thereof, called into trial of his life, and with great difficulty
obtained Pardon: And Manlius who had with great Glory saved the Capitol, for
moving Sedition in Rome, was after from the same cast down headlong.

Every wise Man having performed any great service to his Prince or Country,
ought to be content with such recompense as it shall please the Prince or
Country to bestow: Measuring the same according to the Power of the giver, and
not the merit of him that receives. Example, Horatius Cocles for having lost
his Hand in defense of the Bridge of Rome, and Mutius Scaevola suffering his
Hand to be burnt for his attempt to kill King Porsenna, were rewarded with a
small Portion of Land; and Manlius that defended the Capitol from the Galleys,
had no greater reward than a little measure of Meal.

Ingratitude is a Vice so natural and common, as not only private Persons, but
Princes and States also either through Covetousness or Suspicion are therewith
infected. Example, Vespasian proclaimed Emperor, was chiefly aided by Antonius
Primus, and by his help prevailed against Vitellius, in Reward of which Service
Vespasian removed him from the Command of his Army, and gave that honor to
Mutianus. Consalvo Ferranoe having taken the Kingdom of Naples from the French,
was first removed from his Command of the Castles and Soldiers, and in the end
brought into Spain, where in disgrace he ended his Life. Collatinus Tarquinius
who with the aid of Brutus suppressed the Tarquins of Rome, and with him Pub.
Valerius were banished for no other cause but for being of the name of Tarquin,
the other because he built a House upon Mount Coelio.

All Errors that great Captains commit, are either wilful or ignorant, toward
the one and the other of which Offenders to use greater lenity than the quality
of their Offenses deserves, seems necessary: For Men of Honor suffer naught
by the Infamy which evil Service does bring. It is also to be considered that a
great Captain being cumbred with many cares, cannot proceed in his Actions
courageously, if he stand in daily doubt to be punished for every error that
happens. Example, Sergius and Virginius were before Veio, the one part of the
Army on the one side of the City, the other not far from the place. Sergius
being assaulted by the Falisci was not aided by Virginius, neither would he
require his help, such was the envy the one bare to the other; and consequently
their Offense is wilful and worthy of capital punishment. Likewise when Varro
by his Ignorance, received an overthrow by Hannibal at Cannae, he was
nevertheless pardoned and honorably welcomed home by the whole Senate.

Whenever an Inconvenience arises within or without the State, it seems a
Resolution more sure to dissemble the knowing thereof, than to seek by sudden
violence to suppress it. Example, Cosmo de Medices having gained extraordinary
Reputation in Florence, the Citizens imagined, that to suffer the same to
increase was dangerous, and therefore they Banished him: Which extreme
Proceeding, so offended the Friends of Cosme, being the stronger, as they
forced the Citizens to revoke him, and make him Prince of that City. The like
happened in Rome, where Caesar for his Virtue, much admired and followed, became
afterward to be feared; and they that feared, not considering their force to
be inferior to the power of Caesar, endeavoring to oppress him, were the
occasion of his greater Glory.

In every Republic, an excessive Authority given to one or two Persons for
long time, proves dangerous, chiefly when the same is not restrained. Example,
The Dictatorship given to Caesar for life, was an occasion to oppress the
Liberties of the Romans. The same effect was before that time like to follow
the Decemvirate, by suffering Appius Claudius to prolong the time of his
Dignity.

The Ambition of Men is such, as rarely they will obey when formerly they have
commanded; neither do they willingly accept of mean Office, having before sat
in higher place: Yet the Citizens of well-governed States, did not refuse as
well to obey as command. Example, The Victory the Romans obtained against the
Veienti, Q. Fabius was slain, having the year before been Consul: Nevertheless
he then served in meaner place under C. Manilius, and M. Fabius his own Brother
then Consul.

There is nothing more strange, yet by experience proved true, That Men in
adverse Fortune be much grieved, and in Prosperity also discontented; which is
the reason, that not being forced to fight for necessity, they will
nevertheless contend for Ambition; and that Humor does as well possess those
that live aloft, as others whom Fortune holds down. Example, The People of
Rome having by the Authority of the Tribunes obtained to make themselves secure
from oppression of the Nobility, forthwith required, That the Honor and Office
of State might be also imparted unto them. The like Ambition moved them to have
their part of Lands by force of Lex Agaria, which was at last the overthrow of
the Roman Liberty.

It seems that People displeased with some Innovations happened in the State,
do sometime without just Reasons complain of those that govern: Not unlike to a
sick Man, who deemeth that the Physician, not the Fever, is the cause of his
Grief. Example, The People of Rome were persuaded that the Ambition of Consuls
was the cause of continual War, therefore required that no more Consuls should
be; yet they were content that certain Tribunes should command with like
Authority; so was nothing altered in the Government, but the Governors Title,
which alone did content them.

Nothing can corrupt and alter the nature of Man so much, or so soon as the
immoderate desire of Honor; in so much as Men of honest Minds and virtuous
Inclinations are sometimes by Ambition, drawn to abuse that Goodness whereunto
they are inclined. Example, Appius Claudius having lived long an Enemy to the
Multitude, hoping by their aid to continue his Authority of the Decemviri in
Rome, became their Friend, and disfavoured the Factions of great Men. Likewise
Q. Fabius a Man of singular virtue, being also called to that dignity by
Appius's self, adulterated his nature and became like unto him.

Seldom or never is any People discontented without just cause; yet if happily
they be asked whereof their offense proceeds, many times for want of some fit
Man to pronounce their grief, they stand silent. Example, The Romans at the
death of Virginia, were gathered together armed upon Mount Sacro, and being
asked by the Senate, for what cause they so did? No Answer was made; until
Virginio Father of the Virgin had procured, that twenty of the Tribunes might
be made to be as Head of the People, and confer with the Senate.

A great Folly or rather mere Madness it seems to desire any thing, and tell
beforehand that the end and purpose of the desire is evil; for thereby he
shows Reason why it ought not to be granted. Example, The Romans required of
the Senate that Appius and the rest of the Decemviri should be delivered into
their Hands, being determined to burn them all alive.

The first part of their Request seemed reasonable, but the end thereof
unreasonable.

A course very dangerons it is in all States, by continual accusing and
punishing, to hold the Subject in doubt and daily fear: For he that stands
always looking for some trouble, becomes careless and apt to attempt
Innovation. Example, The Decemviri being oppressed, the Tribunes authorized in
their place, endeavored daily to call in question the most part of the
Decemviri, and many other Citizens also, whereof great Inconveniences arose,
and much danger would have ensued, had not a Decree propounded by M. Duillius
been made, that for one year no Roman Citizen should be accused.

Strange it is to see how Men in seeking their own security, lay the Injuries
which they fear, upon other Men; as though it were necessary, either to offend
or to be offended. Example, The Romans among themselves, united and strong,
always endeavored to offend the Nobles; and the Nobles likewise being
persuaded they were strong, labored to oppress the People: Which Humors were
the cause of continual Troubles.

To make estimation and choice of Men fit to govern, the best course is to
consider in particular; otherwise it might be imagined, that among the
Multitude or meaner People, they being the greatest number, might be found some
Persons of more perfection. Example, The People of Rome desiring that the
Consulship might be given among them as Men of most Merit, did by all means
endeavor to obtain that Honor; but being come to Election, and every Man's
Virtue particularly considered, there could not be among the Multitude only one
found fit for so great a place; and therefore the People themselves consented,
that the Dignity should still remain as it was.

To persuade a Multitude to any Enterprise, is easy, if that which is
persuaded, does promise either Profit or Honor; yet often under that external
appearance lies hid loss or disadvantage. Example, The Romans persuading
themselves that the slow Proceedings of Fabius Maximus in the War, was both
chargeable and cowardly, required, That the General of the Horse might direct
the War; which course had ruined Rome, if the Wisdom of Fabius had not been.
Likewise, when Hannibal had diverse years reigned in Italy, one M. Centenius
Penula, a Man of base Birth, yet a Soldier of some Repute, undertook that if he
with such Volunteers as would follow him, might have Authority to Fight, he
would within few days deliver Hannibal either alive or dead: Which Offer was by
the Senate accounted rash, yet for fear to offend the People, granted; and
Penula with his Soldiers was cut in pieces.

To appease a Mutiny or Tumult in any Camp or City, there is no means more
speedy or successful, than if some Person of great Quality and Respect, present
himself to the People, and by his Wisdom lay before them the damage of their
Discords, persuading them to Peace and Patience. Example, The Faction of the
Frateschi and Arratiati in Florence; the one ready to assault the other.
Francisco Soderini, Bishop of Voterra, in his Episcopal Habit, went between the
Parties and appeased them: Also Count Egremont, by the Authority of his Wisdom
and Presence, suppressed a great Mutiny in Antwerp, between the Martinists and
Papists.

A People corrupted, do rarely or never observe any Order or Ordinance, unless
by Force of some Prince's Power they be thereto enforced; but where the
Multitude is Incorrupt and Religious, all things are done justly, and without
Compulsion. Example, Camillus at the Victory against the Urienti, vowed that
the tenth part of the Pillage should be offered to Apollo; but the Senate
supposing that the People would not consent to so great a Contribution, studied
to dispense with that Vow, and to please Apollo and the People also by some
other Means: Whereat the People showed themselves openly offended, and
willingly gave no less than the Sum formerly decreed. When the Free-Cities of
Germany are occasioned to make Money for any Public Service, the Magistrates
impose one or two in the hundred on every City, which done, every one is sworn
to lay down so much as in his own Conscience he is able; and he with his own
Hand, no other Witness being present, casts the Money into a Coffer prepared
for the purpose; which he would not, if his own Conscience did not enforce him.

When any extraordinary occasion happens to a City or Province, some prodigious
Voice is heard, or some marvelous Sights are seen. Before T. Gracchus General
of the Roman Army was betrayed by Flavius Lucanus, the Aruspices discovered two
Serpents eating the Entrails of the Beasts sacrificed; which done, they
vanished: Which Vision, as they divined, prognosticated the General's Death:
Likewise F. Savanarola foretold the coming of King Charles VIII. into Italy:
And M. Sedigitus, when the Gauls first came toward Rome, informed the Senate
he heard a Voice much louder than any Man's, crying aloud, Galli veniunt.

The multitude of base People is naturally audacious and apt to Innovation; yet
unless they be directed by some Persons of Reputation and Wisdom, rarely do
they join in any Action of great import. Example, The Romans, when their City
was taken and sacked by the Gauls, went to Veio with determination to dwell
there: The Senate informed thereof, commanded, That upon great Pain every
Citizen should return to Rome, whereat the People at first mocked; but when
every Man particularly within himself considered his own Peril, all in general
determined to obey the Magistrates.

In the Employment of Men for Service, neither Age nor Fortune ought so much to
be regarded as Virtue; for young Men having made trial of their Valor, soon
become aged, and thereby either unapt or unable to serve: Therefore
well-governed Commonwealths, preferred Military Virtue before any other
respect. Example, Valerius Corvinus, with others, made Consul the three and
twentieth Year of his Age, and Pompey triumphed in his Youth.

No wise or well-advised Prince or other State will undertake without excessive
Forces to invade the Dominions of any other Prince, unless he assure himself of
some Friends there to be a Mean, and as it were a Gate. to prepare his Passage.
Example, The Romans by Aid of the Saguntines entered Spain, the AEtoli called
them into Greece, the Hediai into France: Likewise the Palaeologi incited the
Turk to come into Thrace; and Ludovicus Sforza occasioned Charles the French
King to come into Italy.

A Republic desirous to extend the Bounds thereof, must endeavor to be fully
furnished with Inhabitants, which may be done both by Love and Force: Love is
gained by suffering Strangers to inhabit the City securely; and Force compels
People to come thither, when other Cities and Towns near at hand be demolished
or defaced: And impossible it is without this Order of proceeding. to enlarge
any City or make the same of greater Power. Example, The Romans to enlarge
their City demolished Alba, and many other Towns, and therewith also
entertained all Strangers courteously: So as Rome grew to such greatness, that
the City only could arm six hundred and forty thousand Men; but Sparta or
Athens could never exceed twenty thousand, for that Lycurgus had inhibited the
access of Strangers.

A Commonwealth that consumes more Treasure in the War, than it profits in
Victory, seems to have rather hindered than honored or enriched the State. A
wise Captain therefore in his Actions, ought as well to profit the Republic,
as to gain to himself Glory. Example, The Consuls of Rome did seldom desire
Triumph, unless they returned from the War laden with Gold, Silver and other
rich Spoils fit to be delivered into the Common Treasury.

All Foreign Wars with Princes or other States taken in hand, be either for
Ambition or Desire of Glory, or else for Necessity. Example, The Romans for
their Ambition conquered many Nations, with intent only to have the Obedience
of the People; yet did they suffer them to hold Possession of their Houses, and
sometimes they were permitted to live only with their old Laws. Likewise
Alexander the Great endeavored to suppress many Princes for his Glory, but did
not disposses the People, nor kill them.

Otherwise it is where a whole Nation enforced by Famine or Fury of War,
abandon their own Dwellings, and are forced to inhabit elsewhere. Example, The
Goths and other People of the North invaded the Roman Empire, and many other
Provinces, whereof their Alteration of Names did ensue; as Illyria, now called
Slavonia, England formerly named Britain.

A common Conceit and Saying it is, That Money makes the War strong, and is the
Force and Sinews thereof; as though he who has most Treasure, be also most
mighty; but Experience has apparently showed the contrary. Example, After the
Death of Alexander King of Macedon, a multitude of Gauls went into Greece, and
being there arrived, sent certain Ambassadors to the King, who supposing to
make them afraid of his Power, showed them his Treasure, which wrought a
contrary effect; for the Gauls, before desirous of Peace, resolved then to
continue the War, in hope to win that mighty mass of Money. Likewise Darius
should have vanquished Alexander, and the Greeks might have conquered the
Romans, if the richer Prince might ever by his Money have prevailed.

Every League made with a Prince or Republic remote, is weak and rather aideth
us with Fame than Effect, and consequently deceives all those that in such
amity repose Confidence. Example, The Florentines being assaulted by the King
of Naples and the Pope, prayed Aid of the French King; who being far distant,
could not in Time Succor them: And the Cedicini desiring Aid of the Capuani
against the Samnites, a People of no Force, were deceived.

A Prince whose People is well armed and trained, shall do better to attend his
Enemy at Home, than by Invasion to assault his Country: But such Princes whose
Subjects are disarmed, had need to hold the Enemy aloof. Example, The Romans,
and in this Age the Swisses, being well armed, may attend the War at Home; but
the Carthaginians and Italians being not so well furnished, did ever use to
seek the Enemy.

The Plurality of Commanders in equal Authority, is for the most part occasion
of slow Proceeding in the War. Example, There was at one Time in Rome created
four Tribuni Militares with Authority of Consuls, viz. T. Quintus after his
Consulship, Cajus Furius, M. Posthumus, and A. Cornelius Cassius, amongst whom
arose so much Diversity and Contrariety of Opinion, as nothing could be done
till their Authority ceased, and M. AEmylius made Dictator.

A Victory obtained by any great Captain with the Authority of his Prince's
Commission, Counsel, and Directions, ought ever to be imputed rather to the
Wisdom of the Prince, than the Valor of the Captain: Which made the Emperors
of Rome to permit no Captains (how great soever his Victories were) to Triumph,
as before that time the Consuls had done; and even in those Days a modest
Refusal of Triumph was commended. Example, M. Fulvius having gained a great
Victory against the Tuscans, was both by the Consent of the Senate and People
of Rome, admitted to Triumph; but the Refusal of that Honor proved his great
Glory.

All they that from private Estate have aspired to Principality, either by
Force or Fraud be come thereunto, unless the same be given, or by Inheritance
descended: Yet it is rarely seen, that Force alone prevails, but Fraud
without Force oft-times suffices. Example, Agathocles by such means became
Prince of Syracusa; John Galeazzo by abusing his Uncle Barnabas, gained the
Dominion of Lombardy; and Cyrus circumvented Cyaxares his Mothers Brother, and
by that Craft aspired to Greatness.

Sudden Resolutions are always dangerous; and no less Peril ensues of slow and
doubtful Delays. Example, When Hieron Prince of Syracuse died, the War even
then being in great Heat between the Romans and Carthaginians, they of Syracusa
consulted, whether it were better to follow the Fortune of Rome or Carthage. In
which Doubt they continued until Apollondies, a chief Captain of Syracusa, laid
before them, That so long Delay would make them hated both of Romans and
Carthaginians. Likewise the Flcrentines being by Lewis the Twelfth required to
give his Army Passage toward Naples, mused so long upon an Answer, that he
became their Enemy, and they forced to recover his Favor full dearly.

To govern a State is nothing else but to take such Order as the Subjects may
not, or ought not to offend; which may be done, either by removing from them
all means to disobey, or by affording them so great Favors, as reasonably they
ought not to change their Fortune; for the mean Course proves Dangerous.
Example, The Latins being by the Valor of Camillus overcome, yielded
themselves to endure what Punishment it pleased the Romans to inflict.

An Ingenious and Magnanimous Answer being made unto Wise Magistrates, does often
obtain both Pardon and Grace. Example, When the Privernates had rebelled, and
were by Force constrained to return to the Obedience of the Romans, they sent
certain of the City unto Rome, to desire pardon; who being brought before the
Senate, one of the Senators asked the Privernates, what punishment themselves
did think they had deserved: The same, quoth they, which Men living in Freedom,
think they are worthy of. Whereto the Consul thus replied, Quid si poenam
remittimus? Qualem nos patem vobiscum habituros speremus? The Privernates
answered, Si bonam dederitis, and fidelem and perpetuam: Si malam, haud
diuturnam. Which Answer was thought to proceed from generous Men, and therefore
they were not only pardoned, but also honored and received into the number of
the Roman Citizens.

All Castles, Fortresses, and Places of Strength, be made for Defense, either
against the Enemy or Subject: In the first Case they are not necessary, in the
second dangerous. For thereby the Prince may at his Pleasure take occasion to
insult upon the Subject, when much more seemly he might settle his Estate upon
the Love and good Affection of Men. Example, The Castle of Millan made by Duke
Francisco Sforza, incited his Heirs to become insolent; and consequently they
became odious; which was also the cause that so soon as that City was
assaulted, the Enemy with facility did possess it.

That Prince or Potentate which builds his Severity rather upon the Trust he
has in Fortresses, than the Love of Men, shall be deceived: For no Place is so
strong, as can long defend it self, unless by the Love and Aid of Men it be in
time of Necessity succored. Example, Pope Julio having drawn the Bentivoli out
of Bologna, built there a strong Castle; the Governor thereof robbed the
People, and they therewith grieved, in a short Time took the Castle from him.
So after the Revolt of Genoa, Lewis the Twelfth came to the Recovery thereof,
and builded there the strongest Fortification of Italy, as well for Sight as
the Circumstances inexpugnable. Nevertheless the Citizens rebelled, and within
sixteen Months the French were forced to yield the Castle and Government to
Octavio Fragosa.

To build Forts upon Places of Strength, either for defense of our own, or to
hold that which is taken from others, has ever proved to small purpose.
Example, The Romans having suppressed the Rebellion of the Latins and
Privernates, albeit they were People Warlike, and lovers of Liberty; yet to
keep them Subject, built there no Castle, nor other Places fortified: And the
Lacedaemonians did not only forbear to fortify the Towns they conquered, but
also left their chief City of Sparta unwalled.

The Necessity or Use of Fortification is only upon Frontiers, or such
principal places where Princes make their Habitation; to the end the Fury of
sudden Assaults may be staid, and Time for Succor entertained: Otherwise,
Example, the Castle of Millan being made to hold the State in Obedience, could
not so do either for the House of Sforza or France. Guido Ubaldo, Duke of
Velin, driven from his Dominion by Caesar Borgia, so soon as he recovered his
Country, caused all the Forts to be demolished: For by Experience he found the
Love of Men was the surest Defense, and that Fortifications prevailed no less
against him than for him.

The Causes of Division and Faction in every Commonweal proceed most commonly
of Idleness and Peace, and that which uniteth, is Fear and War. Example, The
Vejenti and Elinsci having Intelligence of great Contention between the
Nobility and People of Rome, thought that a fit Opportunity to oppress the one
and the other: But the Romans informed of such an Intention, appeased all
Domestic Anger, and by the Valor of their Arms, conducted by Gn. Manlius and
M. Fabius, defeated the Enemies Forces.

The means to usurp an Estate disjoynted is, first before Arms be taken, to
become, as it were, an Arbitrator or a Friend indifferent; and after Arms be
taken, then to send moderate Aid to the weak Side, as well to entertain the War
between the Factions, as also to consume the Strength both of the one, and the
other; yet in no wise to employ any great Forces, for thereby either party may
discover the Intents to suppress them. Example, The City of Pistoia fallen into
Division, the Florentines took occasion sometimes to favor the one, and
sometimes the other, that in the end both sides weary of the War, voluntarily
yielded to their Devotion. Philippo Viscount, hoping sundry times by occasion
of Faction to oppress the Florentines, did often assault them with great
Forces, which was the Cause that they became reunited; and consequently the
Duke deceived of his Expectation.

A great Wisdom it is to refrain Opprobrious and Injurious Speech: For as
neither the one nor the other can any whit decrease the Enemies Force, so does
it move him to greater Hate, and more desire to offend. Example, Gabides, a
General of the Persians having long besieged Amida, became weary, and preparing
to abandon the enterprise, raised his Camp, which they of the City beholding,
began to revile the Persians, and from the Walls reproved them of Cowardice;
which undiscreet Words so highly offended Gabides, as thereupon he resolved to
continue the Siege, and within few days won the City. Tiberius Gracchus
appointed Captain of certain Bands of Men, whom for want of other Soldiers the
Romans entertained, proclaimed in his Camp, That no Man, upon Pain of Death,
should contumeliously call any Soldier Slave, either in Earnest or Jest. Nam
facetiae asperae quando nimium ex vero traxere, acrem sui memoriam relinquunt.
Likewise Alexander the Great having conquered well near all the East, brought
his Forces before Tire, they fearing Alexander's Fury, offered upon honorable
Considerations to yield him Obedience, only requiring, that neither he nor any
of his Forces should enter the City, which motion after four Months Alexander
accepted, and so signified by his Ambassador, who arriving at Tire was by the
proud Citizens slain, whereat Alexander grew into Choler, and being ready to
forsake the Siege, staid his Forces, and in the end sacked the City and put the
People to the Sword.

A Prince or any other State being assaulted by an Enemy of far more puissance
than himself, ought not to refuse any honorable Compositions, chiefly when
they are offered; for no Conditions can be so base, but shall in some sort turn
to Advantage and Honor of him that accepts them. Example, Anno 1512. certain
Florentines procured great Forces of Spaniards to come thither, as well to
reposess the Medici then banished, as also to sack the City; promising that so
soon as the Army of Spain did come into the Florentine Dominion, the Faction of
Medici would be ready armed to receive them. But the Spaniards being come,
found no Forces at all to join with them; and therefore wanting Victual,
offered Composition. The Florentines finding the Enemy distressed grew insolent
and refused Peace, whereof followed the loss of Prato, and many other
Inconveniences. The like happened to them of Tire, as before.

The denial or delay of Justice desired in revenge of Injuries either public
or privately offered, is a thing very dangerous to every Prince or other State;
for that the Party injured does often by indirect means, though with hazard of
his Country and himself, seek satisfaction: Example, The Complaint which the
Galli made against the Fabii who sent Ambassadors in favor of the Tossani, not
being heard, nor any punishment inflicted upon them for Fighting against the
Law of Nations, was the cause that the Galli were offended with the States,
whereof followed the sack of Rome; and the delay of Justice in Philip of
Macedon, for not revenging the incestuous oppression of Attalus to Pausanias,
was the Motive to murder that King.

Whosoever endeavors the alteration of any State must of necessity proceed with
all severity, and leave some memorable Example to those that shall impugn the
Ordinance of Government newly settled. Example, When Junius Brutus had by his
great Valor banished the Tarquins, and sworn the People that no King should
ever reign in Rome; within short time after, many young Nobles, among whom was
Brutus's Son, impatient of the equality of the new Government, conspired to
recall the Tarquins; but Brutus thereof informed, caused his own Son not only
to be condemned to death, but was himself present at the Execution.

As Health and soundness of the Hands, Legs, and other outward Members cannot
continue Life, unless the Heart and vital Spirits within be strong and firm; so
Fortifications and Frontier-defences do not prevail, unless the whole Corpse of
the Kingdom and People be well armed: Example, When the Emperor came into
Italy, and had with some difficulty past the confines of the Venetians well
near without resistance; his Army marched to Venice, and might doubtless have
possessed the City, had it not been defended with Water. Likewise the English in
their assault of France, excepting a few Encounters on the Frontiers, found no
puissant resistance within the Realm. And Anno 1513. they forced all that
State, and the King himself to tremble, as often before they had done; but
contrariwise the Romans knowing that Life lay in the Heart, ever held the Body
of their State strongest: For the nearer the Enemy approached Rome, the better
they found the Country armed and defended.

The desire to command sovereignly is of so great Force, as does not only work
in those that are in expectation of Principality, but also in them that have no
Title at all. Example, this Appetite moved the Wife of Tarquinius Priscus
contrary to all natural Duty to incite her Husband to murder her own Father
Servius, and possess his Kingdom, as being persuaded it were much more
honorable to be a Queen than to be the Daughter of a King.

The violation of ancient Laws, Orders and Customs, under which People have
long time lived, is the chief and only Cause whereby Princes hazard their
Estate and Royal Dignity. Example, Albeit the deflowring of Lucrece was the
occasion, yet was it not the cause that moved the Romans to take Arms against
Tarquin; for he having before that fact of Sextus his Son, governed
Tyrannically, and taken from the Senate all Authority, was become odious both
to the Senate, Nobility and People, who finding themselves wellgoverned, never
seek or wish any other liberty or alteration.

A Prince that desires to live secure from Conspiracy, has cause rather to
fear those on whom he has bestowed overgreat Riches and Honors, than those
whom he has greatly injured; because they want Means to offend; the other have
many opportunities to do it: Example, Perrenius the prime Favorite of Commodus
the Emperor, conspired his Death. Plautianus did the like to Severus, and
Sejanus to Tiberius; for being advanced to so great Honors, Riches and Offices,
as nothing remained desirable but the Imperial Title, they conspired against
the Persons of their Sovereigns in hope of the Dignity; but in the end they
endured that Punishment which to such Disloyalty and Ingratitude appertains.

An Army which wants Experience, albeit the Captain be expert, is not greatly
to be feared; neither ought an Army of well-train'd Soldiers to be much
esteemed, whose Captain is ignorant. Example, Caesar going into Africa against
Afranius and Petraeus whose Army was full of old Soldiers, said he feared them
little, Quia ibat ad exercitum sine duce. Contrariwise, when he went to
Pharsalia to encounter Pompey, he said, Ibo ad ducem fine exercitu.

A Captain General commanding an Army ought rather to govern with Courtesy and
Mildness, than with overmuch Austerity and Severity. Example, Q. and Appius
Claudius being Consuls, were appointed to govern the War. To Q. was allotted
one Army which served very dutifully; but Appius commanding the other with
great Cruelty, was by his Soldiers unwillingly obeyed. Nevertheless Tacitus
seems of contrary Opinion, saying, Plus Poena quam obsequium valet.

Therefore to reconcile these different Conceits, I say, that a General having
power to command Men, either they are Confederates or Subjects: If Confederates
or Voluntaries, he may not proceed to extreme punishment; if Subjects, and his
power absolute, they may be governed otherwise; yet with such respect, as the
insolence of the General enforce not the Soldiers to hate him.

Honor may sometime be got as well by the loss as gaining of Victory. Every
Man knows Glory is due to the Victor, and we deny not the same Privilege to
the vanquished, being able to make proof that the Loss proceeded not from his
Default. Neither is it dishonorable to violate those Promises whereto the
necessity or disadvantage of War inforceth. And forced Promises which concern a
whole State, are not binding, and rarely or ever kept, nor is the Breaker
thereby to receive Disgrace. Example, Posthumus the Consul having made a
dishonorable Peace with the Samnites, was by them with his whole Army sent
home disarmed. Being arrived at Rome, the Consul informed the People they were
not bound to perform the base Conditions he was compelled to yield unto;
albeit, he and those few that promised, were bound to perform them. The Senate
thereupon concluded to send him Prisoner to Samno, where he constantly
protested the Fault to be only his own; wherefore the People by that Peace
incurred no Dishonor at all: And Fortune so much favored Posthumus, as the
Samnites were content presently to return him to Rome; where he became more
glorious for losing the Victory, than was Pontius at Samno for having won the
Victory.

Wise Men have long observed, That who so will know what shall be, must
consider what is past; for all worldly Things hold the same course they had at
first. The Reason is, that as long as Men are possessed with the same Passions
with former Ages, consequently of these doings the same effects ensue. Example,
The Almains and French have ever been noted for their Avarice, Pride, Fury and
Infidelity, and so in diverse Ages, experience has proved even to this present:
For perfidious Dealing the French have given sufficient proof, not only in
ancient times, but also in the time of Charles VIII. who promised to render to
the Florentines the Forts of Pisa, but having diverse times received Money, held
them notwithstanding in possession. The Florentines found the like in the
Almains; for in the Wars of the Visconti, Dukes of Milan, they prayed aid of
the Emperor, who promised them great Forces; in consideration whereof, he was
to receive of the Florentines one hundred thousand Crowns in Hand, and as much
more when his Army was arrived in Italy, both which Payments were performed;
but as soon as the Emperor came to Verona he devised Cavillations of Unkindness
whereupon he returned home.

A Prince desirous to obtain any thing of another, must if occasion so permit,
urge his Demand so earnestly and press for so sudden and present Answer, as he
who is pressed may not have leisure to consider how to excuse himself in denial.
Example, Pope Julio endeavored to drive out of Bologna all the Bentivoli, in
which Action he thought the aid of the French necessary, and that the Venetians
should stand neutral; and by diverse Messengers did solicit them to that
Effect; but not receiving any resolute Answer, he thought fit with those few
Forces he had to take his Journey to Bologna, whereupon the Venetians
advertised him they would remain neutral, and the French King forthwith sent
him Forces, as fearing the Popes Indignation; likewise the Tuscans having
formerly desired aid of the Samnites against the Romans, took Arms suddenly and
obtained their request which the Samnites had before denied.

When a Multitude offends, all may not be punished, because they are too
many: To punish part and leave the rest unpunished, were Injury to the
Sufferers; and to those that escape, an Encouragement to offend again;
therefore to eschew all extremity, mean Courses have been anciently used.
Example, When all the Wives of the Romans conspired to Poison their Husbands, a
convenient number of them were punished, and the rest suffered to pass: Likewise
at the conspiracy of the Bacchanals in the time of the Macedonian War, wherein
many thousands Men and Women had part, every tenth person only was put to death
by lot, although the offense were general; by which manner of punishing, he
that suffered, complained on his fortune; and he that escaped, was put in fear,
that offending again, the same punishment might light upon himself, and
therefore would no more offend.

A Battle or great action in Arms ought not to be enterprised without special
Commission or Command from the Prince; otherwise the General incurs great
danger. Example, Papyrius the Dictator punished the General of the Horse in the
Roman Army, for having fought without his consent, although he had in battle
slain 20000 Enemies without loss of 200 of his own; and Caesar commended his
Captain Silanus for having refrained to fight, though with great advantage he
might. Also count Egmont hazarded the favor of the King his Master for giving
battle to Marshall de Thermes, albeit he were victorious: for upon the success
of that action the loss or safety of all the Low Countries depended.

To govern without Council is not only dangerous in Aristocracies and Popular
States, but unto independent Princes an occasion of utter ruin. Example, Hieron
the first King of Sicily in all his proceedings used the advice of Counsels,
and lived fifty years prosperously in Peace; but his grandchild succeeding,
refusing all Counsel lost his Kingdom, and was with all his Kinsfolk and
Friends cruelly slain.

In all Monarchies the Senate or privv-Council is or ought to be composed of
persons of great dignity, or Men of approved wisdom and understanding. Example,
In Polonia no Man is Counselor unless he be a Palatine, a Bishop, a Castellan,
a Captain, or such a one as has been Ambassador: and in Turkey the title of
Counselor is not given but only to the four Bassaes. The two Cadelesquires,
the twelve Beglerbegs, and Kings Son, who in his Fathers absence, is as it were
a President of the Divano or Senate.

Many Princes Ancient and Modern have used to select out of their Council, two
or three, or four at most, to whom only they did impart their affairs. Example,
The Emperor Augustus had Maecenas and Agrippa; Julius Caesar, Q. Paedius and
Cor. Balbus, whom he only trusted with his Cipher and secrets, being
Counselors of the Cabinet (as we now call them.)

The alteration of old Laws, or introduction of new, are in all States very
dangerous, notwithstanding any appearance of profit or public utility, which
moved wise Governors to decree, that ancient Laws once established might never
be called in question. Example, The Athenians decreed that no Law should be
propounded to the People without the consent of the Senate: the like use is
observed in Venice, where no Petition is preferred to the Senate but by advice
of the Sages; and among the Locrians the Custom was, that whosoever presented
any new Law to be confirmed, should come with a Halter about his Neck, and be
therewith hanged if his request were rejected; also Lycurgus to prevent the
alteration of his Laws, did swear the People of Sparta to observe them untilhis
return, and thereupon retired himself into voluntary exile, with intent never
to return.

When necessity or good reason moves Innovation or Abolition of Laws, a course
more secure it is to do it rather by degrees than suddenly. Example, The Romans
finding the Laws of the twelve Tables unprofitable, suffered them to be
observed or neglected at discretion, but would not publicly suppress them for
fear of calling other Laws into contempt: so did they continue 700 years, and
were then cassed by Ebutius the Tribune. But Agis King of Lacedemon desirous to
revive the Laws of Lycurgus, long discontinued, enforced all Men to bring in
their evidence and writings to be cancelled, to the end a new partition of
Lands and Goods might be made; which sudden and violent proceeding proved so
fatal, that it moved a dangerous sedition, wherein he was disposed and with his
Mother and Friends put to death; which Example happily moved the Venetians not to
attempt any thing against the Authority of Augustino Barberino their Duke: but
after his death, and before the Election of Lovedono, the Signiory published new
Ordinances detractive from the Ducal Authority.

Whose has won to himself so great Love and Affection, as thereby to become
master of the forces, and at his pleasure commands the Subjects apt for Arms,
may also without right or title assure himself of the whole Estate. Example,
Hugh Capat a Subject to the Crown of France, being greatly honored by the
Soldiers, found means thereby to prevent Charles Duke of Lorrain of the Crown,
being right Heir by descent from Charlemain. And albeit the Families of the
Paleologi, Ebrami and Turcani be of the blood Royal and Right Heirs to the
Turkish Empire, when the Ottoman Line shall fail; yet it is like that the chief
Bassa having the love of the Janisaries will usurp the State, because the
Paleologi and other Competitors be far from the Turks person, poor and without
means to purchase the Soldiers favor.

A Commander General in Arms, ought upon pain of great punishment be enjoined,
not to employ or retain any forces longer than the time of his Commission.
Example, The Dictators of Rome were in this point so precise, as never any of
them dared to transgress the time prefixed, till Caesar obtained that dignity
should continue in him for life; which was the cause of his usurpation of the
State. Also the Thebans commanded, that if the General of their Army did hold
his forces one day longer than the time prefixed, he should thereby incur danger
of death: which Justice was executed upon Epaminondas and Pelopidas.

Banishment of great Lords, or Citizens of great Reputation, has been in
diverse places diversely used: for in the one, they were enforced only to absent
themselves without further infliction; in the other, Banishment was accompanied
with Confiscation, a course of great danger. Example, In Argos, Athens,
Ephesus, and other Cities of Greece, the Citizens puissant in Friends, Virtue
or Riches, were many times banished for Envy or Fear, but never or very rarely
forced to absent themselves longer than ten Years; and that without loss of
Goods, which was the cause that never any of them Warred against the Country:
But Dion being banished Syracusa by Dionysius Junior, and Coriolanus from Rome,
did make mighty Wars against their own Country. The like was done by the Medici
in Florence.

Honorable and Magnanimous Men were wont not only to enterprise great Acts,
but also to suffer patiently all Injuries which Foes or Fortune could expose
them to: As resolved, that no Calamity was so great as to make their Minds
abject, or to forget the Dignity appertaining to Persons virtuous: Example,
After the defeat of the Roman Army upon the River Allia, the Galli persued the
Victory even to Rome's Walls: Whither being come, and finding the Gates open,
without any sign of Resistance they entered the Streets, where all Honorable
Palaces were also unshut, which caused the Galli greatly to doubt. Nevertheless
looking into the Houses, they found in every of them a Senator set in a Chair
of State, and in his Hand a Rod of Ivory; his Person was also vested with Robes
of Dignity, which Majestic spectacle did marvelously amate the Galli, not
having before that time seen any such Reverend Sight; and therefore did not
only refrain to offer Violence, but highly admired the Roman Courage, chiefly
in that Fortune. Nevertheless at length a rude Gall happened with his Hand to
touch the white Beard of M. Papyrius, whereat he taking great disdain struck
him with his Rod, in requital whereof the Barbarian slew Papyrius, and by that
example all the other Senators and persons of dignity were also slain.

Albeit the knowledge and study of Letters be both commendable and necesssary
in all well regulated States; yet if under so honest pretense, Idleness enter,
such Abuses most seasonably be foreseen and removed. Example, When Deognis and
Carneades, two excellent Philosophers, were sent Ambassadors from Athens to the
Romans, many of the Nobility that before disposed themselves to Arms, allured
with their Eloquence and marvelous Wisdom, began with great Admiration to
follow them: And in lieu of Arms, turned their endeavors to the study of
Letters, which the wise Cato discerning, procured the Senate to decree that (to
eschew all Inconveniences which so honest Idleness might breed) no Philosophers
should from thenceforth be received into Rome.

The Honor due to Magistrates was anciently much regarded, and contrariwise
all irreverent and undutiful Behavior with great Severity punished. Example,
The Censors of Rome degraded a Citizen only for having yawned loud in their
Presence: And another called Vectius was slain in the Field, for not doing due
reverence to a Tribune when he past by him. It is also observed, that the Son
of Fab. Maximus when he was Censor, meeting his Father on Horseback, and seeing
the Serjeans afraid to speak to him to dismount, did himself Command him so to
do, which Command the Father cheerfully and willingly obeyed, saying, Domestic
Power must give place to Public Authority.

Tyrannous Princes having incurred the universal Hate of People, found no means
so meet to preserve them from Popular Fury, as to execute or deliver into their
Hands their own chief Minions and intimate Counselors. Example, Tiberius
delivered to the People his Fa vourite Seianus: Nero, Tigellinus. Henry King of
Swede committed to their Fury his best beloved Servant George Preston;
Caracalla caused all his Flatterers to be slain that had persuaded him to kill
his Brother. The like was done by Caligula, whereby he escaped himself.

A Prince that rewards or pardons a Person that kills another Prince, albeit by
that means he is aspired to Sovereignty, shall thereby both incur great Danger
and Hate, and encourage Men therein to attempt the like against himself.
Therefore wise Princes have not only left such Services quite unrecompenced,
but also most severely punished them. Example, The Emperor Sever^^ put all
those to death that consented to the Murder of Pertinax; and Alexander the
Great executed him that slew Darius, as abhorring that Subject that would lay
violent Hands on his Prince, notwithstanding he were an Enemy. Likewise
Uitellius put to death all the Murderers and Conspirators against Galba; and
Domitian Executed his Secretary Epaphroditus for the Murder of Nero, although
he instantly desired his aid.

The virtuous and vicious Examples of Princes incite Subjects to imitate the
same Qualities; which Rule never or very rarely fails. Example, Francis the
First King of France, and other Princes in diverse Ages and Places, had great
esteem of Learned Men; and forth with all the Princes, Nobles, Nobility and
Clergy, disposed themselves so earnestly to study, as before that time had not
been seen so many and so great a number of Learned Men, as well in Tongues as
Sciences. Contrariwise, Alexander the Great, otherwise a Prince of great
Virtue, by his immoderate use of Drinking, did draw the greatest number of his
Court and People also to delight in Drunkenness- The like effect followed the
excessive Intemperance of Mithridates, King of Amasia.

The last and not the least considerable, is, to observe how great effects
Devotion and Contempt of Human Glory works in the Minds not only of private
Persons, but of Kings and Princes also, who have often abandoned worldly Profit,
Honor and Pleasure, to embrace the con templative retired Life. Example,
Ramirus King of Aragon, Verecundus King of Spain, Charlemain Son of Carolus
Martellus, Matilda Queen of France, Amurath King of Turbay, with many others.
Imperio Maximus, exemplo Major.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and sold by Joseph Watts at the Angel in St. Paul's
Churchyard, viz.
THE History of Ireland from the Conquest thereof by the English to this
present Time, in two Parts: By the Honorable Richard Cox, Esquire one of the
present Judges for that Kingdom. Folio.

The Right Honorable the Marquis of Carmarthen's State of his Case. Folio.

His Answer to the Examination of the State of his Case. Folio.

His Answer to Sir Robert Howard's Book. Folio.

His Reply to some Libels lately Printed. Folio.

Trial of the Lord Russel. Folio.

Character of a Popish Successor. Folio.

The World's Mistake in Oliver Cromwell: By Sl. Bethel, Esquire Quarto.

Satyr against Hypocrites. Quarto.

No Protestant Plot, 1st. 2d. and 3d. Parts. Quarto.

Diarry of His Majesty's Expedition into England. Quarto.

Hunton's Treatise of Monarchy, in two Parts. Quarto.

The Earl of Rochester's Funeral Sermon. Quarto.

The Present Settlement Vindicated, and the late Mis-government proved. Quarto.

Rushworth's Historical Collections from 1618. to 1629.

James's Corruption of Popish Father's Counsels, etc. Octavo.

The True Nature of the Divine Law, etc. Octavo.

Reformed Devotions, in Meditations, Hymns and Petitions, for every Day in the
Week. Twelves.

The Excellent Woman described by her true Characters, and their Opposites.
Octavo.

An Earnest Invitation to the Sacrament: By Dr. Glanvill. Twelves.

At which Place may be had Acts of Parliament, Proclamations, Declarations,
Orders of King and Council, Speeches in Parliament; Choice Pamphlets, both
Ancient and New; Trials, Narratives and Gazzetts.


