A Standard of Righteousness lifted up unto the Nations, and an Ensign of
Grace unto the People. But the Flagge of Defiance against Antichrist, and all
his Messengers and Ministers, who are under his power and pleading for it, for
term of life. All which are held forth in a plain answer unto Leonard
Letchfords Quaery Concerning Perfection and keeping of Gods Law and
Commandments, which may serve for the universal good, and satisfaction of all
people who are yet unsatisfied in these weighty matters in this Book inserted.
With a testimony concerning the natural man, who cannot keep the Law nor
Commands of God. Also an Invitation to all people to come unto the Fountain of
Living Waters, from whence they have been driven. Also a testimony concerning
the spiritual man, in whom the Law of God is fulfilled, and the Commands of
Christ kept. Also the way to the Kingdom of God in short held forth to all who
are willing to enter therein. Also the difference between the true Gospel and
the false truly stated. With 34 Quaeries for Leo. Letchford of Hurst-pier
point, in the County of Sussex, to be answered by him, by plain Scripture, as I
have answered his.

Given forth this 13th. day of the 8th. Month 1663, by a follower of the Lamb
through many tribulations, whose Name is AMBROSE RIGGE.

When the enemy shall come in like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord shall lift
up a Standard against him.

Is. 59. 19. Printed in the Year 1663.

Gentle and Courteous Reader:
IN this small Book is many weighty matters laid down to thy serious
consideration, even the things which belongs to thy eternal peace with God;
therefore be not rash nor hasty to judge of any thing herein, which may be
above thy capacity, but wait in that measure of the gift of grace which God
has bestowed upon thee, that it may lead thee in the path of righteousness;
so will these heavenly mysteries be unfolded unto thee: and if in any thing
thou be contrary minded, God shall reveal even this unto thee; for he reveals
secrets, and the light dwells with him. And as no man knows the things of
man, save the spirit of man, that is in him; so no man knows the things of God,
save the spirit of God. Therefore if thou would know whether these things in
this little Volume, be of God or no, return to the manifestation of Gods
Spirit, which he has given to thee to profit withal; this will be as the Key
of David unto thee, and will open unto thee these things, and no man shall shut
them from thee; but if this shut them from thee, no man shall open them to
thee: Therefore unto this I recommend thee, and remain

Thine to serve in love AMB. RIGGE.

A Standard of Righteousness lifted up to the Nations, and an Ensign of Peace
unto the People.
IN the beginning God made man upright, Eccl. 7. 29. perfect and complete in
his own Image, Genesis 1. 26, 27. which was righteousness and true holiness, and
gave him diverse Commandments, and alsopower to keep and observe them, while he
stood in that perfect image in which he was created; who in that state was a
Son of God, and Heir of Life, and had the Tree of Life freely given him to be
his food, that he might live for ever. But out of that state the Serpent led
him to sin and break Covenant with God, whereby he lost that perfection of
holiness in which he stood complete, while he kept Covenant with God. And also
was dispossessed of that power by which he kept the Commands of God; and so all
his posterity died in him from that power and perfection of holiness in which
man was created, and fell into Satan's Kingdom, which is sin and imperfection;
and so were (and always have been) led captive at his will into many noisome
lusts, which has drowned thousands in perdition. But as in Adam all died, so
in Christ shall all be made alive. 1 Cor. 15. 22.

This glad tidings of Life, Salvation and Redemption, was general to all
Mankind without respect of persons, who would hear and obey him, by whom God in
his eternal purpose would restore man into his first estate ( viz.) by Christ
the second Adam, according to his word by Isaiah the Propet, who said that Zion
should be redeemed through judgment, and her Converts with righteousness,
Isa. 1. 27. And also said he would restore her Judges as at the first, and her
Counselors as at the beginning, and afterward she should be called the City
of Righteousness, the faithful City, verse 26. This was the first promise of
man's restoration into that perfection of holiness in which he was created,

And he prophesied of the Coming and Kingdom of Christ, and said it shall come
to pass in the last days that the Mountain of the Lords House shall be
established in the top of the Mountains: And many people should say, Come and
let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, to the House of the God of Jacob, and
he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk therein. Isa. 2. 2, 3. And the
same Prophet cried unto the house of Jacob, and said, Come let us walk in the
light of the Lord, Isa. 2. 5. Here was the way of God, which was his Light,
prophesied of, to lead man again to God, from whence he was fallen, which
afterward came to lead the Israel of God in all his ways, as hereafter I
shall fully declare.

Yet never thelesse the same Prophet said, Christ's Kingdom should be a
Tabernacle, when the Lord had washed away the filth of the Daughter of Zion by
the Spirit of judgment and burning, Isa. 4, 4. 5, 6. yet the same Prophet saw
in a Vision the stubbornness of many, to their own destruction, and said they
would make their hearts fat, and their ears heavy, and would not hear; and shut
their eyes, least they should see, until their Cities was wasted without
inhabitants, and their houses without men. Isa. 6. 10, 11. But said in it there
should be a remnant, which should be as a Teyle Tree, or as an Oak, whose
substance was in them when they cast their leaves; so the holy seed should be
the substance thereof, Isa. 6. 13. which afterward was fulfilled; for Christ
the holy seed was after, in the remnant that was saved; as the substance
remained in the Teyle Tree or Oak, when their leaves was cast. This was also a
certain testimony of the Son of God, who was set for the fall and the raising
again of many in Israel, Luke 2. 34. who was to be manifested in man, to
restore him to his first estate, as the Apostles at large afterward witnessed.

The same Prophet also prophesied of the birth of this Second Adam, and of his
Kingdom and Government, Isa. 9. 6. 7. And said the remnant of the house of
Jacob should no more stay upon him who smote them, but should stay upon the
Lord the Holy One of Israel; and should return unto the mighty God, Isa. 10.
20, 21. as afterward it came to pass. And again he testified of the peaceable
Kingdom of Christ, wherein the earth should be filled with the knowledge of
God, as the waters cover the Sea, Isa. 11. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. which
ksowledge came afterward to be received by the Light which God had commanded
to shine in their hearts, who was witnesses of the same, 2 Cor. 4. 6. by which
the light of the knowledge of the glory of God was received in the face of
Jesus Christ.

Again, the Lord by the Prophet called every one that thirsted to drink freely
of the waters of Life, without money and without price, and called many to
pentance, verse 6. and said, Let the wicked forsake his ways, and the
unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will
have mercy upon him, verse 7. Here was the promise of mercy unto man, if he
forsaked his unrighteous ways and thoughts; and to no other, as afterward was
testified, Prove. 28. 13. and furthermore the Prophet declares the glory of the
true Church, and says, the Gentiles shall come to her light, and Kings to the
brightness of her rising, Isa. 60. 3. which was afterward fulfilled.

All which prophesies was the universal love of God in Christ Jesus to Mankind,
for his restoration into that Image and perfection of holiness in which he
was created; so that all who received him when he came to be manifested to
them, he gave power to become the sons of God, and heirs of life, John 1. 12.

And Jeremiah also prophesied of the scattered flock of the Lord, whom the
wicked Pastors of Israel had destroyed. And the Lord said I will gather the
remnant of my Flock out of all Countries where they have been driven, and will
bring them again into their fold, and will set one Shepherd over them which
shall feed them, Ier. 23. And in his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel
shall dwell safely, and this is his name whereby he shall be called; the Lord
our Righteousness, ver. 6. And they shall no more say the Lord lives which
brought the children of Israel out of Egypt, but the Lord lives which brought
the seed of the house of Jacob out of the North Country, and out of all
Countries whither he has driven them, verse. 7, 8. All which the Lord spoke by
way of Prophecy, that he would restore Israel his people into unity with him,
which could not possible be until he had finished transgression in them, which
was the first cause of separation from God and the glory of his power.

And again the Lord by the mouth of Jeremiah Prophesied of the restoration of
Israel, and said he would bring them from the North Country, and gather them
from the coasts of the earth; he that scattered Israel will gather them as a
Shepherd does his flock, Ier. 31. 10. And also said he would make a Covenant
with the house of Israel and the house of Judah, not according to the Covenant
which he made with their Fathers when he took them by the hand to bring them
out of the land of Egypt (Mark!) but this shall be the Covenant that I will
make with the house of Israel; I will put my Law in their inward parts, and
write it in their hearts; And they shall teach no more every man his neighbor,
and every man his brother, saying, know the Lord, etc. Ier. 31. 31, 32. 33.
This is the Covenant in which Christ was promised, where in God would write his
Law in his peoples hearts, which afterward the Apostles witnessed, with whom
this Covenant was made and confirmed; in which they witnessed the blood of
Christ to cleanse them from all sin, 1 John 1. 7. This Covenant was a Covenant
of Light, and of Life, wherein the Law of the Spirit of Life, not writ in
Tables of Stone, but in the fleshly Tables of the Heart, 2 Cor. 3. 3. was their
Schoolmaster to bring them to Christ, that they might be justified by faith,
Gal. 3. 24. and so were presented blameless unto God, which the blood of Bulls
and Goats could not do, nor any outward thing, Heb. 10. 4.

And by the mouth of Ezekiel the Lord promised to gather his people again unto
himself, and seek them as a Shepherd seeks his Sheep, and feed them in a good
pasture, Ezekiel. 34, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Here was Gods universal love again
manifested by way of prophecy, for the recovery of lost man again; all which
promises was made conditionally unto mankind, if they believed in him whom God
has chosen to be the author of eternal salvation, to all who received and
believed in him.

Then afterward Daniel prophesied of the suffering of the Son of God, of whom
the Prophets had written, whom the Angel showed that seventy weeks were
determined to finish transgression, and to make an end of sin, and to make
reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, Dan. 9.
24.

And in verse the 26. says, that after sixty two weeks shall the Messiah be
slain, but not for himself, and in verse the 27. he shall confirm the Covenant
with many for one week, and in the midst of the week he shall cause the
offerings and the oblations to cease.

This showed the death of the Son of God, before he came into the world, by
which sin and transgression was to be finished, which was the cause of
offerings and sacrifices, still demonstrating Gods eternal purpose through him,
to put an end to transgression in man, without which man could never come to
him again, nor be restored into that image and glory which he lost by
transgression, which is the perfection of holiness in the sight of the Lord,
which the Apostles testified unto, 2 Cor. 7. 1. that man might live with God in
the spirit, for which end he was created, which was brought to pass through the
death and suffering of his Son, whom he sent into the world, that they through
him might be saved, John 3. 17.

And the Lord spoke again by the mouth of Amos, and said, The plowman should
overtake the reaper, and the treader of grapes him that sowed seed, and the
mountains shall drop down with sweet wine, and he would bring again the
captivity of his people Israel, Amos 9. 13, 14.

And Micah foretold of the birth of this Savior, even in Bethlehem Ephratah
though it was little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of it shall he come
forth that was to be ruler in Israel, whose goings forth has been from old
from everlasting, and he shall stand and rule in the strength of the Lord, and
in the majesty of the name of the Lord, and shall be great unto the end of the
earth, Micah 5. 2, 3, 4.

And also said, that the remnant of Israel should be among many Nations as a
dew from the Lord that tarrieth not for man, and as the showers upon the tender
grass, etc. And the remnant of Jacob shall be among the Gentiles as a Lion
among the beasts of the forest, and as a young Lion among the flocks of the
sheep which should rouse them, and go through and none can deliver, ver. 7, 8.

All which Prophesies being so clear and full both of the Birth and coming of
the Son of God, and of his perfecting the work of the Lord, which is to destroy
the works of the Devil, and restore man into that Image and Glory of God which
he lost by transgression, that he that runs may read it, Hab. 2. 2. this was
the very end for which he was manifested, and for which he dyed and rose again
according to the Scriptures.

So, when he was come, of whom the Prophets gave testimony, and born in
Bethlehem of Judea, Mat. 2. 1. Luke 2. 4. he began to do many mighty works and
wonders, in restoring the blind to his sight, and the lame to walk, and the
deaf to hear, as it is written of him, Mark 7. 37. whose work was always a
work of perfection both in his restoration of body and soul, who saved to the
uttermost all who came to God by him, Heb. 7. 25. and made man every whit
whole, John 7. 23. and did not leave his work imperfect nor uneffected in nor
upon them who did believe in him; for then he had done no more then did the Old
Covenant which was disannulled because of the weakness andunpr ofitableness
thereof, because it made not the comers thereunto perfect, for then it should
have ceased, Heb. 10. 1, 2, but he has obtained a more excellent ministry, how
much also he is become a Mediator of a better Covenant which was established
upon better promises, Heb. 8. 6. For if perfection had been by the Levitical
Priesthood, under which the Law was received, what further need was there that
another Priesthood should arise after the Order of Melchisedec and not be
called after the Order of Aaron? Heb. 7. 11.

All which is granted the first Priesthood, with all its Offerings and
Sacrifices evening and morning, and with all its Rites and Ceremonies, could
not make the comers thereunto perfect; and the Law, with all its works, could
never justify any, nor make any thing perfect, Heb. 7. 19. And therefore Moses
did but obtain a Servants place, yet being faithful therein according to what
God had manifested, Heb. 3. 2. 5. he was called the Friend of God, in doing
whatsoever he commanded him, and laid down his head in peace in the Land of
Moab, according to the word of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 34. 5. though that Priesthood
was not then appeared, through which the perfection of holiness was afterward
witnessed, nor power to become the Sons of God, but only servants, who in doing
what the Lord commanded them, it was well-pleasing to God, and he blessed them
in their generation.

And Abraham also God blessed in his generation, because he obeyed the Word and
Commandment of God, and withheld not his only Son at the Commandment of the
Lord, Genesis 22. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. who believed in God and obeyed his Word,
therefore he died in a good old age, an old man and full of years, and was
gathered unto his people, Genesis 25. 8. And God said unto him, because thou have
done this, and have not withheld thy Son, thine only Son, that in blessing, I
will bless thee, and in multiplying, I will multiply thy seed; and make it as
the Stars of Heaven, and as the sand upon the Sea shore, etc. Genesis 22. 16, 17.

And David did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord, and and turned not
aside from any thing that he commanded him, all the days of his life, save
only in the matter of Vriah the Hittite, I Kings 15. 5. for which he suffered
the severe judgment of the Lord, so that he laid roaring all the day long, and
watered his Couch with his tears, Psalm. 22. 1. Psalm. 32. 3. by which judgment
he was redeemed again unto God, and became a vessel of honor to sound forth
the praises of God, Psalm. 98. Psalm. 101. and 103. and 104. after which he
departed not from the Law of God, but continued in the same unto the end of his
days.

And many other of the faithful servants of the Lord, who obeyed his Word and
Commandments, which I might mention both in the time of the Law and the
Prophets, who kept the Commandments, Laws, Statutes and Ordinances of God; in
the keeping of which he promised life unto man, Levit. 8. 5. Ezekiel. 20. 11.
which Laws, Statutes, and Judgments was given to Israel, but they despised
them, and polluted his Sabboths; therefore he powered forth his fury upon them
in the Wilderness to consume them, Ezekiel. 20. 13. And all that went on in
breaking his Laws and Commandments, he overthrew in the Wilderness, and they
never came into the promised Land, I Cor. 10. 5.

Now these things were examples to them that came after, that they should not
lust after evil things, as they also lusted; verse 6.

Neither to be Idolater, as were some of them, as it is written; The people
sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play, Exodus 32. 6. I Cor. 10. 7.
This was counted Idolatry, then which many are found in at this day, who cannot
endure so to be called; though we know that no Whoremonger, nor unclean person,
nor covetous man, who is an Idolater, has any Inheritance in the Kingdom of
Christ* nor of God; Ephesians. 5. 3, 4, 5.

And the Apostle said, Let no man deceive you with vain words, for because of
these things comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience, verse 6.

Here follows some of Leonard Letchford's. doctrine, by way of Quaery, lately
published in two or three papers sent to me, which I shall compare with the
writings of the holy men of God which I have before asserted; who lived but in
the days of the first Covenant and the Prophets; in which the Law and
Commandments of God was given forth; yet they were blessed in the keeping of
them, as I have before showed; but Leo Letchford has lately sought to persuade
it would be praise to God, sor me to say the Commandments of God could not be
done without sinning, as he and his brethren has long believed, and has
caused many to believe, to their own destruction: And so has kept people in
sin and transgression, and imperfection; for which they have long pleaded,
and does yet plead for their disobedience to Gods Law and Commandments, from
some failings of the servants of God before mentioned; which were only written
to warn all not to tempt the Lord; as some of them tempted him, many of which
was destroyed in their rebellion and disobedience; but they who were willing
and obedient, came to eat the good of the Land of promise. And none of them did
answer the Lord when he gave them his Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances,
Commandments and Preceps, and say it cannot be done, as Leonard Letchsord of
Aurst-Pierpoint, a metamorphosed Minister in the County of Sussex, has lately
given under his hand, by way of Quaery.

The Paper is as follows, September 6. 1663.
WHether to do good, and not to commit sin, be a perfection that any man dares
challenge whilst he lives on Earth, or whether it be possible for any man so
keep Gods Commandments, and to observe his righteous Law, as to say any day I
have not offended, I have no need to say forgive me in any thing wherein I have
done amiss? This was the Question.

By which I have struck the Devil dumb in the Quakers Oracle at Hersham, known
to the World by the Name of Ambrose Rigge; Lord open his lips, that his mouth
may show forth thy praise, in saying plainly it cannot be done.

L. L.

Now Moses and Abraham which I have before asserted, to whom the Law and
Commandments was given forth, did so keep them and observe them, that the
breach of them was never charged to them, but was blessed in the keeping and
doing of them, as I have before spoken: And David turned not aside from any of
the Commandments of God all his days, save in the matter of Vriah; and many
more who kept Gods Law and Commandments all the days of their lives, and was
blessed, and their posterity after them, and praised God with an upright heart,
in their obedience to the Law and Commandments of God: and none of them did
ever say, Lord open my mouth, that my lips may show forth thy praise, in saying
plainly thy Commandments cannot be done, as L. L. does: If they did show when
or where ever such a doctrine was preached by any either in the first Covenant
or the second, or else let those faithful servants of God aforementioned, who
kept Gods Law and Commandments, and did live with God in them, be as a thousand
witnesses against Leo. Letchford, who would have people believe it cannot be
done.

Here follows diverse instances of Christ and his Apostles under the second
Covenant, concerning his Commandments, which I shall here lay down from plain
Scripture proof, in order to the further discovery of this damnable doctrine.

1. Christ says after he had given forth many Commandments unto the people, He
that breaks one of these least Commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall
be called the least in the kingdom of heaven; but whosoever shall do and teach
them, shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 5. 19.

2. Christ said to his Disciples, If ye love me, keep my commandments, John 14.
15.

3. He that has my commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me;
and he that loves me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and
manifest my self to him, John 14. 21.

4. A new commandment I give unto you, that you love one another, John 13. 34.

5. If you keep my commandments, you shall abide in my love, even as I kept my
Fathers commandments, and abide in his love, John 15. 10.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, If a man keep my sayings, he shall never see
death, John 8. 51.

7. All which promises was made unto his Disciples upon this condition, That
they kept his commandments, and not otherwise.

8. To which the Disciples answered, not as Leonard Letchford does, in saying
it cannot be done, and count this praise to God: but they said, Hereby we know
that we know him, if we keep his commandments, 1 John 2. 3.

9. Again they spoke in reproof of those, who should say they knew God, and
kept not his commandments, and said, such were liars, and the truth was not in
them, 1 John 2. 4.

10. Furthermore they testified, that whatsoever they asked, they received of
him, because they kept his commandments, 1 Ioh. 3, 22.

11. He that keepth his Commandments dwells in him, and he in him, and hereby
they knew that he did abide in them, by the Spirit which he gave them* this was
their proof of him in the days of old, which is now so much condemned and
cried against by Leonard Lechford, and men of his coat, who says none can
exactly keep the commands of God, 1 John 3. 24.

12. And by this they knew they loved the children of God, when they loved God,
and kept his commandments, 1 John 5. 2.

13. Again they said, This is the love of God, that they kept his Commandments,
and his Commandments were not grievous, 1 John 5. 3.

Harken Leon. Letchford, Art not thou of another mind, who would have people
say it cannot be done? May not all these rise up in judgment against thee?

14. And this is love, that we walk after his Commandments: 2 John 6.

All these gave testimony, how they kept his Commandments, through which their
love was manifested to him, and for so doing, had no cause to repent any day,
nor to ask forgiveness of the Lord; but yet Christ in their infancy taught them
to say, Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us,
Matthew. 6. 12. but this was before Christ was offered up, who purged their
Consciences from dead works by the blood of his Cross, through the eternal
Spirit, by which he cleansed them from all sin, and sanctified them in body,
soul, and spirit, which as they grew up unto God in stature, they bare witness
unto; as hereafter I shall make appear in answer to Leonard Letchfords great
Query concerning perfection, which may serve for the universal good and
satisfaction of all reasonable people, for which end I was moved to make it and
my answer to it public.

Priest Letchfords Query.

Whether to do good, and not to commit sin, be a perfection that any man dares
challenge while he is upon the earth?

Which plainly demonstrates, that he is against doing of good, and for
committing of sin, and denies perfectien while people are upon the earth; which
is absolutely contrary both to the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, and
makes the coming, suffering, and blood of Christ of none effect.

1. It is contrary to the doctrine of Christ, Matthew. 5. 48. who said to his
disciples, Be ye perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect; which was a
perfection of holiness and freedom from sin; for otherwise they could not be
perfect as their heavenly father was perfect:

2. Christ said unto the young man who had kept the Commandments from his
youth, If thou will be perfect, sell that thou have, and give to the poor, and
thou shall have treasure in heaven, and come and follow me, Matthew. 19. 21.

3. It is contrary to Christ's prayer, John 17. 23. who desired that they whom
God had given him might be one, as he and his father was one: He in them, and
they in him, that they might be made perfect in one, etc. which could never be
till sin and transgression was finished, which was the first cause of
separation.

4. To say that none can be perfect while he is upon the earth, is contrary to
Christ's words, who said, Every one that is perfect shall be as his Master, Luke
6. 40. which agrees with his words Matthew. 5. 48.

5. It is contrary to the doctrine of Paul, who said, We speak wisdom among
them that are perfect, 1 Cor. 2. 6.

6. It is contrary to the Apostles exhortation, 2 Cor. 13. 18.

7. It is contrary to all the gifts that was given to the Apostles, which was
for the perfecting of the Saints for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying
of the body of Christ.

Till they all came into the unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son
of God unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ, Ephesians. 4. 11. 12, 13. this was a large measure of perfection indeed,
which they testified of, which afterward was fulfilled in them.

8. To say that none can be perfect while he is upon earth, makes Paul's words
to the Philippians false; who though he had not then attained to perfection,
either were already perfect; he did not say as Leo. Letchford does, that none
could be perfect on earth, but said, he followed after it. Phil. 3. 12.

And pressed toward the mark for the price of the high calling of God in
Christ Jesus, v. 14.

Let us therefore as many as be perfect be thus minded; and if in any thing ye
be otherwise minded, God shall reveal this unto you, Phil. 3. 1st. It seems
iome was ready to be of another mind then, as many are now, unto whom this was
not fully revealed, to whom Paul said, Whereunto we have attained: Let us walk
by the same rule; Let us mind the same thing. v. 16. So that it is clearly
manifest that there was degrees of growth in the gift of God, before they came
to perfection, for Paul was not perfect while he had a body of sin in him; and
the rest were not perfect as soon as they came to be convinced and believe: but
first witnessed a warfare against sin, and the power of it, and afterward came
to be freed from sin, and have victory over it, Romans 6. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. 1
John 5. 4. and then grew up to perfect men in Christ, to the same measure of
the stature of the fullness of Christ, and said, by this was their love made
perfect, that they might have boldness in the day of judgment, because as he is
so were they in this world, 1 John 4. 17. (Mark) they were as he was in this
world. If Leonard Letchford had been amongst them then, surely he would have
cried out against them for so saying, and his unbelieving heart would not have
received this doctrine, no more then he can now: for if Christ's work had
effected no more, but to leave his people still in their sins, he had done no
more then the old Covenant did, nor his blood had been no more available then
the blood of Bulls and Goats, which could not take away sin, nor his offering
of more force then the offerings of the old Covenant, which did not make the
Comers thereunto perfect, Heb. 10. 1. and so was disannulled, because of the
weakness and unprofitableness thereof, Heb. 7. 18. For the Law made nothing
perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope did, verse. 19. (Mark) the
bringing in of a better hope did; this better hope was Christ in them the hope
of glory, Col. 1. 27. who when he was brought to within the Saints, made them
perfect even as he was in this world.

9. This Christ in the Saints the Apostles preached, warning every man, and
teaching every man in all wisdom, that they might present every man perfect in
Christ Jesus, Col. 1. 28. This was the end of their preaching, to present every
man perfect in Christ: and (...) any man be in Christ, he is a new creature,
old things are past away (Mark that) old things past away, which is sin and
transgression, and all things are become new, 2 Cor. 5. 17. Here is the new man
who is created in Christ Jesus to good works, that he should walk in them, Ephesians.
2. 10. Here is good works, in which they were to walk who was new creatures,
without which their faith was dead, even as a body without a spirit, James 2.
26. I suppose this may stop Leonard Letchfords mouth for asking, Whether to do
good, and not to commit sin be a perfection that any man dares challenge while
he is on earth, etc. It seems he dares challenge committing of sin, but not
doing good while he is upon the earth; and so when all that are in the graves
shall hear the voice of the Son of God.

And shall come forth they that have done good unto the resurrection of life,
he that has done evil and committed sin, shall rise unto the resurrection of
condemnation, John 5. 28, 29.

10. To say that nothing can be perfect upon the eatth, is against the Apostles
fervent labor in prayers for the Saints, which was, that thut they might stand
perfect and complete in all the will of God, Col. 4. 12.

11. It is against the end for which the Scriptures was given foth, which was,
That the man of God might be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every good work,
2 Timothy 3. 17.

12. It is contrary to the Apostles exhortation, to say that none can be
perfect on earth, who said, Let us go on to perfection, not laying again the
foundation of repentance, etc. Heb. 6. 1.

And these things we will do if God permit, verse. 3.

13. It is contrary to the exhortation of James, who said, Let patience have
its perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing, James 1.
4. and said, If any man offend not in word, the same is a perfect man, and able
also to bridle the whole body, James 3. 2.

14. It is contrary to Peter's prayer, who prayed, That the God of all grace,
who has called us unto his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after ye have
suffered a while, make you perfect; etc. 1 Pet. 5. 10.

15. To say that men must commit sin while they are upon the earth, is contrary
to the whole body of the Scripture, and was never affirmend by any of the holy
men of God, but by such deceivers as Leonard Letchford has proved himself so
to be, by pleading the devils cause so frequently, which is to keep people in
sin for term of life, which if h^ can by any means do, he knows they must come
to him at the last, because the Son of God has spoken it, Luke 13. 27.

16. It is contrary to all these plain Scripture proofs, John 8. 34. 1 John 3.
4. 1 John 3. 8. He that commits sin is of the devil, etc.

17. To say that none can be perfect, does make void the Apostles prayers for
the Hebrews, when he parted from them; who prayed, That the God of peace that
brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ, that great shepherd of the
sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant.

Make you perject in every good work to do his will, Heb. 13. 20, 21.

18. To say that none can be perfect on earth, makes Paul a liar, who satd to
the Hebrews, But ye are come to Mount Sion, unto the City of the living God,
the heavenly Jerusalem, to the innumerable company of Angels, Heb. 12. 22.

To the general assembly and Church of the firstborn which are written in
heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made
perfect, verse. 23.

But it may be objected, That there is not a just man upon earth that does good
and sins not.

Answer. This was spoken before the coming of Christ, who came to destroy sin,
and finish transgression, as it is written, 1 John 3. 8.

And to save his people from their sins, Mat. 1. 21. not to be favor in sin,
nor to save his people in their sins, but to save them from their sins, and so
from the punishment due thereunto.

Objection. But some in their blind ignorance will say, What benefit has man
by Christ, if he come to live without sin,

Answ. He has the benefit of the coming of Christ, of his Death, and of his
Resurrection, and of his blood which was shed for the remission of sins, as it
is written, Matthew. 26. 28. And he only can call Christ his Redeemer, who is
redeemed from all iniquity, Tit. 2. 14.

Object. Again it is said in many things, We offend all, etc.

Answ. This was spoken to the brethren as a warning, not to go into the many
things, nor to be many masters; for then they should receive greater
condemnation: for in many things they offended all and so did Martha while she
was cumbered about many things, as Christ told her, Luke 10. 41. So when they
went into the many things and many Masters (as the world does now) they
offended all; but as they dwelt in the one thing which Christ spoke of, Luke
10. 42. they were kept out of the offenses, and kept a conscience void of
offense toward God and all men, Acts 24. 16. 1 Cor. 6. 3. And Christ said, Woe
to the world because of offenses: For it must needs be that offenses must come;
but woe unto that man by whom they come, Mat. 18. 7. Luke 17. 1.

Object. It is said also, If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves,
and the truth is not in us.

Answ. This was spoken by John before he came to the fullness of Christ, though
he was come to a measure of the Stature of Christ, which kept him from
committing of sin; for he said, He that commits sin is of the devil, and
has not seen God, neither known him, 1 John 3. 8.

And whosoever is born of God does not commit sin, for his seed remains in
him; and he cannot sin, because he is born of God, 1 John 3. 9.

Who afterward grew up to a perfect state, and said, herein is our love made
perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of Judgment; because as he is, so
are we in this world, 1 John 4. 17.

After which he said, Whosoever transgresses and abides not in the doctrine
of Christ, has not God; but he that abides in the doctrine of Christ, has
both the Father and the Son, 2 John 1. 9.

And if any come unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into
your house, neither bid him good speed: For he that bids him good speed, is
partaker of his evil deeds, ver. 10, 11.

Hear this Leo. Letchford, and all other of thy belief! John did witness a
further state then committing of sin, or having it; but said, Whosoever
transgresses, and abides not in the doctrine of Christ, is not to be received
into the house, least they were partakers of their evil deeds. Will not this
Doctrine shut thee and all thy brethren out of doors, who is not in the
doctrine of Christ in any thing, but pleading with all your might against it,
which is perfection and keeping his Commandments, as I have before showed:
This was her doctrine while he was on earth, which you are now so much opposers
of, and pleading for committing of sin for term of life.

I shall not trouble the Reader to reckon up the Commandments and Laws of
Christ, they are so generally known to all who does but read the Seriptures.

But I shall further lift up a Standard of Righteousness against this viperous
generation, who daily breaks the Commands of God, and would persuade others so
to do, as Leo. Letchford has done; I shall here demonstrate how this strikes
at the Crown and Dignity of Christ, and renders him inferior to the devil; and
then I shall leave it to the serious consideration of the honest hearted,
whether this man be a friend to Christ or an enemy to him.

1. To say the things commanded by Christ cannot be done; this renders him
unjust to command his servants to do that which he knows they cannot do.

2. This frustrates the end for which God manifested him, which was to give
power to as many as received him to become the Sons of God.

3. This makes his Commands of none effect; for if the things be commands
cannot be done, to what end were they given forth?

4. This Doctrine renders him more unjust then the devil; for he gives power
to his servants to do all manner of Iniquity which he commands them, and they
obey his commands daily.

5. This is the highest dishonor that the enemies of Christ can bring to his
Sovereignty.

6. This makes the second Covenant inferior to the first, which is damnable
Doctrine and Heresy.

7. This makes him an insufficient Savior who was called Jesus, because he
saved his people from their sins, which is the breach of Gods Law and
Commandments.

8. This makes the blood of the Covenant of none effect, which was shed to
cleanse his people from all sin.

9. This renders him an hard Master: (To say his Commands cannot he done) which
none ever said of him but the slothful servant who did his talent in the earth.

10. To say his Commands cannot be done, does make him a liar, who commanded
his servants to take his yoke; upon them, for his yoke was easy and his
burden light.

11. This is an Inlet for all the workers of Iniquity, to encourage them to
break the Commands of Christ, and to keep them in unbelief all their days.

12. This makes the Apostles testimony false; who faith, Greater is he that is
in us, then he that is in the world: But this renders him inferior to the
Prince of the world, if his Commands cannot exactly be done without sinning;
for what is it that hinders any from keeping his Commands, but the Prince of
this world, by whose power all who breaks his Law and Commandments are led?

13. This makes John a liar, who said his Commandments were not grievous but
joyous.

14. To say the things commanded by Christ cannot be done without committing
sin, as Leo. Letchford would have others say, does overthrow the foundation
Principles of the Book of Common Prayer, which enjoyneth every child to keep
Gods holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the same all the days of his
life.

15. This makes the Godfathers and Godmothers (as they are called)
Covenant-breakers; which Leo. Letchford and others of his profession has
caused to promise and vow that the Child should keep Gods holy Will and
Commandments, and walk in the same to his life's end.

Many more damnable Consequences incurres from this Doctrine, which are to many
to mention, which is charged upon Leonard Letchford and all the rest of his
brethren of the same mind throughout this Nation, till they clear themselves;
which they can never do but by speedy repentance and public revocation of
these their wicked Errors.

Oh! return unto his mercy gate,
Whose patience long for you does wait;
And learn your ways for to amend,
Least God destroy you in the end.
A few words concerning man in his fallen degenerated estate from God, in which
he has not power to keep the Commands of God nor his Law, nor to do any work
accoptable to him; but all his righteousness is as filthy rags, or as a
menstruous garment.
ALL men by nature are the children of wrath, as it is written Ephesians. 2, 3.
fallen from God and his power, degenerate plants of a strange Vine, Ier. 2. 21.
daily bringing forth evil fruit. in which God has no delight; his heart is
corrupted, his mind is corrupted, and every part and member of his body, from
the crown of the head to the sole of his foot, full of wounds and bruises, and
putrefying fores, Isa. 1. 6. every imagination of his heart is only evil
continually, cen. 8. 21. So that he is a Vessel altogether unfit for the Lords
use or service, neither has the Lord any delight in him in that state, because
he is a slave to Satan, led captive at his will to dishonor his Maker in all
his words and works: So that all his undertakings and outgoings is to promote
Satan's kingdom. He calls evil good, and good evil, and puts light for
darkness, and darkness for light. And is void of understanding, as the beast
that perishes. He is altogether unsenseable of his Creator, and of his Way,
Truth, and Life, because they are spiritually discerned; being wholely a
stranger to the Life of God, and to the Covenant of Promise, and without God in
the World, in its ways and works of darkness; drawing iniquity with Cords of
vanity, and drinking it in, as the Ox drinks water, till he fill himself, and
vomit it up again.

In this estate he was compared to a dog, whose nature is to vomit up that
which he greedily eats; and to a swine, whose nature is to wallow in the mire,
as most pleasing to his nature, till he has fouled himself all over, that he
is loathsome to behold: Even such is man by nature, who wallows, in sin and
corruption, till he be loathsome in the sight of the Lord, and fit for no
service for him, till he be washed again: and therefore the Lord cried unto the
house of Israet, Wash ye and make ye clean, put away the evil of your doing,
Isa. 1. 16. and then come unto me, ver. 18.

In this condition man's Wisdom is earthly, carnal, sensual, and devilish, yet
by this he would compass the heavenly mystery of eternity, and dive into the
secrets of the Almighty, and set up a way of Worship of God in his will, and
establish a righteousness of his own, and will pray, read, sing, and perform
many duties in an hot zeal, though without undetstanding of the least grain of
the knowledge of God his Creator. And in this state was the Jews, who killed
and persecuted the Lord of life in their darkness and unbelief, in a
righteousness of their own, which was as filthy rags, and as a menstrous
garment, and would not cover them from the wrath of the Almighty, a just reward
of all their ungodly deeds, unto whom Christ put forth many parables, and said,
Except a man be born again he cannot see the Kingdom of God, John 3. 3. And
except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall in no wise
enter the Kingdom of God, Luke 18. 17. though they was whited over as whited
walls, yet they were foul and corrupted, blind and naked; therefore the woe was
often pronounced against them, for all their zeal and profession of Christ and
the Apostles words.

Therefore, oh natural man! who ever thou be, whether Professor profane, thy
profession and profaneness are alike justified in the Lord, while thou art
uncoverted, unregenerated, and uncreated again into that Image and nature which
is from above, which can do the will and work of God well-pleasing to him: I
preach not perfection to thee, but repentance, I do not say that thou can keep
the Law of God, for then I should belly thee and the truth also: I do not press
thee to keep the Commandments of God, for thou will say with Leo. Letchford, it
cannot be done: but this I say to thee, if thou will be wise, thou must first
become a fool that thou may be wise, 1 Cor. 3. 18. but this thou can hardly
bear, thou art so puffed up in the pride of thy heart in what thou performest
unto God, though when thou have done all thou can, thou art an unprofitable
servant, as it is written Luke 17. 10. which is to have his portion with
hypocrites, where is weeping and gnashing of teeth for ever, Matthew. 25. 30.

At thy hand God cannot have a sacrifice well-pleasing to him? if thou give thy
firstborn for thy transgression, or the fruit for the sin of thy soul, it is
but as the cutting off a dogs neck, or offering Swines blood, while thy heart
is corrupted through the deceitfulness of sin; this is that with which God has
a controversy in thee, and with thee, he will not make peace till this wall of
partition be broken down, for it was that which first made a separation between
thy father Adam and him, which stands against all his seed and race after him;
nay, it was not all the offerings and oblations throughout the first Covenant,
which stood in outward things, which could ever make an atonement, so as to
bring Adams stock into unity with his Creator.

Therefore this is my counsel and advice unto thee, who art in the unconverted
state, alienated from God, and estranged in thy mind from his Covenant of
life, who has any desires in thee to return unto the Lord who made thee, that
he may save thee from the heat of his wrath for ever: cease from thy own words,
works and ways, and be not hasty to run before thy Maker lead thee by the hand
in the light of his truth, wherewith Christ has lighted thee, John 1. 9. which
shines in thy dark heart, 2 Cor. 4. 6. so shall not thou abide in darkness,
but shall receive the light of life, John 8. 12. Harken unto his voice; who
stands at thy door and knocks, and would have thee receive him into thy heart,
which is his Throne, upon which he must sit as King, if ever he receive thee
into protection with him, there he must work the Fathers will in thee, which is
to purify thee throughout in body, soul, and spirit, without which thou can
never be a vessel of honor to God to set forth his praise and glory in the
earth; his righteousness he must work in thee by his right hand, which must
cover thee for ever, and thou must be crucified upon his Cross from all thy own
righteousness and unrighteousness, which did all spring from the seed of
enmity, in which God had no delight, before thou know the peace of God, which
passes all understanding, to keep thy heart and mind. All this thou will find
true in the day of thy visitation, however the false Prophets may persuade thee
to the contrary, that will all deceive thee in the day of the Lords fierce
indignation, when every one shall receive a reward according to their deeds:
This is a hard saying to thee who is yet alive in the fullness of delight and
pleasure in the flesh, to tell thee of dying to thy own righteousness and
unrighteousness, before thou come to live to God: This is a bitter cup to thee,
of which thou must be willing to drink, before thou test of the Cup of
blessing, which is the Communion of the blood of Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 16. thou
must suffer with him who dyed upon the Cross, before thou know the virtue ol
his resurrection; thou must put off the old man, with his deeds, before thou
put on the new man, Ephesians. 4, 22, 23, 24. Thou must purge out the old leven of
uncleanness, and the old bottle must be broken, before thou keep a seast of
unleavened bread, 1 Cor. 5. 7, 8, as a Passover unto the Lord.

This is the footsteps of the flock, in which thou must walk before Christ's
righteousness; he thine, thou must buy the truth with the loss of all that is
contrary to it, if ever thou truly purchase it, so as to be thine for ever.
This is the word of the Lord God unto thee, which must be fulfilled in or upon
thee. Let no man deceive thee through vain word;, of such as tells thee God
looks upon thee not as thou art in sin, but as thou art in Christ. Oh poor
deluded wretch, this is the deceiveableness of righteousness indeed, which
would make God as unrighteous as themselves, to look upon a man in Christ when
he is not; but in sin and transgression. Oh give not heed to such lying
vanities, lest thou forsake thy own mercies for ever. For because of those
things has come the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 5.
6. Coll. 3. 6. He that says to the wicked, thou art righteous, him shall the
Nations curfe, and people shall abhor him, Prove. 24. 24. I say God looks upon
thee as thou art, art, who will not justify thee in sin, nor hold thee
guiltless in transgression, but will wound the head of his enemies, and the
hairy scalp of such a one as goes on still in his trespasses, Psalm. 68. 21.
therefore return, return unto the Lord by speedy repentance, and kiss the Son
lest he be angry, and thou perish from the way of life; for if his wrath be
kindled, blessed are they that trust in him, Psalm. 2. 12.

I tell thee again, I am not sent to preach perfection unto thee, but the day
of the Lords vengeance ane recompense. I am not to daub thee with untempered
mortar, as the false Prophets has done many years, to cry peace to thee in
iniquity, to whom the Lord says, No peace, Ifa. 48. 22. chap. 57. 21.
Therefore cease from man, and from spending thy money for that which is not
bread, and thy labor for that which satisfies not, Isa. 55. 2. if thou art,
or has been feeding among the Swine upon the husk, and wallowing in the mire
among them, and satisfying thy self with a profession of the Saints words
outwardly. as they are written in the Letter of the Scripture, while thou art a
stranger to that life in which they lived who writ them forth.

Oh this is as chafe to the wheat, which is the inward profession of the life
and righteousness of the Son of God, therefore return unto the Fathers house
(which is the light in which God dwells, 1 Timothy 6. 16.) so will he meet thee,
and embrace thee, and rejoice over thee, and satisfy thee with bread enough,
Lnke 15. 17, 18, 19, 20. yea with the fatted calf (his own crucified one) of
which thou shall feed and never hunger more.

This I was warned by the Lord to lay before all who are yet in Babylon and
Egypt, that they may fly out and escape from her sins, lest they pattake of
her plagues, as it is writeen, Kev. 18. 4. for the hour of her judgment is
comes and the execution will speedily follow, which will leave the wicked
neither root nor branch.

Therefore let your laughter be turned into mourning, and your joy into
heaviness, for God has clothed himself with a garment of vengeance, and with
zeal, as with a cloak, Isa. 59. 17. and no unclean thing shall now stand before
him. Howl ye oaks of Bashan, and ye Cedars of Lebanon, the Lord has haid his
axe to your roots, and your strength and tallness must come down; for your
fruit has been the fruit of Sodom, and your grapes the grapes of Gomorrah, you
have long cumbred the ground, even till it is weary with you, and is ready to
vomit you up; therefore bow your selves unto the mighty God of Jacob, before he
cut you down, and cast you into the fire of his jealousy for ever; and tremble
at the presence of him, whose word is gone forth even from Dan to Beersheba, 2
Chroo. 3. 5. for he is the God of the whole earth, and before him all Nations
are as the drop of a bucket, Isa. 40. 15. who has measured the waters in the
hollow of his hand, and meted the heavens with a span, and comprehended the
dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed the mountains in scales, and the
hills in a balance, Isa. 40. 12. who will render to every man according to the
fruit of his doings; therefore while thou has a little time. prize it, lest the
day of thy visitation pass away, and the day of wrath come upon thee as a thief
in the night 1 Thessalonians. 5. 2.

Here follows an Invitation of Love to all people, to come unto the Fountain
of Fountain of Living Waters, which is now open, that they may drink and be
satisfied, and never thrist more.
OH all ye Nations of the earth, ye people every where;
Let me invite you to come forth the voice of Christ to hear.
By whom the Lord will now declare his righteousness and truth
Unto the Nations every where, that they may now come forth
Of that great bondage unto sin, in which their souls does mourn:
And that you all may now begin unto the Lord to turn.
That he may save your souls alive, for his own mercy sake;
Of which he will not now deprive all them that do awake,
And follow him whom God has sent his Law for to fulfill:
Which perfectly cannot present completely in his will.
Nor by its works cannot mankind be justified with him,
Until he come this Christ to find, with whom I did begin:
And his own righteousness obtain, which he for them has wrought,
In bearing of that mortal pain when he the reto was brought.
By which he fully ransomed all those who did believe;
And death he then abandoned, and raised from the grave.
Him has God raised now again in this the latter day;
Who must for ever now remain as Moses once did say.
Even Isreal's Shepherd, and their Rock, to save them from their sin:
Who now does open unto his knock, and him receive within.
He Will give them power his sons to be, his danghters eke also;
And give them perfect victory over their internal foe.
But first he ll purify their hearts by his own precious blood,
And quench the enemies fiery darts, when they come as a stood.
He Will open to them his fountain sweet that they thereof may drink:
And when they pass the Lake so deep, therein they shall not sink.
The waters he will divide, that they way pass through without harm,
And Pharaoh and his host destroy, That they his fear may learn.
And bring them through the wildenress, wherein he will try their faith;
That they may know his righteousness, and see his saving health.
He Will bring his royal chosen flock through many tribulations:
And suffer many them to mock, to exercise their patience.
And many other trials great he will suffer them to bear,
Too many now for to repent, that they his Crown may wear.
Through which he will purge away their dross, their Tynne also consume,
And nothing in them shall be lost, that with him must have room.
And when he thus has brought them nigh unto his habitation,
He Will fill their mouths with praises high, and show them his salvation.
That they may ever with him dwell in joy and lasting rest,
And triumph over death and hell, by which they were oppressed.
In that strait path of righteousness in which he did them bring
To see his truth and faithfulness, that they his praise might sing.
Therefore ye people great and small, unto the Lord return;
Incline your ears to hear his call, that he may now confirm
His promise made to Israel, if they his face did seek;
Their enemies for to expel for his own mercy sake.
A Testimony concerning the spiritual man, who is begotten of God, through the
spirit, by the Immortal Word of God, which lives and abides for ever, and
has received the spirit of Adoption, whereby he cries Abba Father.
AS there is a natural man who is corrupted after the deceitful lusts, so there
is a spiritual man, who is born of the Spirit, and has the promise of Eternal
Life, through the Adoption ( viz.) the redemption of the body, he is made an
habitation of God through the Spirit, in whom God dwells and walks, according to
his promise of old, 2 Cor. 6, 16. he walks in the Spirit, and does not
fulfill the lusts of the Flesh, in him has God great delight, and gives him
wisdom, power, strength, and ability to do whatsoever he commands him, and he
can do all things through him whom is his strength, Phil. 4. 13. The
Commandments of God are not grievous, but joyous to him, nay they are his
only delight, and this keeps him in love and favor with God; so that he
withholds no good thing from him, Psalm. 84. 11. but gives him of the abundance
of his heavenly treasure: He seeds him with the Heritage of Jacob, even with
the finest of the wheat, and with honey out of the Rock, Psalm. 81. 16. he opens
his Breasts of Consolation to him, out of which delight some refreshment comes,
whereby he grows in the beauty of holiness, in his mouth is the high praises
of the as a two-edged sword in his hand, through which he executes vengeance
upon the heathen, and punishment upon the people, Psalm. 149. 7. As the natural
man is wife to do evil, He is wife to resist evil, so that it does not come
nigh unto his honse, yea though evil pursue the wicked, yet to him there is a
Tree of Life, Prove. 13. 21. upon which he seeds, and lives for ever.

He is stout and valorous, even as bold as a Lion, Prove. 28. 1. he fears not
the swelling of the Sea, he is not afraid of the terror of the night, nor of
the arrow that flies by day, Psalm. 9^. 5. the Law of Truth is in his mouth,
Mal. 2. 6. so that his steps cannot slide, he calls no man Father upon Earth,
nor no man Master below the Sun, Mat. 23. 9, 10. for he is born of God, and
receives his Law from his mouth, he is Created again in Christ Jesus unto good
works, that he may live in them. He lives by every word that proceeds out of
the mouth of God, Mat. 4. 4. over him death nor darnknesse has not power, but
he stands in the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, a free born son and heir
of God, a joint Heir with Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 17. he grows up in the measure
of the stature and of the fulness of Christ, unto a perfect man, as it is
written of him, Ephesians. 4. 13. but this is a mystery to the natural man, even as
the wind blows where it lists, and he hears the sound thereof; but knows not
whence it comes, nor whither it goes, John. 3. 8. even so is every one that is
born of the Spirit.

Therefore they who are of the flesh, they mind the things of the flesh, and
they who are of the Spirit the things of the Spirit. And as many as are led by
the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God, Romans 8. 14. but the natural man
perceives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness to
him, 1 Cor. 2. 14. but the spiritual man judges all things, and he himself is
judged of no man, 2 Cor. 2. 15. And this is that noble birth which God has
brought forth in many at this day, unto whom we preach perfection and freedom
from the law of sin and death, which is the same wisdom which Paul said he
preached among them that was perfect, 1 Cor. 2. 6, 7. But this the carnal man
cannot endure to hear of, who receives not the things of the spirit of God, as
it is written of him, 1 Cor. 2. 14. Therefore it is no marvel why Leonard
Letchford cannot receive this doctrine of perfection, which the holy men of God
held forth unto the spiritual man so plentifully throughout the Scripture of
truth, as I have showed before to all, who with a spiritual eye discerns the
things of God by which they are only known, 1 Cor. 2. 11. but they are
foolishness and madness to such sons of Belial, as Leo. Letchford has
manifested himself to be; whose Query is:

Whether to do good, and not to commit sin be a perfection that any man dares
challenge while he is upon the earth, etc.

By which it manifestly appears, that he has made a strong Covenant with
death, and an agreement with hell, who dares challenge no perfection, but to do
evil and commit sin, and that for term of life; and would persuade others so to
do, and make them believe this is praise to God, which is the highest disgrace
he can possibly bring to his Name, and the most for the promoting of that
antichristian doctrine of the Church of Rome, that the devil can lead any of
his servants to give forth. For it is wholly raked out of that kennel and
filthy puddle of iniquity, and never once mentioned in the Scriptures of truth,
but condemned thereby root and branch, as I have showed above. By which let all
sober-hearted men judge, whether John or he is to be believed, who said, He
that commits sin is of the Devil, etc. I John 3. 8. And whosoever is born of
God does not commit sin, for his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin,
because he is born of God; then said, In this is the children of God
manifested, and the children of the Devil: Whosoever does not righteousness is
not of God, neither he that loves not his brother, I John 3. 9, 10. and by
this they will soon see whether L. L. be a child of God or of the Devil, who
would persuade others, that to do good and not to commit sin is that which none
dares challenge upon the earth, and that it would be praise to God to say his
Commandments cannot be done without sinning or offending; this cannot be
paralleled in all the Scripture, if it can, I leave it to Leo. Letchford to
produce; if it cannot, I leave him naked to all the world to judge of him in
truth, equity, and righteousness, whether this doctrine of sin and imperfection
does not overthrow all the works and sufferings of Christ the Son of God, and
establish the work of the Devil for term of life, yea or nay.

Therefore oh! thou begotten of God, who art born again of the water and of the
spirit, give in thy evidence who ever thou art against this unheard of Heresy,
which God will confound with the breath of his mouth and with the brightness of
his shining glory. Which is arisen and arising to expel all these foggs, mists
and vapors which the man of sin has overspred the earth withal in this long
night of darkness and apostasy from the life of God, wherein the great Whore
that has sitten upon many waters has made all Nations drunk with the wine of
her fornication, Rev. 17. 1, 2. and 18. 3. and has sitten a a Queen and seen
no sorrow; and all her ministers has pampered themselves like fat horses in
the sulness of the earth, and has made merchandise of many through
covetousness and feigned words, 2 Pet. 2. 3. this sixteen hundred years and
upward ever since the Antichrists went out into the world, who has continued
in the world to this day, I John 2. 18. deceiving the Nations with the
multitude of their Enchantments; but now is the day of the Lord broken forth in
clearness again in this latter age, which has discovered her skirts with all
her merchants, who is worse then Balaam the son of Bosor, who though he loved
the wages of unrighteousness, durst not take it, Number. 22. 18. and 24. 13. but
they love and take it, and persecute all those who will not give it to them, as
we have a cloud of witnesses standing upon record against them at this day,
their actions has been more cruel then ever was any of their sore-fathers, the
Pope excepted, as thou who art spiritual has clearly seen I question not, but
their end shall be according to their works, Cor 11. 15. what ever their words
are, the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

Here is the way which leads to the Kingdom of God in short, held forth to
all who are willing to enter therein.
AS Satan by sin and transgression has opened a way into eternal misery and
condemnation from God, for all who follows and obeyes him: So God in his
infinite love and mercy by Jesus Christ has opened a gate of mercy unto all
mankind, and has prepared a way of life, peace, and eternal salvation, that
all who are willing to walk therein may attain thereunto: This way is called
the way of Holiness, which the unclean shall not pass over; the wayfareing man,
though a fool, shall not err therein, Isa. 35. 8,

This way is a mystery to all the Sons of Adam, and is strait and narrow, and
few there be that find it, Matthew. 7. 14. but the way which leads to
destruction is wide and broad; and all the unclean, yea all the workers of
Iniquity can walk therein, Matthew. 7. 13. So there is but these two ways for
all mankind to walk in; the one leads to life eternal, and the other to
eternal death.

Now the Lord has opened my heart a little to show unto every one the way of
life, which is Christ Jesus, John 14. 6. And that by which they may be brought
into this way, according as the Spirit of God shall give me utterance. It is
written in the Scriptures of truth, of a Woman having ten pieces of silver; if
she loose one, does light a candle, and sweepeth her house, and seek diligently
till the find it, and when she has found it. calls in her friends and
neighbors together, saying, Rejoice with me, for I have found the piece which
I had lost, Luke 15. 8, 9. This was a Parable of the way of Life, which was to
be found within when the candle was lighted; and thy house swept, Which is thy
heart, which is soul and corrupted by the enemy of thy soul, who has led thee
from mountain to hill (like a lost sheep) I mean from one High Priest to
another, so that thou have sorgotten thy resting place, Isa. 50. 6. Therefore
has the good Shepherd left the ninety and nine in the Wilderness, and is gone
after thee which is lost in the mountains, and will lay thee upon his
shoulders, till he bring thee home, and rejoice over thee, Luke 15. 4, 5. And
when thou art come in, thou shall be sed in a good pasture by the rivers of
water, where thou shall not want, Ezekiel. 34 14. and thy soul shall delight it
self in fatness and shall live, Isa. 55. 2. For the Lord will be thy Shepherd,
and thou shall be established in Righteousness, and great shall be thy peace,
Isa. 54. 13. and thou shall not need to say, Who shall ascend into heaven to
setch Christ from above? nor who shall descend into the deep to setch him from
beneath? but the Word shall be nigh thee in thy heart, and in thy mouth,
according as'tis said, Romans 10. 8. Deuteronomy. 30. 14. This will be a Lamp to thy
seet, and a Light to thy path, Psalm. 119. 105. to guide thee in the way of
truth and peace, and will give thee the light of the knowledge of the Glory of
God in the face of Jesus, 2 Cor. 4. 6.

So let every one search his own heart, and light the candle there, that he may
sinde the word of faith there to guide him: this word David hid in his heart,
that he might not sin against God, Psalm. 119. 11. This is the word of says
which I preach unto thee, that thou may come to hear and receive it, whereby
faith may be wrought in thy heart, to give thee victory over the world, sin,
death, and darkness, and the grave, which has long separated thee from God;
And then shall thou witness him thy Redeemer, even the Holy One of Israel. But
if thou ask me what must lead the to this Redeemer, I answer, The Law of God
which he has written in thy heart, according to his promise in the second
Covenant, Ier. 31. 31, 32, 33. which Law was the Apostles Schoolmaster to bring
them to Christ, that they might be justified by faith, Gal. 3. 24. This Law
will be thy Schoolmaster to bring thee to Christ, that thou may be justified by
faith, and not by works, of the Law: this will be a present Teacher with thee
at all times, and in all places, and will never let thee do evil, nor do that
to another thou would not that he should do unto thee. It will bring thee to
love the Lord with all thy heart, and thy neighbor as thy selse, as it is
written in the Law of Moses; yea, when thou turnest to tho right hand or to the
lest, thou shall hear a voice behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk in
it, Isa. 30. 21. But thou may object and say, Shall I not go to hear Sermons
from learned men, such as are brought up at Oxford or Cambridge? I say, cease
from man, even from all them who keeps thee from the Law written in thy heart,
for such has no light in them, Isa. 8. 20. Such are blind Guides, and would
keep thee from this Law which is light, Pro. 6. 23. loast it should discover
their darkness unto thee, and that they may lead thee in blindeness and
darkness which leads to the chambers of Death, Pro. 7. 27. And that thou may
spend all thy substance upon the Physicians, as the woman had done, and yet was
not cured, till she came to Christ, Luke 8. 43, 44. As thou Will not be till
thou come to be led to him by that which manifests both thy deeds of darkness
and theirs also, who has applied salve to thy wounded soul, before they have
cleansed out the filthy rotten corrupted ulcers with which thy soul has been
loaded, so their salve has taken no impression, nor been available at all unto
thee, so that they have been Physicians of no value, Job 13. 4. but thy
corruptions has prevailed upon thee till all thy money is spent. Oh therefore
hearken unto him who stands at thy door and often knocks. If thou will open thy
door, he will come in to thee and will sup with thee, and thou shall sup with
him, Rev. 3. 20. Then shall thou know the Supper of the Lord, even a Feast of
unleavened bread.

If thou will receive him, he will cleanse thy sores and lance thy wounds like
the good Physician, and reach the living sensible part in thee, that the
Corruption has not prevailed against, and nothing else he will suffer to
remain within, that he may thoroughly cure thee, and make thee perfectly whole in
body, soul, and spirit, and then he will pour in the oil of Joy for the spirit
of heaviness, that thou may be called a Tree of Righteousness, the Planting of
the Lord, Isa. 61. 3.

Then shall the light of the Moon be as the light of the Sun; and the light of
the Sun shall be seven-sold, as the light of seven days, in the day when the
Lord binds up thy breach and heals the stroke of thy wound, Isa. 30. 26.
then shall thou who has been deaf hear, and thy blind eye shall be opened,
and shall see out of obscurity and out of darkness, Isa. 29. 18. And thou shall
increase thy joy in the Lord, and rejoice in the Holy One of Israel, verse 19.
then shall Judgment dwell in the wilderness which thou shall love, and
righteousness in the fruitful field in which thou shall dwell, and the work of
Righteousness shall be Peace, and the effect of Righteousness quietness and
assurance for ever, Isa. 32. 16, 17. Then shall thy soul delight it self in the
Lord its Redeemer, and magnify the name of the God of Israel all thy days.

And thou shall not need to be taught of thy neighbor or of thy brother
brother to know the Lord, for thou shall know him, and be taught of him, and
great shall be thy peace, according to the words of Jeremiah, Ier. 31. 34. Isa.
54. 13. John 6. 45. and the anointing wherewith he has anointed thee shall
abide in thee, and thou shall not need any man to teach thee but as the
anointing teaches thee of all things, and is truth and is no lie, and even as
it teaches thee thou shall abide in him, 1 John 2. 27. These things I have
written to thee concerning any that would seduce thee from this inward teacher,
ver. 26. That if any come to thy house and bring not this doctrine, bid him not
God speed, least thou be partaker of his evil deeds; yea, if, I, or an Angel
from heaven preach any other doctrine, let us be accursed, and let God give no
more increase to our work, then he has done to the work of the Priests this
many hundred years.

Therefore cease from man whose breath is in his nostrils, and hearken unto him
by whom God speaks in these last days, as thou may read, Heb. 1. 1. who
says, Learn of me and you shall find rest for your souls, Mat. 11. 29. He
will be a sufficient teacher unto thee in all the ways of righteousness, and
be a wall unto thee in the time of storm, and a shadow unto the time of heat,
Isa. 25. 4. yea, he will be they Shepherd, and spread thy table in the sight of
thy enemies, Psalm. 23. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and he will lead thee into green pastures
by the rivers of water, and will restore thy soul to praise and glorify his
name for ever.

EVen all these things in mercy great
he will bring to pass for thee,
If thou will now upon him wait,
his saving health to see.
He Will take thee from the lake so deep,
out of the mire and clay,
And on a rock he will set thy feet,
and will divert thy way:
And bring thee to that lasting rest,
which he prepared for thee,
Before he formed East or West,
in his heavenly decree.
Therefore I warn thee to return
unto the Lord, that he
May all his promises confirm,
that happy thou may be:
Which he will make thee in the end,
if thou his law regard;
And learn thy way for to amend,
by cleaving to his word.
This is written from a true lover of thy soul, whose name is, AMBROSE RIGGE.

The difference between the true Gospel and the false, truly stated and clearly
demonstrated; that all people may see and read which Gospel they have received
and obeyed this many years, whether the true Gospel, or the false.
THe true and everlasting Gospel of Jesus Christ the Son of God, is glad
tidings of good things; which is remission of sins, and reconciliation to God
by Jesus Christ, Luke 1. 19. Luke 8. 1. which was preached to give the
knowledge of falvation unto all people by the remission of sins, Luke 1. 77. So
here it manifestly appears, that this Gospel was preached to give the
knowledge of salvation to all people, which knowledge was only received by the
remission of sins.

The false Gospel of Antichrist the man of sin is sad tidings of bad things,
wherein there is no remission of sins, but a continual slavery unto sin and
Satan all man's days, according as it is and has been taught by the teachers
of this generation, which is as contrary to the true Gospel as light is to
darkness.

The true Gospel its message is to turn people from darkness to the light, and
from the power of Satan unto God, that they might receive forgiveness of sins,
and an inheritance amongst them that are sanctified by faith in the Son, Acts
26. 18.

The message of the false Gospel is, that people can never come from under the
power of Satan, but must have a body of sin as long as they live, which is sad
tidings, and not glad tidings; for he that has been under a tyrants power from
his mothers womb, for another to pretend freedom to him, and take his money as
though he would bring him to Christ who would free him, and yet in the end tell
him he must remain under the power of this tyrant all his days, this is sad
tidings to him, who has both spent his money, and is neither redeemed, nor now
has any hopes ever to be while he lives; and such is the false Gospel at this
day.

The message of the true Gospel is a proclamation of liberty and freedom to all
Captives, who has been imprisoned in sin and transgression, wherein the blood
of Christ is freely held forth for the remission of sins, Mat. 26. 28.

The message of the false Gospel is continual captivity in sin, and never
liberty nor freedom from it, as we have seen by many years sad experience.

The true Captain of salvation says, Follow me, and thou shall find rest to
thy soul, Mat. 11. 29.

The false Leader says, Thou shall never overcome, but be in a continual
warfare, and shall never come to peace nor rest here, which is sad news indeed.

The Messengers of the true Gospel says, They were circumcised with the
Circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the
flesh by the Circumcision of Christ, Col. 2. 11.

The Messengers of the false Gospel says, This can never be done, but men must
have a body of sin as long as they live, which is far different from the other.

The Messengers of the true Gospel says, Christ shall save his people from
their sins.

The Messengers of the false Gospel says, Christ shall save from the
punishment due to sin, but not from committing sin; which doctrine overthrows
the Justice of God who gives to every one according to their deeds.

Here follows a few Queries put to Leonard Letchford, either to be answered
by plain Scripture, according as I have answered his before cited, or else to
acknowledge that I have struck the Devil dumb in his minister at Hurst at last,
though I have long suffered him to boast himself as though he were a Minister
of Christ, even till his fruits are grown so foul and odious that every one is
ready to bring in their verdict to the contrary.
Query 1. What is that Image in which man was created in the beginning by God,
was that Image perfect or imperfect?

2. What was the forbidden fruit of which he eat through which he lost this
Image, and where is it now, and how is it to be known now?

3. What was the Tree of Life from which man was driven, and where is it, and
how must he come to it again?

4. Whether man can be saved or come to life with God for ever, unless he come
to this Tree and feed thereof, yea or nay?

5. What are the Cherubims and the flaming Sword which turned every way to keep
the way of the Tree of Life?

6. What is that death which passed over all men in transgression?

7. What is the feed of the Woman which should bruise the Serpents head, and
what did God promise therein to all the Families of the earth?

8. How must man be restored into that Image in which he was created, and
whether he can come from under the power of that death which passed over him,
till he be thus resored, yea or nay?

9. Whether can man be so restored in this life, yea or nay: If yea, by what
way and means? If nay, Whether at death, or the day of judgment, or betwixt
both? Answer by plain Scripture, seeing the Scripture says, no unclean thing,
nor any thing that defiles, or works abomination, shall in any wise enter
therein?

10. What is the wall of partition which stands between God and Man? And
whether man can be brought into unity with God again, out of the unity, before
this wall be broken down, and this enmity slain, yea or nay?

11. What is the valley of Achor, and where is it, in which God will plead with
man by his sword, and by fire, because of that death which has passed over him
by transgression?

12. For what end was the Commandments and Law of God given forth by Moses? Was
they given forth to be broken or to be kept, yea or nay?

13. Whether did God give them power to keep his Laws and Precepts, when he
commanded them to observe and do them, yea or nay?

14. Why was this Law said to be weak, and in what was this Covenant faulty,
and to what was this Covenant weak, and in what was this Covenant faulty?

15. For what end was this Covenant and the Priesthood therein changed? And why
was there of necessity made a change of the Law?

16. What was that death which was the cause that Aarons Priesthood could not
continue.

17. What was Aarons Office, and what was the Office of Christ, and what was
the end of both their Offices?

18. For what end was Christ manifested, and said to be an everlasting high
Priest? Was it that sin might remain or be destroyed?

19. For what end did he lay down his life? Was it to ransom man from sin or
no?

20. Whether can man be truly said to be ransomed or saved, while he lives
under the power of Satan, yea or no?

21. Whether has man any benefit by the death or blood of Christ whilehe
lives in sin and transgression, yea or nay?

22. Can man truly say he is redeemed, while he is in his vain conversation, or
can he truly say Christ is his Savior, while he is not saved from his sin, yea
or nay?

23. What is that death which Paul spoke of, when he said, I thank God I dye
daily, because his body was alive years after?

24. Does God look upon any one to be in Christ, while he is in sin? Or does he
justify the ungodly while in ungodliness?

25. Whether is any justified by Christ, who is not sanctified by the blood of
his Cross throughout in body, soul, and spirit, yea or nay?

26. Whether any does know the truth as it is in Jesus, who is in the bondage
of corruption, seeing Christ said to his Disciples, if you obey my word, you
shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free?

27. What was the work of Christ in the world, which his father gave him to
do? and what was the difference between his works, and the works of the Law, by
which no flesh could be justified?

28. Whether is man freed from the guilt of sin while he remains in the act of
it? Or, whether is he freed from the punishment due for sin (which is death,
and separation from God for ever) while he remains in either, yea or nay? If
yea, show how, and by what way if thou can?

29. What is the virtue of Christ's resurrection, and whether has man any
benefit thereby while he lies in the grave of corruption, yea or nay?

30. What is the difference between the righteousness of the Law, and the
righteousness of faith? And whether any can have this righteousness imputed to
him, as to be made his for ever, until he come to cast off the old man, with
his deeds, which is sin and trangression, yea or nay?

31. What is the old leaven which was to be purged out, that they might become
a new lump? And whether he who commanded this thing, did not give them power to
do it, yea or nay?

32. What is that death and hell which was to be cast into the lake of fire?
And where is that lake? And how may it now be known?

33. What is that victory of which death should be swallowed up, and how and
when may it now be gained or known?

34. Whether it was not a perfection of holiness and righteousness, and
freedom from sin and imperfection, that Christ and his Apostles held forth and
witnessed while they lived on earth, through the power of him whom God had
raised from the dead? If yea, why is this Doctrine now condemned? If nay, where
or how were they made perfect, show by plain Scripture?

All these plain Scripture Queries are left to Leonard Letchsord to answer if
he can, or else consess himself a Minister not sent of God, whose Doctrine is
contrary to Christ and his Apostles.

Written by him who has suffered under Leonard Letchfords cruelty this fifteen
months and upward, in the County Goal in Horsham, for the testimony of a good
Conscience, whose name is Ambrose Rigge.


