The Use of the Letters and Figures, directing to the twenty four Tables, or
Brass Cuts; and the hundred eighty four Figures in those Tables, representing
the Parts of the Body.
EVery Brass Cut, or Print, is called a Table; and the said Prints or Tables,
are twenty four, and have their respective Numbers set at the Foot of the
Table, or Print, on the corner that is outmost, and against the Readers right
hand. Each particular Figure is also numbered, and the Number set over its Head,
and the several parts of each Figure, are distinguished by Letters of the
Alphabet, for the easier finding. To compare therefore, the Discourse with the
Tables, I shall teach you by an Example or two. In Chap. 8. page 9. line 21.
The word Coronalis, is marked with the Letter a; to which Letter, looking at
the end of the said Chapter, you find a T. 15. f. 3. a a a. intimating that you
must turn to Table 15. Figure 3. and that part of the Figure which is marked a
a a. which represents the Coronal Suture of the Skull: The Mark shows that the
former Citation is ended. Again, in the next line of page 9. by the word
Lambdoides, you find Letter b, to which looking at the end of the said Chapter,
you find b f. 4. b b. * to teach you that in the 15 Table foregoing, Figure 4.
and on that part of the Figure marked b b. you shall find the Suture of the
Skull called Lambdoides: and this mark after b b. shows again that the Citation
is ended. Again, in the same line, by the word Sagittalis, you find Letter c,
to which turning at the end of the Chapter, you shall there find c f. 3. b b.
f. 4. a a. intimating that in Figure 3. of the forenamed Table 15. and in that
part of the Figure which is marked b b. Also in Figure 4. of the same Table, on
that part which is marked a a you shall find the Sagittal Suture described. The
mark shows the Citation is ended.

Note that where you find not among the Directory Letters, T. for Table, that
Figure belongs to the forementioned Table. Also you are to take notice that
between two Citations, you shall find this mark.

Finally. He that would make his most advantage by the use of this Book,
should, having been present at some Anatomical Dissections of the whole Body;
study the Tables first, with their Explanations on the opposite Pages; and then
read the Discourse of Riolanus, and compare it all along with the Tables, which
may be best done, if the Tables be bound up by themselves, so as to lie open
always while he is reading the respective Chapters, referring to each Table.

A SURE GUIDE OR, The BEST and NEAREST Way TO Physic and Chyrurgery: That is
to say, The Arts of Healing by Medicine, and MANUAL OPERATION. Being An
Anatomical Description of the whole Body of Man, and its Parts, with their
Respective Diseases, demonstrated from the Fabric and Use of the said Parts.
In Six Books. VIZ.

1 Describing all, and every of the Bones of Man's Body, according to the
Ancient Method.

2 Describing the Belly, and all its Parts and Bowels, with their respective
Diseases.

3 Describing the Chest, and all its Parts and Contents, with their respective
Diseases.

4 Describing the Head, and Face, with all their Parts Containing and
Contained, and their respective Diseases.

5 Describing the Limbs of the Body, with the many Regiments of Muscles, and
their Diseases.

6. Containing a new Description of the Bones, by a Method first invented by
our Author, handling all the Diseases and Symptoms of the said Bones.

At the End of the Six Books, are added twenty four Tables, cut in Brass,
containing one hundred eighty four Figures, with an Explanation of them; which
are referred to in above a thousand places in the Books, for the Help of young
Artists.

Written in Latin, by Johannes Riolanus, Junior; Doctor of Physic, Physician
in ordinary to the Queen Mother of France many years together, and the last she
had: And also the Kings Professor of Anatomy and Herbarism, in the University
of Paris.

Englished by Nich. Culpeper, Gent. and W. R. Doctor of the Liberal Arts, and
of Physic.

London: Printed by Peter Cole, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the Sign of
the Printing-Press in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1657.

To the Right Honorable, HENRY LAWRENCE, Esquire; Lord President of the Council
to his Highness, the Lord Protector.
Right Honorable,
IT being my hap some years since to find in the Stationers shop at Amsterdam,
your Lordships Elegant Treatise of Baptism, and being upon Enquiry, informed
touching the quality of the Author; I wondered what Gentleman it was, that
having a stock of Honor and Repute in the world, had withal so much Christian
Courage, as to venture it in that kind. For I judged (and I suppose rightly)
that for a Gentleman of name and note, at that time to dare to vindicate the
true Christian Baptism, contemning the clamorous censures of the weak
Multitude of Pretenders to Religion and Learning, was an Act of more true and
high Courage than to storm a Town. And I humbly conceive, Experience has
evidenced the Truth hereof, since hundreds (not to say thousands) that have
adventured their Lives to gain Honor and Riches in the Field, have in their
hearts found it too hard an Adventure (however otherwise convinced in their
understandings) to own and acknowledge the true Christian Baptism, and subject
themselves to the scorned practice thereof, with the evident hazard of much of
their acquired Honor, and of their future Repute, and the advacement depending
there upon.

That this action, nevertheless, of yours (my Lord) has not been attended, with all that Ignominy and Prejudice, which was only to be expected from Men; is the
singular providence of God, giving Courage and Ingenuity, to many others of
note, soon after (much animated doubtless by so noble and generous a Leader as
your Lordship) to acknowledge and submit to the Divine verity, and beautiful,
and most lovely Rationality of that solemn Institution of our Mr. Christ* and
his eminent blessing that part of the soldiery, Characterised thereby. Much
affected therefore with your Lordships Christian Virtue in this kind, and
desirous to commend the same to Posterity; It has not been since that time in
my power to do it more effectually, than by prefixing your truly honorable Name
in the Front of this excellent Anatomical Treatise, and best Foundation of the
Art of Healing, commonly though corruptly called Physic. The fitness of which
Dedication, I shall with your Honors gentle Patience, thus demonstrate

Seeing this book is nothing (for the most part) but a Declaration and
Exposition of the stupendiously admirable wisdom of the Eternal our Maker,
shining forth in the most curious Fabric of Man's body; to confirm and seal the
belief of the Resurrection whereof (which is the very Foundation of 1 Cor. 13.
15, 16. 17. 18. 30. 31. 32.
Christianity) baptism seems (by the Scripture) to have been chiefly ordained,
by our great Mr. Christ; that as we had one solemn Ceremony to represent his
sufferings and death, we might not want another to set forth and solemnize his
burial and Resurrection (without which his own death and his Disciples Faith
had been in vain) and to take possession in and by a Figure of our own
Resurrection to come (For, we Colo. 2. 12.
are, says Paul, Buried with Christ, in our Baptism, and therein also risen
with him; That is, in a figure, being through a solemn Ceremonious possession
of our future Resurrection from the grave, instated into eternal life.) This
being so (my Lord) to whom should this excellent Description of the body of Man
in general, with all its parts, and their Respective Diseases, be dedicated,
rather than to him that has vindicated to the Christian world, that excellent
pledge of the Resurrection thereof; to wit, the Baptism of Christ rightly
solemnized: whereby al true believers are mightily assured, that though this
curiously built House of our Earthly Tabernacle, be sown in the dust, yet it
shall not there abide for ever, as the beasts that perish. Accept therefore
(Generous Sir) from your most humble servant, this Testimony of your Christian
Courage and sincerity, and suffer this excelleut Treatise to shelter it self
under your honorable Patronage. And though this testimony of your virtue so
publicly given, may (I fear) afford some disgust to your Modesty, yet I
beseech your Lordship to let it pass, for the glory of our great Mr. Christ,
and the Edification of Christendom. And I have much reason to hope, it may be a
Monument of your honorable Memory, when probably the royal and Magnificent
combs at Westminster, shall pledge the Fate of them in Paul's, and be
overwhelmed with Dust and Ruins. Such is the desire and Hopes (my Lord) of him
that craves leave to subscribe himself,

Your Honors, WILLIAM RAND.
From my House near Cripple-Gate in London. December, 22. 1656.
Mris. Culpepers Information, Vindication, and Testimony, concerning her
Husbands Books to be Published after his Death.
SO great are the Afflictions wherewith our Heavenly Father has been pleased
to exercise me his poor Handmaid, that I have not only lived to see my dear
Husband, (the Stay ^^d Solace of my Life) taken from me: but it has been my
hard hap also to see his Reputation, and Memory (which will be dear to al
Posterity, for the Works he has written for the Common Good of this Nation)
blemished, and Eclipsed, by the covetous and unjust Forgeries of one, who,
though he calls himself Nathaniel, is far from being an Israelite in whom there
is no guile; who was not content to publish a Hodgpodg of undigested
Collections, and Observations of my deer Husband deceased, under the Title of
Culpeper's last Legacy; but to make the Deceit more taking, he steeled his
Forehead so far, and brased it so hard, as not to be ashamed to forge two
Epistles, one in mine, and the other in my Husbands Name; of the penning of
which, he nor I, never so much as dreamed: And yet he impudently affirms in
my Name, that my Husband Laid a severe Injunction on me to publish them for the
general good, after his decease; and that they are his last Experiences in
Physic and Chyrurgery. And in the Title of his Book, he said, They are the
choycest, and most profitable secrets, resolved never to be published til after
his Death. Al which Expressions in the Title and Epistles, are as falls as the
Father of Lies; and every word in them, forged and feigned. And he knew well
enough, that no discreet, honest man, that was a friend to my Husband, or me,
would ever have agreed to such infamous and dishonest practices; and therefore
I desire all courteous Readers of the Writings of my Husband, to take notice of
this Deceit, and to assure themselves that it never entered into his head, to
publish such an undigested Gallimoffery, under the promising and solemn Name of
his Last Legacy, and that whereby he gained his Reputation in the World, as the
Imposter makes him speak in his forged Epistle. And I desire any in different
Reader, that has observed my Husbands lofty, and Masculine manner of
expressing himself in his Prefaces, and Epistles Dedicatory, whether in case he
had been minded or disposed to take so solemn a farewell of the world, as the
Forger makes him to do; whether, I say, he would have done it in such a whining
fashion, and so in the Style of a Balade-maker, as to say, And now, if it
please Heaven to put a period to my Life, and Studies, that I must bid al
things under the Sun farewell: Farewell to my dear Wife and Child, farewell Arts
and Sciences, farewell al worldly Glories, adieu Readers. Certainly my Husband
would have been far more serious, and material, in such a case, as any discreet
man will Judge. Neither can it be thought, that in such a solemn Valediction, he
could possibly forget his wonted respects to the College of Doctors, to whom he
did so frequently address himself, in diverse of his writings.

Courteous Reader, I shall say no more touching the abuse of the Bookseller,
only to prevent (as much as concerns me) thy being abused for the future, know,
That my Husband left seventy-nine Books of his own making, or Translating, in
my hand, and I have deposited them into the hands of his, and my much honored
Friend, Mr. Peter Cole, Bookseller, at the Printing-Press, near the Royal
Exchange (for the good of my Child) from whom thou may expect to receive in
print, such of them as shall be thought fit to serve thee in due season, without
any Disguises or Forgeries, unto which I do hereby give my attestation. Also my
Husband left seventeen Books completely perfected, in the hands of the said Mr.
Cole, for which he paid my Husband in his lifetime: And Mr. Cole is ready and
willing (on any good occasion) to show any of the said seventy-nine Books, or
the seventeen, to such as doubt thereof.

And if any Person shall question the Truth of any part of this Vindication, or
Epistle; if they will take pains to come to me, I will face to face, justify the
truth of every word thereof, as I have subscribed my Hand thereunto in the
presence of many witnesses.

I profess in the presence of the great God, the searcher of al hearts, before
whom Mr. Brooks and I must one day give an account of al our Actions: That I
have not published this Epistle or Vindication, out of any dis^respect to Mr.
Brooks (for I much resp^t the man, and would be glad to serve him to my power)
but only to clear my Husband from the solly and weakness cast upon him by the
means above expressed. And out of tenderness to Mr. Brooks, I first tried other
means of keeping, and afterward of repairing my Husbands Credit, and then
stayed long to see if he would repair (in any measure) the wrong done to my
Husband, and myself. I desire to be.

Your Servant (in, Alice Culpeper.
From my House, next door to the Red Lion in Spittle-fields, October, 18. 1655.
Mris. Culpeper did the 18. of October, subscribe this Epistle in Vindication of
her Husband's Reputation, before Ten Witnesses, as she had done another Epistle
on the ninth of October, almost in the same words with this, except near the
Conclusion.



THE CONTENTS OF The First Book. Of Osteology, or the History of the Bones.
CHAP. 1. The Intent of the Author is declared. 1 Chap. 2. Why we begin our
Anatomy with the Treatise of Bones 3 Chap. 3. The Division of Osteology, or the
History of the Bones. 4 Chap. 4. Of the Composition, and Definition of a Bone.
ibid. Chap. 5. Of the Qualities, or Natural Disposition of the Bones. 5 Chap.
6. Of the Conjunction of Bones. 6 Chap. 7. The Division of a Sceleton. 8 Chap.
8. Of the Head, being the first Part of the Sceleton. ibid. Chap. 9. Of the
upper Jaw. 11 Chap. 10. Of the Orbitary Bone 12 Chap. 11. Of the inferior Jaw
ibid. Chap. 12. Of the Os Hyois ibid. Chap. 13. Of the Teeth 13 Chap. 14. Of
the Trunk, being the second Part of the Sceleton. ibid. Chap. 15. Of the Chest.
14 Chap. 16. Of the Limbs, being the third Part of the Sceleton: and first of
the Scapula. 15 Chap. 17. Of the Shoulder. ibid. Chap. 18. Of the Cubitus, and
Radius. 16 Chap. 19. Of the Hand. ibid. Chap. 20. Of the Bones of the Ilium 17
Chap. 21. Of the Bone of the Thigh. ibid. Chap. 22. Of the Leg. ibid. Chap. 23.
Of the Foot 18 Chap. 24. In what Particulars the Bones of Men differ from those
of Women. ib. Chap 25. Of the number of the Bones in a Man's Body. 19 Chap. 26.
The History of an Infants Bones, till the Age of seven years. ibid. Chap. 27.
Of the Head 21 Chap. 28. Of the Back and Breast-bones. 23 Chap. 29. Of the
upper Limbs 24 Chap. 30. Of the Inferior Limbs ibid. Chap. 31. Of the Number of
Bones. 25
The Second Book.
CHAP. 1. General Precepts, which he that would be an Anatomist, must be first
acquainted with 26 Chap. 2. Of the Natural and Legitimate Conformation of the
Body. 29 Chap. 3. The Division of Man's Body. 31 The Medicinal Consideration
ibid. Chap. 4. Of the lower Ventricle. 32 The Situation of the parts of the
Belly. ibid. The Medicinal Consideration 33 The Medicinal Consideration 34
Chap. 5. Of the Scarf Skin 34 The Medicinal Consideration ibid. Chap. 6. Of the
Skin 35 The medicinal Consideration. 36 Chap. 7. Of the Fatty Membrane ibid.
Chap. 8. Of the Fleshy membrane 37 The medicinal Consideration ibid. Chap. 9.
Of the common membrane of the muscles 38 Chap. 10. Of a muscle in the general
ibid. Chap. 11. Of a Tendon 40 Chap. 12 Of the muscles of the Belly. ibid. The
medicinal Cosideration 42 Chap. 13. Of the Peritoneum ibid. The medicinal
Consideration 43 Chap. 14. The Division of the Parts of the Belly 44 Chap. 15.
Of the Navel ibid. The medicinal Consideration 45 Chap. 16. Of the Omentum, or
Call ibid. The medicinal Consideration ibid. Chap. 17. Of the Guts 46 The
medicinal Consideration 48 Chap. 18. Of the Mesenterium ibid. The medicinal
Consideration 49 Chap. 19. Of the Sweetbread, or Pancreas. 50 Chap. 20. Of the
Vena Porta ibid. Chap. 21. What is to be considered in the Vena Porta 51 Chap.
22. Of the Celiacal Artery 52 Chap. 23. Of the Stomach ibid. The medicinal
Consideration 54 Chap. 24. Of the Liver. 57 The medicinal Consideration 58
Chap. 25. Of the Bladder of Gall 59 The medicinal Consideration 60 Chap. 26. Of
the Spleen 61 The medicinal Consideration 63 Chap. 27. Of the Vena Cava, and
Aorta, within the lower Belly 64 The medicinal Consideration 65 Of the Aorta
descending 67 Of the Nerve of the lower Belly ibid. Chap. 28. Of the Kidneys
ibid. The medicinal Consideration 68 Chap. 29. Of the Vreters 70 Chap. 30. Of
the Piss-Bladder ibid. The medicinal Consideration 71 Chap. 31. Of the Genitals
of a Man; and first of the Yard 73 The Medicinal Consideration 74 Chap. 32. Of
the Groyns 76 Chap. 33. Of the Fundament. ibid. The Medicinal Consideration 77
Chap. 34. Of the Cod, and Stones. ibid. The Medicinal Consideration 78 Chap.
35. Of the Vessels which carry the true Seed, of the Seed-Bladders, and the
Prostatae or Auxiliaries. 79 The Medicinal Consideration. 80 Chap. 36. Of the
Genital Parts of a Woman, and first of the External. ibid. The medicinal
Consideration 82 Chap. 37. Of the internal Parts of a Woman which serve for
Generation 83 The medicinal Consideration 85 Chap. 37. Of the Pains of the
Loins. 90
The Third Book.
CHAP. 1. Of the Chest 94 Chap. 2. Of the Dugs of Women. 95 The medicinal
Consideration. ibid. Chap. 3. Of the external Parts of the Chest. 97 Chap. 4.
Of the Pleura, Mediastinum, and Pericardium ibid. The medicinal consideration
98 Chap. 5. Of the Midrif, or Diaphragma. 101 The Medicinal Consideration 102
Chap. 6. Of the Lungs or Lights ibid. The medicinal consideration 103 Chap. 7.
Of Respiration, or fetching of Breath. 105 Chap. 8. Of the Heart. 107 The
medicinal consideration 110 Chap. 9. Of the Vessels, viz. Veins, Arteries, and
Nerves contained within the Chest. 113
The Fourth Book.
CHAP. 1. Of the Head. 118 The medicinal consideration. 119 Chap. 2. Of the
Brain. 121 The medicinal consideration. 130 Chap. 3. Of the Eyes 136 The
medicinal consideration 138 Eyelids Diseases. 139 Tear-Kernels Diseases. 140
Diseases of the Tunica Conjunctiva. ib. Diseases of the Cornea Tunica. 141
Diseases of the Wea Tunica ibid. Diseases of the Pupilla ibid. Diseases of the
Chrystalline and Glassie Humor 142 Diseases of the Optic Nerve ibid. Diseases
and Symptoms of the Sight. ibid. Chap. 4. Of the Ear 191 The medicinal
consideration 192 Chap. 5. Of the Face, and outside of the Mouth. 194 The
Medicinal Consideration 195 Chap. 6. Of the Nose 197 The Medicinal
Consideration 198 Chap. 7. Of the Neck 199 The Medicinal Consideration 201
Chap. 8. Of the Teeth and Gums. 202 The Medicinal Consideration ibid. Chap. 9.
Of the Gums 204 Chap. 10. Of the Palate ibid. Chap. 11. Of the Uvula, and
Isthmus. ib. The Medicinal Consideration 205 Of the Isthmus ibid. Chap. 12. Of
the Tongue ibid. The Medicinal Consideration 206 Chap. 13. Of the Larynx, or
Head of the Windpipe. 207 The Medicinal Consideration 208 Chap. 14. Of the
Aspera Arteria, or Windpipe ibid. The Medicinal Consideration 209 Chap. 15. Of
the Oesophagus, or Gullet. ibid.
The Fifth Book.
CHAP. 1. Of the Limbs* 210 The Medicinal Consideration 211 Chap. 2. Of the
Superior Limbs. ib. Of the Shoulder Blade, and the Arm from the Shoulder to the
Elbow. ib. Of the Cubit, or part of the Arm from the Elbow to the Hand 212 Of
the Hand ibid. Of the Nails ibid. Chap. 3. Of the Inferior Limbs. 213 Chap. 4.
In what places Issues are commonly made 214 Chap. 5. Of Veins usually opened
215 Chap. 6. Of the Arteries which are opened. 217 Chap. 7. Of the Muscles, and
first of the Forehead Muscles. 218 Chap. 8. Muscles of the hinder part of the
Head. ibid. Chap. 9. Muscles of the Eyelids ibid. Chap. 10. Muscles of the
Eyes 219 Chap. 11. Muscles of the external Ear. ibid. Chap. 12. Muscles of the
Nose 220 Chap. 13. Muscles of the Lips ibid. Chap. 14. Muscles of the lower Jaw
221 Chap. 15. Of the muscles of the Os Hyoides ibid. Chap. 16. Muscles of the
Tongue 222 Chap. 17. Muscles of the Larynx ibid. Chap. 18. Muscles of the
Pharynx ibid. Chap. 19. Muscles of the Gargareon, Uvula, or Mouth Palate. 223
Chap. 20. Muscles of the Head ibid. Chap. 21, Muscles of the Neck 224 Chap. 22.
Muscles of the Shoulder-blades ibid. Chap. 23. Muscles of the Arm 225 Chap. 24.
Muscles of the Cubit. ibid. Chap. 25. Muscles of the Radius 226 Chap. 26.
Muscles of the Wrist. 227 Chap. 27. Muscles of the Palm of the Hand ibid. Chap.
28. Muscles of the Fingers 228 Chap. 29. Muscles of the Thumb. 229 Chap. 30.
Muscles of Chest 230 Chap. 31. Of the Midrif. 231 Chap. 32. Muscles of the Back
and Loins, wherewith the Backbone is moved. ib. Chap. 33. Muscles of the Belly
232 Chap. 34. Of the motion of the Ilium Bones, and Os Sacrum joined together.
ibid. Chap. 35. Muscles of the Testicles ibid. Chap. 36. The Bladders Muscle
ibid. Chap. 37, Muscles of the Yard 233 Chap. 38. Muscles of the Clytoris ibid.
Chap. 39. Muscles of the Fundament ib. Chap. 40. Muscles of the Thigh ibid.
Chap. 41. Muscles of the Leg. 235 Chap. 42. Muscles of the Feet 236 Chap. 43,
Muscles of the Toes 238 Chap. 44. Muscles of the great Toe 239 Chap. 45. An
Introduction to the Art of Muscular Dissection, showing an accurate Method to
cut up the Muscles of the whole Body. ibid. The Frontal Muscle 228 The Orbicular
muscle of the Eyelids. ibid. Muscles of the Lips ibid. Muscles of the Nose
ibid. The Temporal Muscle 241 The Masseter Muscle ibid. The Parotick Kernels
ibid. The muscles of the Ears ibid. The muscles of the Eye ibid. `Muscles
seated in the Neck 242 Muscles of the Larynx, Pharynx, and Gargareon 243 The
muscles of the hinder part of the Head and Neck 244 Muscles of the Arm 245 Next
thereunto, is the Rotundus minor ibid. Muscles situate upon the Back and Loins
ibid. Muscles of the Breast 246 Muscles of the Cubit ibid. Muscles of the
Radius, the Wrists, the Fingers, and the Thumb 247 Muscles of the Abdomen, or
Belly 248 Muscles of the Yard 250 Muscles of the Fundament ibid. The Bladder
muscle 251 Muscles of the Clytoris ibid. Muscles of the Thigh ibid. Muscles of
the Leg 253 Muscles of the Tarsus 254 Chap. 46. Of the Veins, Arteries, and
Nerves, belonging to the Limbs ibid. The Medicinal Consideration 258

The Sixth Book.
A New Osteologia, or History of the Bones. Wherein he treats of the Bones,
Ligaments, and Gristles of the whole Body, by which the Frame of the Body is
compacted together, the Muscles being removed; handling all the Diseases and
Symptoms which happen unto the Bones. 260

CHAP. 1. 260 Chap. 2. Of the great profit of this new Osteology, or Doctrine
of the Bones 261 Chap. 3. What is to be observed in the bones of a dead Body
not boiled 262 Chap. 4. Of the Nourishment, Sense, and and Marrow of the Bones
263 Chap. 5. Of Articulations, or joyntings of the Bones ibid. The Medicinal
Consideration 265 Chap. 6. Of the bones of the Skull 267 The Medicinal
Consideration 270 Chap. 7. Of the inferior Jaw Bone ibid. Chap. 8. Of the Teeth
ibid. Chap. 9. Of the Bone Hyoides, and of the Ligaments 271 Chap. 10. Of the
Heads motion, and Ligaments 272 Chap. 11. Of the inside of the Ear ibid. Chap.
12. Of the Clavicula 273 Chap. 13. Of the Breast Bone. ibid. Chap. 15. Of the
Ribs 275 Chap. 16. Of the Backbone ibid. The Medicinal Consideration 277 Chap.
16. Of the Scapula 278 Chap. 17. Of the Humerus, Cubitus, and Radius. 280 Chap.
18. Of the Wrist. 281 Chap. 19. Of the Metacarpium, Fingers, and Sesamoidean
Bones ibid. Chap. 20. Of the Os Ilium, and Thighbone 282 Chap. 21. Of the
Patella 284 Chap. 22. Of the Tibia, and Fibula 285 Chap. 23. Of the Foot ibid.
Chap. 24. The number of Bones for a Sceleton ibid. Chap. 25. Of breaking the
bones ibid. Chap. 26. The Collection, and ordering of Bones for a Sceleton 287
THE FIRST BOOK OF ANATOMY AND PHYSIC, OF John Riolanus.
Chap. 1. The Intent of the Author is declared.
ANatomy, is considered and handled two ways, Philosophically, The
Consideration of Anatomy is. Philosophical.
and Physically, Galen, Lib. 1. Anat. The Philosopher searches out the
structure of the Parts, their action, and use, that he may know himself, and
that the * Work-master may be admired in his (* Viz. God)
work; and therefore the knowledge of the Parts alone does content him. But the
Physician, besides the Physical,
knowledge of this, brings al into a Practical way, and searches after the
Natural dispositions of every Part, that so by veiwing the Anatomy of the
Carkases of sound and sick men, he may more easily know the accidents against
Nature; which happen to those Parts, in such as are alive.

By Dispositions against Nature, is to be understood Diseases, whose generation
and end, whether it will be good or bad, the way and manner of Curing, he that
would know exactly, must be skilled both in Philosophical, and Physical Both
which are necessary. ^*
Anatomy; and I dare boldly affirm, that he will be an abler, and more skilful
Physician that is well skiled in this Anatomy, than he that contents himself,
with the bare knowledge of the Parts.

This manner of showing, and teaching Anatomy is new, but gives great light,
and is wonderful necessary for a Physician, and I will lay it down intermixed
with the order of Anatomy in all the Parts, and show particularly in every Part,
what profit will thereby redound unto a Physician, in his Practice. And seeing
the Natural Constitution of every Part which Hippocrates calls Euphuian, and is
commonly called Health, is threefold, Similar, Organical, and common, The
Preternatural Constitution of the Parts, called Sickness, must likewise be
threefold and make three kinds of Diseases, Viz. A Disease of the Similar, a
Disease of the Organical Parts, and a Disease common to both. The Similar
Constitution, according to Nature, consists in Substance, and Temper; The
Organical Constitution, which pertains to the construction of the Organ, is
placed, in number, Magnitude, Situation, and shape or Conformation; which
Conformation is again divided into Figure, Passage, Cavity, Roughness, and
smoothness; The common Constitution of Similar, and Organical Parts, consists
in Union and Connection. This threefold Natural Constitution, I will declare in all the Parts; afterward I will lay down in a few words, what may be gathered
from this Sound Constitution, for the Knowledge, fore knowledge, and Cure of a
Diseased Constitution; And Anatomy handled in this Method, will be the
beginning, Middle, and end of the whole Art of Physic. This is a short, easy,
and clear Method, Quickly, and rightly to learn the Art of Curing; which
propounds the same, visible to the Eyes of such as are well verst in my Fathers
writings, or in the Institutions of Sennertus. for by this Method, I shall
unlock, and display the treasures in Anatomy of Physic: But perhaps some Fool,
that is unskilled, will reprove our Disigne, and Object, that we confound the
whole Art of Medicine, seeing Anatomy is a Part of Physiology, distinct from the
rest; and therefore ought to be taught apart, seeing Galen himself, in the
beginning of his dissection of Muscles, reproves the Anatomical Book of Lycus;
because in his Treatise of Muscles he inserted the Diseases of the Parts. If
any prattle such things against us, they will quickly hold their peace, if they
read Gal. Lib. 2 admin. Anatom. Relateing, That Ancient Physicians regarded
Anatomy so much, that in all Hippocrates did in all his Books. Many are the Sorts
of the Figures, both within, and without the Body, (says Hippocrates, in Lib.
de vet. Med.) Which have much different qualifications in the Sick, and the
Sound; all which you must perfectly distinguish one from another, that you may
rightly know, and observe the causes of every one of them.

According to Aristotle, Health, and Sickness, are the Fundamental And
Profitable in Medicine.
Parts of Medicine: Both of them are contained in the Parts; and Sickness
compared with Health is the better discerned. Ad to this, That Aristotle
Writes, that he that would Cure the Eyes, must first know the Structure of the
Eye. Again, Hippocrates held, that Diseases were distinguished according to the
Parts they were in^ierent in; and the principal Curative indications, were
taken from the Affect, and the Part affected; and Remedies both Medicinal, and
Chyrurgical were Prescribed and administered diversely, according to the Parts
Afflicted. Therefore Galen wrote his Therapeuticks of the composition of
Medicines, according to the Parts afflicted: and Avicenna did wisely, when
perceving that the Seats of Diseases could not be known without skill in
Anatomy, Before the Diseases of the particular Parts he set down their Anatomy.
And if we believe Galen in Lib. de Part med. The first Matter or Subject of
Medicine, is the Body, as it is the Subject of Health and Sickness.

Our intent then is by a short and easy Method, To deliver in writing, and The
Intent of the Author.
demonstrate in dead Bodies, of the seats of al Diseases, and Symptoms, both
Internal, and External; and the particular way of Cure according to the order
of Anatomy, which is publicly observed. A notable piece of Workmanship to
learn Physic by, by which it is easy to manifest, and bring to light the
Errors, in the Cures of Diseases and to instruct and inform such as are
Studious in Physic, by that time they have been hearers and beholders two
years, of two Anatomies in a year, with diligent reading of Books, and
excercize of the knowing of Plants, and other Drugs, and visiting of the Sick
with him that is their teacher. Excellently said Johannes Fernelius in the
beginning of his Pathology, I shall never think any man well skilled in the
knowledge of Diseases, unless he have been an Eye witness of the seats of them,
in the Body of man, and know how they are affected against Nature; neither can
be come to this unless he be skilful and exquisite in Anatomy, and whatsoever
he reads or hears, let him seriously contemplate it in the Body of man, and
settle the chief knowledge of things in his mind.

Chap. 2. Why we begin our Anatomy with the Treatise of Bones.
THat kind of style is twofold, which is used in the explication of any thing,
Gal. Com. ad Part. q. Lib. 1. de fract. et Cap. 1. Lib. The Method of teaching
double.
Synops. de Pulls. The first is called Synopticus, when the Matter is briefly
laid down; The other Diexodicus, when it is Copiously unfolded, nothing being
passed by which is profitable to be declared: The former helps the memory; the
latter cleers the matter to the understanding. For which Cause Galen divided
his Books into Isagogical, and perfect; the first being fitted to young
beginners, the other to proficients, as himself testifies. Lib. de libris
Propriis. This is also confirmed by the authority of Hippocrates; Lib. de vet.
Med. Where he advises Physicians to teach easy things to young students, and
such as may be quickly learned; ad hereunto; That al men desire to learn apace,
according to Aristor. Lib. 2 de Rhetor. Chap. 10. And the Method of breife
teaching, is always grateful, both to young students, and to perfect Masters;
for it teaches the former what things must be learned; and in the latter calls
back to their memory what they have learned before, and almost forgotten, Gal.
Lib. 4. de diff. pulls.

Wisely, and Elegantly, did the Emperor Justinian judge, That a compendium of
the Laws was first to be propounded, to invite Novices to knowledge. Then are
al things delivered most commodiously when they are first delivered by a plain
and simple way, and then by an exact and diligent interpretation; for if we
burden weak, though studious minds at beginning, with variety and Multiplicity
of things, we either make them desert their studies, or else young Men to great
labor and distrust, and bring them by a longer way to what might be learned
with more speed, less labor, and no distrust.

Therefore following the precepts of Galen, and Hippocrates, I will describe Why
the Author wrote a Synopsis.
a brief, and clear Manual of Anatomy, following the counsel of Galen, who had
rather write a Synopsis of his Books of Pulses himself, then to leave the
business to another, who by not understanding his mind, and sense, should
pervert or confound his meaning.

I begin with the Bones, because they are the foundation of all the Parts of the
whole Body, which is substained, Included, Preserved, and moved by the Why he
begins with the Bones.
Bones; which, according to Hippocrates, give stability, and form to the Body.

Therefore he that is studious in Physic, ought to be instructed in the
perfect The necessity of writing of the Bones.
knowledge of the Bones, before he come to behold the Anatomy of the whole Body:
otherwise he will be ignorant in designing the original, and insertion of the
Muscles, and the sticking of other Parts to certain Conceptacles of the Bones,
unless he be skilled in the History of Bones; at which Anatomy is to begin, as
Hippocrates taught, and after him, Galen.

Chap. 3. The Division of Osteology, or the History of the Bones.
THe History of the Bones is called. Osteology, of which are two Parts: The
Parts of Osteology.
Practice, and Theory. I call that the Theory, which is conversant in the
knowledge of their conformation and use. The Practice is the manual operation
which comprehends both Ossilegium, and Ossifragium; Ossilegium, is the manner
of preparing Bones to make a Sceleton; Ossifragium is that which searches out
the joining, and knitting together of the Bones, and Joints, by Ligaments, and
Cartilages, and by breaking, and deviding them; searches out their internal,
and hiden Parts.

See Chap. 26. and 27. Lib. 6. Of this Book.
Chap. 4. Of the Composition, and Definition of a Bone.
THat the Nature of a Bone may be perfectly understood, there are four Four
Confiderations.
things to be considered in it: The Matter, Efficient, Form, and End.

The Matter of the Bone is Proper, or Diverse. 1. Matter, Proper. Generation.


Proper is considered Generally, or Specially.

Proper Matter, taken Generally, is double; the one for Generation, the other
for Nourishment; the Bones are made of the Seed by consent of al Physicians.
The Seed consists of Humor, and Spirit: The Humors are of two Parts; the one
thinner, of which the noble Parts are formed; the other thicker, of which the
Bones are engendered.

The matter of Nourishment is also two fold; Remote, and Near: Remote, is
Blood, by which all the Parts of our Body are nourished: Near, is the Marrow
Nourishment.
contained in the Cavity of the Bones, or a Marrowy Juice shut up in the
Spongious Bones.

The Proper Matter considered specially, regards the Bone already made, which
is various in respect of substance, and quality; and so the substance of
Constitution.
one Bone is diverse, by reason of the Epiphysis, which is Softer then the rest
of the Bone; or the Apophysis, which is harder then the rest of the Bone: also
the whole Bone, if it be Sollid, is harder without, then it is within. If it be
hollow, the Internal Superficies is hardest.

As for what belongs to Quality, and Namely Color; the Bone, the more (...) it
is, the more White it is; that which is hollow, is pale or reddish.

By the diverse Matter of the Bone, understand that which compasses it Matter
diverse.
about; and it is a Membrane, and a Cartilage. The Membrane which compasses
about the Bone, is called Periostion, and sticks firmly to it. By benefit of
which, it Obscurely feels. The extremities of the Bones are covered with a
Cartilage, which Facilitaces the Motion of the Bone, and hinders its wearing.

The Efficient Cause of the Bone, is the Implanted Generative Spirit, or 2.
Efficient cause.
rather heat, which ^orre^^es and dryes the Matter of the Bone. Gal Lib. 1. ^e
fac^l. natural. acknowledges the faculty which forms the Bones; to which Heat
and Spirit, do administer.

The form of a Bone is double; Essential, and accidental: That is called 3.
Form, Essential.
Essential, which makes it to be a Bone, Namely, the Vegetable Soul.

The Face, says Aristotle Lib. 2. de Generat. animal, is no Face, if it want
the Soul; and so is the Flesh and Bone. But with Physicians, the form of
Similar Parts, is nothing else then their temper. The temper of the Bone, is
cold and dry; therefore Coldness and Dryness constitute the form of the Bone.
The accidental form, is the Figure of them, which is Proper, and peculiar
Accidental.
to every Bone, and is most commonly round in all Bones, both in Longitude, and
Latitude.

The end of the Bones, is their Use; and this is general, and particular; 4.
End. General. Special.
That is called General, which serves for the whole Body; and that is three
fold, 1. To establish, and make firm the soft Parts. 2. To give shape, and
Figure to the Parts. 3. To help the Motion, and Progress of the Body. The
Particular end, or use, is that which is Proper to every several Bone.

From what has been written, this Definition of a Bone, may be gathered; It is
a Similar Part, most cold and dry, Formed by heat of the thick and Fat
Definition.
substance of the Seed; for the form and settlement of the whole Body.

Chap. 5. Of the Qualities, or Natural Disposition of the Bones.
THe Doctrine of Bones, ought to be double; one which treats of the Doctrine of
Bones Double, Of Infants and men grown up.
Bones of infants, which from their Birth til seven years of Age, differ in
many things from such as are grown up: the other of men of perfect Age, which
we now handle.

And seeing al Doctrine of Bones, is referred to Physical use, we must know the
Condieions, and affections of Bones, well and Naturally affected, which are
either common to al, or Proper to some.

The common are nine which shall be Described, and Demonstrated, in our
Affection of the ^ones are. Common.
new Osteology, at the latter end of this Manual. In dry Bones well Prepared,
are five things showed. 1. Hardness and solidity. 2. They have holes outwardly,
Especially toward the Extremities, by which is ingress given to the little
Veins, and arteries, for Nourishment and life. 3. A cartilaginous Crust at the
Extremities, and the Periostion, which compasses about the whole Bone, the
Cartilaginous extremities excepted. 4. Continuity, and Equallity in its whole
substance; wherefore the callous, by which broken Bones are united, is not
Natural. 5. A fit and convenient joining of one Bone with another.

The affections Proper to the several Bones, are twofold; either such as regard
Proper,
every Bone severally; or such as regard more Bones then one, joined together.

1. The affections of the first sort, are four; Hollowness, Prominence, 2. of
Bones separated.
Roughness, and Smoothness; which affections are considered in the extreme
superficies of the Bone, in as much as Bones are referred to mutual conjunction
because they cannot subsist alone by themselves. The Head of the T. 21. f. 2.
C.
Omoplata is hollow; the f. 1. a.
Shoulder Bone sticks out; the f. 4. B.
Ischium, or Huckle-bone, is hollow; the f. 1. D.
Bone of the Thigh sticks out; the Skul is rough behind for the T. 15. f 4. C.
insertion of Muscles, in other places it is smooth, and Polished: Al which
affections, if they are such as Nature made them, they are according to Nature;
if otherwise, they are beside Nature.

Also a Cavity is deep, or superficiary; that which is deep, is called T. 21.
f. 4. B.
Cotyle; the superficiary f. 4. F. f. 2. F c
Glene. A Prominency, or Parts sticking out, is called Apophysis, or Epiphysis:
Both of them are round, or long, or hollow: If it be round, it is called a
Head; if it be large and long, it is absolutely Named a f. 1. dd. f 4. a.
Head; but if it be short, and depressed, it is called f. 2. II.
Condylu^. The Heads or Condyli of small Bones, are not Epiphysis, but
Apiphy^is* as in the nether Jaw, and in the Ribs, and the Bones of the Fingers,
and Toes. A long Apophysis, is either with a point, and called Corone; or
simply long, and that according to the Figure of it, has diverse Names; or T.
15. f. b. D.
Styloides T. 21. f. 2. d.
Coracoides, T. 13. f. 21. a.
Odontoides; or else it is terminated in a Head, and then is called T. 21. f. 2.
c.
Cervix or a Neck.

It is not absurd, that some Apophysis should be hollow, Seeing al Cavities
whether Apophyses have hollownesses.
are, as it were, ingraved in the Apophysis; or else are made of two or three
Apophyses, as in the Cavity of the Ischium, or Huckle-bone: and although
sometimes a Cavity make the Body of the Bone, yet it is formed by a bony
Circumference; which Seeing it sticks out obliquely, and orbicularly, without
the plain superficies, it is worthily accounted an Apophysis; Gal. Lib. de
Ossibus acknowledges the Omoplata to be an Apophyfis, which is a Cervix, the
extremity of which, ends in the ibid
Glene; therefore Cavities ought to be referred to Apophysis; and a Cavity if
it be round and large, may be called a Head, for the Neck is always subjected
to the Head Gal. Proem. Lib. de Ossib.

In every Bone, which being joined to another makes a Joint, I observe the Body
and the extremities, which are Adnata, or Enata; The body is The Body
the principal Part, formed of Nature, that it may be the foundation of the
extreme Parts; for Nature ever-more begins the formation of the Bones in the and
middle, and produces them toward the extremities. The extremities of the
bones called Enata, are T. 2. f. 1. aa. f. 2. b c d. T. 15. f. 3. M N d.
Apophyses; Adnata are T. 21. f. 1. 2. q. T. 13. f. 21. a. T. 15. f. 6. D.
Epiphyses: the Extremities, which are Apophysis, and Epithysis.
Treatise of the Epiphyses pertains to the Osteology of Infants, therefore we
will not speak of it here.

Yet this you may know, that Epiphyses belong to the extremity of the Joints of
the bones; and that their Nature is to be sought out in Children; for in men
grown up, they degenerate into Apophyses, no Footsteps of the ancient Division
remaining; and yet inwardly they keep the condition of their Proper Nature,
which ought to be like a pumice, and bloody; but the Apophyses are alwais
harder.

The second sort of Affections are, the Articulations of bones, one with
another, 2. The Joynting of Bones.
which in diverse bones, are different; which now we come to speak of, in
General.

Chap. 6. Of the Conjunction of Bones.
SEeing it is not safe, nor comely for man, that Divine Creature, to creep Why
there are many Bones in man.
along like Worms, and Serpents; Nature has set his body bolt upright, with
firm, and sollid bones; not only three, or four in number, but very many
various, and distinct, whereby he may bow, and move himself every way; And that
this Workmanship might be the more Elegant, the Bones are so Joined together,
that the extremity of one, enters into the Cavity of the other.

This structure is called a Joint, the Nature of which, is much controverted
amongst Anatomists; some contending that the touching of two bones one with
another, makes a Joint; others, besides touching, ad motion. So that it is the
movable touching of two bones, which makes a Joint.

If Motion be removed from the Definition of a Joint, Galens Doctrine may
easily be defended. He constitutes two kinds of Articulation; Diarthrosis, with
mainfest Motion; Synarthrosis, with Obscure, or no Motion: and he assigns the
differences of Synarthrosis, which are altogether immovable, to be Conjunction
of Bones is either by Articulation the Differences of which are Diarthrosis and
Synarthrosis.
Sutura, Harmonia, and Gomphosis; with those which take away Motion in the
Definition of Articulation, refer to the third speeies of Articulation, which
they call Neutral, or mean, between Diarthrosis and Synarthrosis. Some give it a
new Name, Amphiarthrosis, to wit, when the structure is so Obscure, and the
Motion so hidden, that you know not whether it appertain to Diarthrosis, or
Synarthrosis. But that place of Galen being il understood, deceives many
Anatomists. This Doctrine of Galen seems more probable, thus.

The bones are knit together by Articulations, and Symphyses: Articulation, is
the knittings, or touching of two bones; the differences of which are
Diarthrosis, and Synarthrosis; the one has evident Motion, the other Obscure,
or none at al; and therefore the differences of each, are equal: but the one,
for example sake, is called Enarthrosis Diarthrodes, with a manifest Motion;
the other Enarthrosis Synarthrodes, with an Obscure Motion; The common species
of which are. 1, Enarthrosis.
Judge the like of the other differences.

Enarthrosis, is when a large, and long Head, goes into a deep Cavity; which
seeing it is common both to Diarthrosis, and Synarthrosis, we will give an
example of them Both. The Motion of Enarthrosis Diarthrodes, is manifest in the
Joint of the Ischium: the Motion of Enarthrosis Synarthrodes, is Obscure in the
Articulation of the Ancle with the Scaphois.

When a depressed, and plain Head, is received by a shallow and superficial 2.
Arthrodia.
Cavity, this Joynting is called Arthrodia. an exemple of Arthrodia
Diarthrodes, is in the conjunction of the Shoulder with the Omoplata. An
example of Arthrodia Synarthrodes, is in the Bones of the Wrist, with the
Metacarpus.

Ginglymos, is a mutual ingress of the bones, such as you shall usually see in
3. Ginglymus.
the hinges of Doors and Windows; in which that Part of the Hinge which bears
and that which circles about, have a Mutual ingress one into another. The
Motion of Ginglymus Diarthrodes, is manifest in the Elbow; the Motion of
Ginglymus Synarthrades, is Obscure in the joining of the Ancle to the Heel.
Modern writers add a fourth to those three, which they call Trochois, in which
the Motion of conversion is apparent: such is the joining of the first Vertebra
with the second, but it is to be referred to Arthrodia; As for what belongs to
Ginglimus, and its various differences, we will thus Methodically handle them:
Ginglimus is an Articulation of bones, by mutual reception; Which is Simple or
Compound.
and is simple, or compound: that is called simple, which is made of two bones,
by one only and simple Articulation in the same Part, as in the juncture off
the Elbow and Arm. Compound Ginglymus consists of a double Articulation, which
is performed either in the same extremities, or in places distant, of two or
three Bones, which by a double Articulation end in the same extremities. It is
seen in the Vertebrae of the Neck. A compound Ginglymos by a double
Articulation in places distant is seen in the Cubitus and Radius, in distant
places of three bones is seen in all the Vertebrae of the Back and Loins.

Besides Synarthrosis, contains under it, Harmonia, Sutura, and Gomphosis,
Proper species of Synarthrosis. 1. Harmonia.
which are without Motion. T. 15. f. 3. R. etc.
Harmonia, is a Conjunction of bones, by simple touching without mutual
ingress; and is distinguished by a Line, either right, or oblique, or many
fold. f. 4. a. b.
Sutura, is the joining of bones: as though the Teeth of two Jaws, or two
Combs were thrust one within the other, and is altogether of one and the same
form. Gomphosis, is when one bone sticks fast, and immovably in another, like a
Nail in a Post.

Opposite to Articulation; is Symphysis, which is an immovable conjuntion 3.
Gomphosis. Or by Symphysts whose differences are three.
of bones, as though they were united, which Nature brings forth at first
divided, yet afterward in process of time, they grow together. Some are united
without any discernable f. b. m. n. o.
Medium, others with a Medium interposed. And therefore, the simple differences
of Symphysis are three; Syssarcosis Syneurosis, Synchondrosis. A mixed or
compound Symphysis; is only one, viz. By a Nerve and Cartilage, which Galen
calls Neurochondrodis. See chapter 5. Lib. 6. of this Book.
Of these you may see more in. Com. at Gal. Lib. de Ossibus.

According to Galen, I thus expound the Doctrine of Joints, Methodically.
Galens Doctrine of Joints.
The Conjunction of al Joints is made by the touching of their extremities:
This touching is either Articulus or Symphysis: Articulus is a* Natural joining
of Bones; which are divided amongst themselves, to the same use, for which they
were formed; this use is either for Motion, or perspiration, or passage of some
substance, or distinguishing of parts, or to secure them from hurting, as
apeares by the Articulations, Harmonia, Sutura, and Gomphosis. Symphysis is a
Natural Union of bones which were at first divided, which grow together either
with, or without an apparent Medium, because it is Obliterated, as in the
Sternum, Os-sacrum, or Ischium, and the bony portions of the inferior Jaw: and
therefore the Conjunction of bones is divided into Articulus, and Symphysis, as
it were into two species. Otherwise if Symphysis, be taken according to the
mind of Modern Anatomists, and not according to the mind of Galen, wheresoever
Articulation is, there must Symphysis needs be; for the Collection of bones,
and Galen had ridiculously opposed Symphysis, to Articulation.

Chap. 7. The Division of a Sceleton.
THe whole Fabric of the bones sticking together, is by Galen, called
SCELETOS, It is vulgarly divided into the Head, the trunk and the limbs.
Hippocrates, in his Book of the Nature of bones, constitutes six parts of the
Sceleton; The Head, Neck, Breast, Backbone, Hands, and Feet. Galen, into five,
the Head, Backbone, Breast, Hands, and Feet, as may easily be gathered from
the series of his discourse, We follow the common division, and according to
the example of Galen, begin at the Head, which is the first bone formed by
Nature; and as it were the foundation of all the rest: which are framed in
respect of largness, according to the proportion of the Head.

Chap. 8. Of the Head, being the first Part of the Sceleton.
THe Head is defined by Galen, to be that whole substance which is above What
the Head is. It Is Diviston. What the Skul is.
the Neck, and the dwelling place of the Brain.

It is divided into the Skul, and the Face, which latter comprehends both the
Jaws.

The Skul, is a globous, and round body; hollow within, but this roundness is
not exactly, spoehircal, by Reason of those Eminencies, which stick out before,
and behind, which make the Skul somewhat longish, and compressed on the sides
toward the Temples. If the Skul be not somewhat longish, it is Its Natural
^igure.
depraved and this depravation is fourfold. 1. When it sticks not out before,
2. When it sticks not out behind. 3. When both Prominencies, are deparved, and
then it is exactly round, 4. When its Longitude is turned into Latitude, which
is inconsistent with life, because the Structure of the Brain, is perverted.

Not only one Bone, but many make the structure of the Skul, the number The
number of the Bones of the Skul:
of which is various in Authors, Galen Atributes seven thereto, and Sylvius
follows him: others hold 14. As Bauhinus, by adding the six bones, of each
ear, which are Parts of the rocky bone, and included in the Cavities of the
Ear, and add nothing at al to make the globe of the Scul. But more rightly
Paraeus ads fourteen bones to the Skul, but distinguishes them, into
containing, and contained, the containing are eight, the contained are the six
small bones, of the Ears. Hippocrates, Lib. de Oss. Constitutes the Skul o^
eight bones, and yet he seems to comprehend some bones of the Face, this number
the most excellent Anatomists follow; as Vesalius, Columbus, Fallopius, from
whom we will not dissent, because this number our Eyes can witness, in
Dissections.

The intervails, or connections of those bones; are called Suturae, which
Sutura what.
knit and unite the Bones together.

Of Sutura's, some are Proper, others common: They are Proper, which How
manysold. Proper are. Three true ones. 1. Coronalis. 2. Lamdoides. 3.
Sagittalis.
distinguish the bones of the Skul one from another: they are common, which
distinguish the bones of the Skul from those of the uper Jaw. The Proper are
divided into true, and fal^e: the true, are the Saw-like Conjunctions of the
bones intertexed, like the Teech of a Comb. They are held by Anatomists, to be
in number three. 1. T. 15. f. 3. aaa.
Coronalis is on the forepart of the Skul, which passes transversly from one
temple to the other. 2. opposite to this is, f 4. bb.
Lambdoides, placed in the hinder part of the Head. 3. f 3. bb. f 4. aa.
Sagittalis knits both these together, passing from the top of the Lambdois, by
the longitude of the Skul, and sometimes comes even to the top of the Nose. The
concourse of the sagittal and coronal suture, the Greeks call Bregma; commonly
it is called Fontanella, to which we apply causticks. Above the Ears, are to
Sutures not like others, and therefore they are called false, or Bastard; they
are called F 15. f. 3. cc.
Squamosae, from their scaly likeness, and join the bones of the Two false
ones. Common are three. 1. Frontalis. 2. Sphenoidea. 3. Ethmoidea.
Temples, to the bones of the top of the Head. Modern Anatomists hold the
common sutures to be three: The first is called T. 15. f. 3. Supra K.
Frontalis, beginning at the outward Angle of the Eye, and passing by the
middle of the Orbita, even to the Eye-brow, and keeps the same way by the other
Eye. The second is called T. 15. f. 5. aa. f. 6. oo.
Sphenoidea, which Circumscribes the Os-sphenois, beginning at the hinder part
of the Head, and ending at the furthermost Tooth of the upper Jaw. The third is
called f 4. AB.
Ethmoidea, and compasses about the Os Ethmois, on every side; it seems rather
to be Proper than Common, and belongs rather to Harmonia than Sutura.

The Sutures being well known, it is an easy matter to distinguish the bones The
Eight Bones of the Skul.
of the Skul; which are eight in number, and sometimes nine when the Sagittal
Suture passes to the Nostrels, and passes through the middle of the Frontal
bone; which is often seen in the Skuls of such as are grown up: al of them are
Proper, none common, unless the Sphenois, according to Galen.

1. The bone of the f. 3. D.
Forehead distinguished by the first, Common, and coronal Os Frontis.
Suture, which sometime is Cut into two part sby the Sagittal Suture is that
Eminent seat of the Eyebrows; it includes two Cavities derived into the
Nostrels.

The Second and third are called the bones of the f. 6. cc. f 3. d.
foot part of the Head, and Os Sintipitis.
are separated from one another by the sagittal Suture; below, by the Scaly
Suture; before by the coronal: behind by the Lambdois.

Under these are the bones of the f. 6. DD.
Temples, which on the uper part ar^ attenuated The Bones of the Temple.
like a Scale, but the inferior Part is hard, and rough, and called rocky;
therefore it is commonly divided into the Scaly, and Rocky Parts.

In the Rocky part are four Apophyses; l* f 6. EE. f 3. F.
Mastoides T. 15. f. 5. ^f.
Styloides and T. 20. f. 6. A. f 3. B.
Lygomatica; Its Apophyses.
and the fourth is placed in the basis of the Skul, and may be called f. 6. B.
C.
Auricularis; in little Children it is an Epiphysis, and may easily be pulled
off from the Rocky Bones.

In this last Apophysis, are the three Cavities of the Ear contained: The The
Cavities of the Ear. 1. passage of hearing. 2. Concha 3. Labyrinthus. 4.
C^clea. Os Occipitale.
first is external, and called the f. 7. ABC.
Passage of hearing, The second is called f. 6. B.
Concha, and contains the internal Air, and the three small bones called f. 9.
BB.
Malleolus Incus and Stapes, as also a hole passing into the Cavity of the
Mastois. The extremity of this Cavity is directly opposite to the Timpanum and
has two small holes; of which the greater is called the f. 6. C.
oval window and is the ingress into the third Cavity, which is called the f.
9. AA.
Labirinth, by reason of its various Circulations and turnings; the other hole
is narrower, and is the Passage to the fourth T. 15. f 4. C.
Cavity which is called f. 5. B. f. 6. F.
Cochlea, from its rough and wreathed Figure.

The sixth bone of the Skul is called f. 5. Supra inferius B.
Lambdoides and Occipitale, and is compassed about with the Suture Lambdois,
the Extremities of which, are called Horns by the Ancients; but by Galen,
Aditions to the Lambdois. To these are Causticks sometimes applied.

The seventh Bone is f. 5. aa. f. 6. G. H.
Sphenoides; in which we must consider the external, ^s-Spheneides.
and internal table: In the internal table, are three Apophyses, which are
called T. 15. f. 6. G. H.
Clinoides; between these is a Cavity i^terjected, which is T. 15. f. 5. B.
called Sella Its Apophyses.
Sphenoidis. The external Table has for Apophyses; of which, two resembling
the hollowness of a ship, are called T. 15. f. 5. CC.
Naviculares, by Galen they are called Pterigoides: the other pass under the
Zygomata, to the Temples, and are called Temporalls. Between the two Tables, or
Plates, is an empty ibid.
Cavity passable to the Nose by a double hole, and severed within by a Bridge in
the midst; this is always wanting when the bone of the Forehead is sollid.

The eight bone is called Ethmoides, or according to Galen Spongides; it Os
Ethmoides.
consists of seven different portions, The first is pierced thorugh like a T.
15. f. 6. I.
Sieve: from which, within the Skul, arises an Apophysis, which is the second
portion Tabula cribrosa. Crista galli.
of the bone, and is like a T. 15. f. 5. CC.
Cocks Comb; without the Nostrells, from the same Sieve-like Table, depends
that bony substance, which makes the f. 5. aa.
bridge between the Nostrels; and this is accounted the third portion of the
bone: To Septum Nas^. Two Spongy Bones.
this Bridge of the Nose, stick two Spongy bones, which make the fourth; and
fifth part of the Ethmoides: The sixth, and seventh p^ions of the Ethmoides, are
thin Scales, plain, and smooth, as broad as a man's Thumb; which make the
internal side of each Orbita, beside the great Canthus, and underneath they
cover three, and sometimes four cells, disposed from the great Canthus, even to
the lower-most Orbita.

In the basis of the Skul, both internally and externally, certain Cavities are
observed; of which some are called Sinus, others holes, others Fossa or pits;
of which, see Sylvius, who was the first that handled them Methodically: we
give them here Names according to their places, and Natures.

The Sinus are eight; two Maxillares in the uper Jaw, as many Frontals Eight
Sinus.
in the bone of the Forehead, so many Sphenoides in the bone Sphenois, and no
fewer Maisioides in the Apophyses of the Mastois.

Holes are internal, or external; Internal are twenty five commonly, sometimes
Holes internal. 27.
twenty seven; twelve or thirteen on each side, and one without a fellow; which
gives Egress to the Marrow of the Back. The first, is f. 5. aa.
Ethmcides; the the second, f. 5. bb.
Sphenoideus; the third, f. 5. cc.
Opticus; the sourth, f. 5. dd.
Scissura Orbitalis; the fifth, f. 5. ee.
Temporal, from the nerve of the third conjugation which passes to the
temporal muscle; the sixth, f. 5.
Gustativus; the seventh, Gustativus Secundus; the eight, f. 5. hh.
Cervical; the ninth, Caroticus; the tenth, f. 5. ibid.
Aridi^orium; the Eleventh, T. 15. oo.
Jugulare; the twelfth, f. 16. BB.
Motivum Linguae, or Linguosum; the thirteenth, and last, s Impar, or
Occipitale. The external External holes. 10.
holes are ten on each side, according to Silvius; to which I ad an eleventh,
to wit, the external hole of the Ear; besides, a^ the Root of the Stilois, in
the extremity of the auricular Apophysis, on the external part, is a hole
divided into two within, divided with a very thin Scale. Of the external holes
the first is called, Superciliare: the second Lacrimale, the third, Orbitarium
externum; the fourth, Orbitarium Ethmoideum; the fifth, above the palate; the
sixth in the extremity of the Pallat; the seventh, the cleft under the Zygoma;
the eight, and ninth, Supra Pterigoides; the tenth Mastodes; the eleventh, the
external hole of the Ear.

The pits are internal, and external: six are in the internal basis of the
Skul; Pi^s internal* External.
two frontals, two temporals, and two occipitals. The external are seven on
each side, to which I add an eight, to wit, the Cavity of the Nose: The first,
Orbitaria; the second, Nasalia; the third, Zygomatica, the fourth, above the
Pallat; the fifth, under the Pallat; the sixth, Pterigoidea; the seventh, in the
joynting of the inner jaw; the eight, in the hole of the sixth Conjugation.

Chap. 9. Of the uper Jaw.
THe other Parts of the Head, is called the Face; it comprehends both Jaws, The
Fa^e what
and is separated from the Skul, by the first common Suture.

The uper Jaw consists of many bones, about the number of How many Bones in the
uper Jaw.
which is some controversy amongst Anatomists; but passing by the vain and
foolish opinions of modern Authors, I admit only of Eleven, passing by those
portions of the Ethmoides, which ^ome Anatomists reckon for several Bones: for
those Bones only belong to the Jaw which are separated from the Bones of the
Skul; neither are portions of them, but some of those bones contained within
the Orbita, and form the Orbita of the Jaw; with other bones are portions of
the bones of the head, as the productions of the Sphenois, the broad portion of
the Ethmois; and therefore they are Childishly referred to the Jaw.

If any object, That they do belong to the Jaw, because they are beneath the
common Suture that divides the Skul from the Jaw; wherefore seeing they are
placed Beneath the said Suture, they may be attributed to the Jaw. But if the
Apophyses of the bones of the Skul, which stick out beyond the roundness of it,
be referred to the Face; by the same rule the Apophyses, called Pterigodes,
which stick out without the Globe, and r^t^ndity of the Skul, and are placed in
the Same plain with the Vomer, and the Angles which sustain the Jaw, are to be
reduced to the Jaw it self. And when Galen reckons the Os Sphenois amongst the
bones of the Jaw, he reckons it as a Supernumerary. And therefore we must
reckon but Eleven bones of the Jaw.

Five bones are placed on each side, and one without a fellow, which sustains
The first Bone of the Jaw.
the midst of the Pallat. The first, Galen Lib. de Oss. Calls T. 15. f3. E.
Melon: It may be called Zygomaticus, because it constitutes the greatest part
of the Zygoma, and a great part of the Orbita, and Angles of the Eye: now
Zygoma, is nothing else than a bony Semicircle made of two Apophyses, by the
oblique Suture; of which the one passes from the rocky bone; the other from
the bone of the Cheek. The Second is called f. 3. G.
Os unguis, or Ossiculum Lacrimale. The ^.
The third is called the f3. I.
greatest bone, and contains the middle part 3.
of the Teeth; and finisheth the inferior part of the Orbita, and the internal
part of the Nose. The fourth bone forms the f. 3. K.
Nose, and so the Nose is formed 4.
of four bones, two are Proper, which we mentioned last; and two common. Modern
Anatomists ad the bone called f. 6. j.
Vomer, which is placed under the Sphenois, and Palate, which was not unknown to
Hippocraces. It is like a Plow-share, and holds up the bridge of the Nose, to
which it is Joined by Sutura, or Harmonia.

Chap. 10. Of the Orbitary Bone.
THe orbitary bones, which Hippocrates Lib. de Ossibus calls Hypopia by The
Orbitary Bones of the Eye how many.
which the Eye holes are made, were first of al by Picolominus propounded to be
five; but he ignorantly pretermitted a portion of the maxillar bone, which
joined to the rest makes six, of which the hole of the Eye is made; but these
bones are not Proper, excepting the ungular, or Lacrymal bone, but partly
portions of the bones of the Skul, partly portions of the bones of the uper
Jaw. The first is the T. 15. f. 3. A.
Frontal bone, which makes the furnace of The error of Picolominus, touching
their number.
this vault. The second is a portion of the Sphenois, situated in the deep
external side of the Eye hole, even to the lesser corner. The third is T. 15.
f. 3. E.
Lygomaticum, which makes the lesser corner, and the middle pavement of the
Orbita, or Eye hole. The fourth is T. 15. f. 3. j.
Maxillare. The fist T. 15. f. 3. G.
Lacrimale. The sixth the Scaly table, of the os Ethmois which makes the other
side of the Orbita, and the greater Corner: these bones are to be discerned
within the Orbita, with their Proper and common Sutures.

Chap. 11. Of the inferior Jaw.
THe inferior Jaw in such as are grown up, is but one bone; in which is to Its
Parts. Basis.
be noted, its basis, and its extremities. Its basis is the middle part of it,
hollow within sticking out outwardly and is called the T. 15. f. 3. L.
Chin. The extremities are Angles, each extremity leads out two Apophyses, of
which one is Apophyses.
Sharp called T. 15. f. 3. M.
Corone, and receive the tendon of the temporal Muscle; the other is a f. 3. N.
Condyle, and may be called Articulatoria, because it serves for Articulation
of the Jaw. Below these Apophyses is a Singular f. 3. Infra M.
hole by which Veins, Arteries, and Nerves pass to the Teeth; one portion of
which passes back again, near the f. 3. L. l.
Chin; and is dispersed to the Muscles of the Lips.

Chap. 12. Of the Os Hyois:
THe Os Hyois may be refered to the bones of the Head, because it is fastened
Its parts.
by Nervous bones to the Apophyses of the Stylois. It is Compounded of five
small bones, of which that which is greatest and hollow is called the T. 13. f.
11. 12. A A.
basis, Basis.
they which ad a sixth and a seventh bone understand the Ligaments wherewith
this bone is tied which as they are usually Nervous, so in some they are
observed to be Cartilaginous. From the extreme parts of the greater and
Fundamental bone, one Cartilaginous T. 13. f. 11. 12. B B.
Horn, which is seldom bony, springs on the top, Horn.
on each side it is fastened to the Cartilage Tyrois, which two Horns are
usually numbered for the eight and ninth bones.

The Os Hyois is the foundation of the Larinx and Tongue and by the Judgment of
al Anatomasts receives the Tongue in its Cavity, but if a man may believe his
own Eror of Anatomists.
Eyes, they will show him that the Epiglottis only is received in its Cavity,
and that the Tongue rests on the uper side of its Basis.

Chap 13. Of the Teeth.
THe Teeth, are the instruments of Chewing the Meat, and forming the voice.
Their Nature
They are bones although they differ in Nature from other bones.

They consist of two parts, one of which sticks out without the Gum, and is
called Parts, Basis and Root.
the Basis. The other is hid within the Gum, and called the Root, the Root is
not sollid but hollow, and so hollow, that it receives a small Vein, a small
artery, and a small Nerve.

The Roots of the Teeth are various in number and disverse in figure. The Root
The number of the Roots of the Teeth.
of the Cutters is always simple and right, distinguished only with a small
cleft for their firmer sticking. Also the Roots of the Dog-teeth are simple.
The superior grinders have a threefold Root and Crooked, because they hang
downwards, in the inferior grinders they are double and sometimes treble.

The number of the Teeth is various in regard of Age. In Children from the The
number of the Teeth.
seventh Month even til they are two years Old and upwards; twenty of them
usually come out by degrees one after another, and before they are well toward
four years of Age, they have no more, afterward eight, or twelve others come
out: So that they have twenty eight, or thirty two in both Jaws.

This number is distinguished into three orders by reason of their Situation
and Their Orders.
bigness, the first four Teeth are called T. 15. f. 6. M.
Cutters. Those two which are next these, one on each side, are called T. 15.
f. 6. n.
Dog-teeth. The rest being eight, or ten, are called T. 15. f. 6. oo.
Grinders, They are placed in the Cavities of each Jaw, which Cavities are not
continual but divided into Cells, and their conjunction, or Articulation is
called Gomphosis.

Chap. 14. Of the Trunk, being the Second Part of the Sceleton.
THe Trunk comprehends the Backbone and such bones as are fastened thereunto.
Of what is consists.


It is compounded of the Backbone and the Chest.

The Backbone is a bony Channel which gives passage to the Marrow of the Back,
The Backbone what.
and is stretched even from the Head, to the Os Coccyx. It consists of very
many bones for its security and that it may not easily be hurt, as also that a
man may bow himself, for necessity of action, these bones the Greeks call
Spondils, and the latins Vertebrae.

In every Vertebra you may observe two parts of which the one is internal,
thick and Two parts of a Vertebra.
round, and is called the body: the other external with various Apophyses and
has no Name, the differences of the Apophyses are three, right, Oblique, and
transverse, Difference of the Apophyses.
the hindmost is sharp and is Properly called T. 2. f. 2. d.
Spina that which is f. 2. bb.
Lateral, and transverse is double, the f. 2. c c c c.
Oblique fourfold by which they are joined together by Ginglymos in which three
bones are required.

In the Oblique Apophyses two are above, and as many below; and therefore in all
the Vertebrae, are seven Apophyses found. The whole Rachis or Backbone, is
divided into four Parts. The Neck, Back, Loins and Os Sacrum: The Neck has
seven Vertebae, the Back twelve, the Loins five, the Os Sacrum is either one,
or threefold in such as are grown up; in Children it is divided into five or
six Parts: Wherefore the Backbone in such as are grown up, is composed of
twenty four Vertebrae; to which, if you add the Os Sacrum, which is a great
Vertebra, it makes twenty five or twenty seven. The crooked-streight Figure of
the Backbone, which is admirably described by Hippocrates in Lib. 3. de
Articulis, from verse 33. to 35. Cannot be noted in a Sceleton, though never so
exactly made; but in a The Vertebrae of the Neck,
Carcass the Flesh of the Back being taken away it may; in the Vertebrae often
lie Neck, this peculiar thing is to be noted, That all the transverse T. 13. f.
20. bb.
Apophyses are peirced through, that so they may give passage to the cervical
Veins and Arteries; they have Cavities in the extremities, through which the
Nerve being yet soft, is deduced: The f. 21. b.
hindermost Apophyses, are double, for the rise and insertion of Nerves; but
the two superiors have another structure and conformation, by reason of the
motion of the Head; for the first wants a f. 20.
Spina, and has a thick round Body; the second sends out a f. 21. ^.
Tooth like Apophysis. All the Vertebrae of the Neck are stricktly joined and
implicated lest they should slip a^under in the vehement Motions of the Neck.

The twelve T. 10. f. 3.
Vertebrae of the Back, are altogether one like the other: their Apophyses The
vertebrae of the Back.
are al sollid, and continual, without any hole or division. The twelfth, or
eleventh Vertebra, has a different Articulation from the rest; all the rest are
joined by Ginglymos; the eleventh, or twelfth, only by Arthrodia. And therefore
the whole Motion of the Backbone, bowing, extending, and Obliquation, is
performed by that Vertebra.

The five Vertebrae of the Loins, differ in Apophyses from those of the Back;
for The Vertebrae of the Loins.
the hinder Apophyses, or T. 2. f. 2. d.
Spinae, do not descend as they do in the Back, but are straight, and broad:
the T. 2. f. 1. aa.
transverse Apophyses are longer, and stand instead of Ribs.

Under the Loins is the T. 2. f. 5. 6.
Os Sacrum, which though it Seem one simple bone at the Os Sacrum.
first view, yet being boiled a long time in Oil, it is divided into five
parts, and sometimes into six.

To the extremity of the Os Sacrum, is another cartilaginous bone joined, which
Coccyx.
is divided into three, seldom into for Parts and is called T. 2. f. 5. bb. c.
Coccyx, the Crupperbone.

Chap. 15. Of the Chest.
THe Chest, together with the Backbone, make up the trunk of the The Breast
what.
Sceleton.

The Chest is a bony Circumference, which holds the vital Parts, and is
constituted It is fourfold.
of a fourfold kind of bones; the Sternum before the Ribs on each side, the
Claviculae at top, and the Backbone behind, to which the Ribs stick.

The T. 10. f. 2. A A.
Sternum or Brest-bone, in such as are grown up, is one only continued The
Sternum.
bone, distinguished by three or four transverse lines, which are but the
footsteps of the Ancient divi^ions; and these lines are more conspicuous on the
inside, than on the out. On the extremity of this bone, depends the Cartilage
or Gristles called The Cartilage called Swordlike. The Ribs.
f. 2. B.
Xyphoides, or the sword-like Cartilage; it represents a Shield in bruites.

The Ribs are twenty four, twelve on each side; of which, the seven uper most
are called f. 2. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.
True, because they are committed to the Sternum; the other five inferior are
called f. 2. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12.
Bastard, because they are never joined to the Breast Bone, but are joined in a
Cartilage, that they may the better give way to the swellings of the Liver and
Spleen, and yield to the Motions of the Diaphragma.

The f. 1. f. T. 21. f. 2. A.
Claviculae are two, one on each side; whose Figure represents an Italica
Clavicul^.
S. They retain the Scapula in its Proper seat that it fall not upon the Breast.

Chap. 16. Of the Limbs, being the Third Part of the Sceleton: and first, of
the Scapula.
SEeing the Scapula Omoplata, or shoulder blade, belongs nothing at al to the
constitution of the Breast, I separate it from the Trunk, and set it at the
beginning of the hands. In the Omoplata many Parts come to be noted for the
original Its Parts.
and Insertion of Muscles. A very Necessary Part of the Omoplata being
stretched to the Longitude of the Back, is called the T. 21. f. 2. hh.
Basis, the extremities of which are Basis. Angles.
called Angles; one is f. 2. f.
Superior, the other f. 2. g.
Inferior. The Basis is the sides of the Ribs; of which, the one is shorter and
thinner, which is called the f. 2. ab. f. ad. d.
Superior Rib; the other longer, and thicker which is called the f. 2. ag. ad.
^.
Inferior Rib. The whole Ribs.
Latitude of the Scapula is called the table; The ex^ernal Part of which, is
Gibbous; Process.
the internal hollow, that so it may receive the Muscle. The famous process or
Apophysis ascending upwards from the basis, is called f. 2. e.
Spina, the broad extremity of which, is called Acromium; which according to
Galen and Hippocrates, is a distinct bone, and Cartilaginous in Children; but
hard, and bony, in such as are grown up. Which after the twentieth year, and
something sooner is turned into an Apophysis of the Spina. The pits on each side
of the Spina are called Interscapulium; one pit is above it, the other below
it, but the middle prominence of the Spina Pit^.
which is bowed, is commonly called Pterygium or the crist. The other extremity
of the Scapula, which is great, subject to the Acromium, and opposite to the
Basis, is called the f. 2. c.
Neck; in it you shall note, that Apophyses called f. 2. d.
Coracoides, which was made for the security, and firmness of the Joint of the
Shoulder, the Cavity of the Neck, is called Glenoides.

Chap. 17. Of the Shoulder.
THe Arm hangs upon the Omoplata or Scapula, which is divided into three The
three Parts of the Hand. The Head of the Bones of the Shoulder.
Parts; the Shoulder, the Cubit and the Hand. In the Shoulder are two
extremities for the insertion of Muscles; the upermost is called the Head,
which a membranous Ligament, bred from the Cavity of the Glenois, compasses
about, besides the four Muscles which it involves: a little below this, the
Orbicular narrow place, is called the Neck: In the Head is a long Chink, by
which the Nervous The Neck.
Head of the Muscle Biceps arises. In the other extremity of the Arm, you may
observe the Trochlea, about which the Cubit is turned: About the Trochlea are
Troclea* Cavities. Apophyses
two f. 2. f.
Cavities, of which the external, is wider than the internal; in these are the
Coronal Apophyses of the Cubit received: with the Trochlea are two Apophyses,
which are called Condili the one inferior, and interior; the other superior,
and exterior.

Chap. 18. Of the Cubitus, and Radius.
THe second Part of the hand is called Cubitus, and consists of two bones; of
which the one which is superior and shorter, is called f. 2. E.
Radius; the other, which is Radius Cubitus why there are two bones.
inferior, and subject to the former, is called by the Name of the whole f. 2.
D.
Cubitus, and by some Vlna. Two bones are necessary in this Part of the Arm by
reason of their double and contrary Motions, which could not be performed by
one bone united by Ginglymus; for Ginglymus suffers only bowing and extending,
and in no wise invertion; which the Radius being joined by Arthrodia performs.
The Obliquation of the Radius cannot perfectly be discerned unless in a new
carcass, all the Muscles being taken away; for with great admiration you shall
see the Radius turned about, upward and downward, upon the Cubit, being unmoved
and also moved together with the Cubitus, when it is bowed and extended.

There is something worthy the noting in the extremity of the Cubitus: For in
the uper extremity, is the Cavity, called Sygmoides, which embraces the
Trochlea of Cavity. Apophyses.
the Arm; about this, are two Apophyses, called Corone; the lowermost is called
T. 21. f. 2. g.
Olecranum: In the inferior Part the Cubitus, is an Apophysis, which is called
f. 2. e. regione.
Styloides; the extremities of these bones alone, are joined together by that
Ginglymus, which consists of two Bones, passing into one another, in diverse,
and distant places.

Chap. 19. Of the Hand.
THe Hand is divided into three Parts Carpus, Metacarpus, and the Fingers.
Division.


f. 1. FF. f. 2. F.
Carpus consists of eight bones, distributed into two orders, which are joined
Carpus.
amongst themselves by Symphysis, by a kind of Harmonia; because the bones of
the Carpus are moved the one from the other, either obscurely, or not at al:
the first order makes Arthrodia Diarthrodis, with the inferior Cubit; the same
order is joined with the second order of the bones of the Wrist, or Carpus, by
Arthrodia; which second order is joined with the Metacarpus, by Arthrodia
Synarthrodis: So that this Motion, is either none at al, or insensible; but the
first order with the second is moved obscurely.

The T. 21. f. 1. GG. f. 2. G.
Metacarpus, succeeds the Carpus, and is framed of five bones, if we add
Metacarpus.
the first bone of the Thumb, which some reject, because it is Obliquely added
to the Metacarpus, and endewed with manifest Motion and contrary to the Nature
of other bones of the Metacarpus, which make Arthrodia with the Wrist, and
Enarthrosis with the Fingers; and yet the fourth bone of the Metacarpus, which
sustains the Ring Finger, has manifest Motion.

From the several bones of the Metacarpus, are several F. 8. f. 12. CDE.
Fingers stretched; only Fingers.
the Thumb excepted, the Fingers consist of three bones which are joined to one
another by Ginglymos; and therefore they admit only of bowing, and extending;
the oblique Motion of them depends upon the Enarthrosis of the first bone with
the Metacarpus.

Chap. 20. Of the Bones of the Ilium.
THe greatest and largest bones of the body, which being joined with the Os
Sacrum, sustain and erect the whole Trunk, are by the greatest Part called Ossa
Ilium: In such as are grown up, they are one bone* but in Children divided into
T. 8. f. 12. CDE.
three parts; which yet hold their ancient appellations, though the very
Footsteps Its Parts.
of them be obliterated by Age. The broader Part of the bone which frames the
latitude of it, and is stretched out to the middle of the funnnel; is called T.
2. f. 3. A.
Ilium; Ilium. Pubis. Ischium.
the other half, and superior Part, is called f. 3. C.
Pubis; the other inferior Part f. 3. BB.
Ischium: Of these three portions, is made that great hole called the T. 21. f.
4. B.
the Funnel.

In these bones some particular things are to be noted; for Anatomists call the
external Face of the Os Ilium, the Back; the superior internal Cavity, they call
the Belly; the extremity of which, is called the Reb; the brims of which, both
external, Back. Rib. Lips.
and internal, are called Lips, or Brows, so as one is external, the other
internal. The extremity of the Rib, which sticks out, and is joined to the Os
Sacrum, is called the hinder Spine. And the other T2. f. 4. aa.
extremity of the Rib toward the Funnel, Spines.
is called the foremost, upermost Spine. There is under this, another called
the former and nether Spine.

In the Os Pubis, a Spine is observed near the Spmphysis, by its top: In the
Ischium, a Spine, and a Bunch is noted; which Bunch is called Condylus.

Chap. 21. Of the ^Bone of the Thigh.
THe Feer, as well as the Hands, are divided into three Parts; the Thigh, Leg,
and Foot.

The Bone of the Thigh is but one, and the greatest in all the Body. In the
superior The Thigh Bone. Head. Neck. Apophyses.
excremity, the T. 21. f. 1. dd. f4. a.
Head is round, to which a slender part is added, called the Neck: from the
Neck are two Apophyses produced, to which, the Muscles called Rotatores, are
fastened; and therefore they are called Trochanters; the foremost is called the
lesser f. 1. gg. f4. c.
Trochanter; the upermost, on the side, the greater f. 1. ff. f. 4. b.
Trochanter. The other extremity of the Thigh, has two f. 1. hh. f. 4. ee.
Condyli: a f. 4. d.
Cavity being left between, which admits the f4. f.
middle, and eminents Apophysis of the Leg; and in like manner the Condyli are
received by the f. 1. hh. f4. ee.
Cavities of the Leg, by a loose f. 8. cc.
Ginglymus, the fore Part of which, is called the Knee, the hinder Part the
Ham: this Knee. Ham. Knee-pan
Articulation is strenghtned before, with a small bone, called the f. 1. LL. f.
8. d.
Knee-pan, which is Articulated to no bone.

Chap. 22. Of the Leg.
THe Leg is composed of two bones; of which, the greater, and internal, is Two
Bones of the Leg. Tibia. Fibula.
called f. 1. M. f. 4. D.
Tibia; The lesser, and external, f. i. M. f4. D.
Fibula. The Fibia is Articuluted by Ginglymos to the Thigh; the Fibula sticks
to the Tibia, and touches not the Thigh. The inferior, and bunchy Parts of
them both, are called Ancles; of which, the Fibia makes the f. 1. ii. f4. gg.
internal, and the Fibula, the f. 1. KK. f4. h.
external.

Chap. 23. Of the Foot.
THe Foot is divided into the Tarsus, Metatarsus, and Toes. The Tarsus
Division. Tarsus.
consists of seven Bones, which Ruffius Ephesius calls Ostracodea, by reason of
their hardness: The first Bone Articulated with the Tibia, is called
Astragalus, or f. 5. A.
Talus: The Bone under this, Pterna, or f. 5. B.
Calcaneum: The third joined to the Astragalus, Schaphoides: The fourth f. 5.
C.
Naviculare; to which is joined the inner, and foremost portion of the Heel,
which is called f. 5. D.
Cuboides; the other three have no Names, or Else are called f. 5. eee.
Calcoidea. The f. 4. g.
Metatarsus follows the Tarsus, and is formed of five Bones, and answers to the
Metacarpus of the Metatarsus. Toes.
Hand.

The Toes succeed the Metatarsus* coustituted of f. 4.
three Bones apiece, except the great Toe, which has only two Bones: small
Bones fill up and strengthen the internodes of the Fingers and Toes in such as
are grown up, which are uncertain in number, and called T. 21. f. 6.
Sesamoidea.

In the second Articulation of the great Toe, are two small Bones worth the
noting, and indifferent big, which are always found in all Carcasses, and two
at the original of the two Muscles of the Feet, mentioned by Vessalius, which
are but seldom found, and are to be numbered with the Sesamoidea.

Chap. 24. In what Particulars the Bones of Men differ from those of Women.
THe Bones of Men and Women, differ in some parts, which Platerus first noted,
Those which differ are.
and Bauhinus follows him; but by their leaves, they noted many differences
which are not found, and omitted some that are: we shall speak of them both
severally.

It is true, all the bones of Women, are less then those in Men, both in weight,
and In Substance. of the Bone.
thickness, as also in length. Galen adds they are not so hard, but faith, that
in all living Creatures, the Bones of the Females, are softer then those of the
Males; and Aristotle held so before him.

The bones of the Head, are altogether alik, having neither more, nor fewer
Sutures; The Bones of the Head.
although Aristotle thought otherwise; Namely, that Males had more Sutures then
Females, Chapter 7. Lib. 1. de hist. animal. and 7. Lib. 3. ejusd, operis, and
Chap. 7. Lib. 3. de part animal. Yet the T. 15. f. 3. bb.
Sagittal Suture, more often in Woman, passes to the Nase, dividing the f. 3.
A.
Bone of the Forehead in the middle.

It is fal^e that Aristotle held, Viz. That Males have more f. 6. mno.
Teeth, then Females, Teeth.
as is clear in Men, Sheep, Hogs, and Goats.

The T. 13. adf. 10.
Larinx (if it may be numbered amongst the Bones) is less in Women, and Larynx.
the Cartilage f. 8. A.
Thyroides, sticks out less.

The T. 10.
Breast in Women is depressed in the fore part, and sticks not out as it does
Breast.
in Men, for the more accommodation of the Dugs.

The T. 21. f. 1. R.
Claviculae in Women are not so crooked, for the more comeliness of their
Claviculae.
Neck and Breast.

The inferior Part of the T. 10. f. 2. AA.
Sternum, is broader then in Men, and many times has Sternum.
a manifest hole in it; and the lower Bone upon which the f. 2. B.
Sword-like Cartilige depends, is clest like a crescent Moon and makes a large
hole for the Egress of the Mammaria Interna.

It is false that the f. 2. CC.
Cartilages, which in men become bony about the forty or Cartilages of the Ribs.
fifty yearts of their Age, become bony in Women so soon as their Breasts grow;
Though it be true in Women when they are old.

In Women with great Breasts, Thorax is narrow, and almost poynted, by reason
of the weight of their Breasts.

That Part of the Back above the Loins, is no more bowed Backwards in Women,
then it is in Men. Back.


The T. 2 f. 5. and 6.
Os Sacrum is shorter, broader, and more bowed outward in Women, Os Sacrun.
then it is in Men.

The Os f. 5. and 6. b. c.
Coccyx, or Crupper Bone, is more movable, and not so strongly knit, Coccix.
and more bowed Backwards in Women; not according to the opinion of Galen, but
of Later writers. Galen: Lib. 1. de Semine.

The Buttocks of Women are broader and according to Aristotle, Lib. 4. de hist
animal. Women are stronger in their lower Parts, and therefore the Os f. 3. and
4. A.
Ilium Buttocks.
most commonly is larger, but that largness bends more outward; by which means
the Ossa Ilium are more hollowed outwardly. Os Ilium.


Upon this largness of the Bones, the Womb when it is great with Child leans as
it were, upon Pillows, and sits as it were in a Saddle. Elegantly said Galen
Lib. 14. deusu Partium, when he called the concourse of these Bones with the Os
Sacrum, THE GREAT BONY VAULT or Arch. The oval hole is Smaller in Women that
the portion of the Os Pubis, near the Symphysis, may be larger; but Os Pubis.
the Spina of the Os Pubis is turned outward.

The inferior, or tuberous Parts, of the f. 3. 4. b.
Os Ischium, it fitted with a double Os Isehium.
Cartilage, thicker softer; and this commissure is perfected by a short line,
that in the travail, it being softened and loosed, the Bones of the Pubis may
part.

The space between the Os Sacrum, Ilium, and f. 3. 4. C.
Pubis, where they are joined together, is sarger in Women then in Men, least
the narrowness of the Passage should hinder the coming out of the Child. The
rest of the structure of Bones in Women, is like those in Men.

Chap. 25. Of the number of the Bones in a Man's Body.
THe number of the Bones of man's Body amongst Anatomists is uncertain Vesalius
held 307. Galen 242. But in the Sceleton of a perfect man, there are two
hundred and fifty six necessary Bones for the structure of it; which are thus
numbered. Of the Skul, eight; of the upper Jaw, eleven; of the nether Jaw, one;
of the Os Hyois, three; Teeth, thirty two; Backbone, twenty four; Os Sacrum,
three; Coccyx, three; Claviculae, two; Ribs, twenty four; of the Sternum,
three; of each Hand, divided into four Parts, sixty two; Omoplata, two; Arms,
two; Cubits, four; both Wrists, sixteen; both Metacarpus, eight; of all the
Fingers, thirty; of each Foot, divided into four parts, sixty two; Namely the
Bones of the Ilium, two; Thigh, two; Legs, four; Kneepans, two; Tarsus,
fourteen; Metatarsus, ten; Toes, twenty eight.

Besides these Bones, where of the Sceleton is made, there are eighteen other
manifest small Bones, In each great Toe four, Sesamoida; in the Head of the
Muscles, called Gemeli, on each side, four. The rest of the Sesamoida are so
small that they consum or vanish away in boiling the Bones to make a Sceleton.

There is in each Ear three small Bones, which ought to be kept apart with the
Sesamoida; neither come they into the structure of the Sceleton. So that if you
add the first number to the second, you shall find two hundred and fifty six
Bones.

Chap. 26. The History of an Infants Bones, till the Age of seven years.
SEeing the Bones of Infants, from their Birth til seven years of Age, differ
much from the Bones of such as are grown up, both in number, and figure, and
especially in the Multitude of Epiphyses, and desectof Apophyses, therefore I
thought it well worth the while, to ad the Bones of Infants, to the Bones of men
grown up, that the difference between them may apear more evidently, for this
comparison makes much to take away the differences amongst Anatomists; and to
unty the difficult knots, you shall find in Galens Doctrine of the Bones.

That this Osteology, was known to Galen, is manifest by various places in him;
in which he declares the Bones of Infants, in his Book of the formation of the
Child Is Ancient.
in the Womb, he describes the Head of the Infant, In the first book De semine,
he treats of the Teeth of Infants, but before Galen, Hippocrates, was a
diligent studier and observer of this Osteology; as his divine monuments of the
Nature of Children, and of their breeding Teeth witness.

And the profit of this Doctrine is very great: not only in the education of
Children, And profitable.
which are marred, by the unskilfulness either of the Midwife, or Nurse. We see
diverse Children at this day Borne, with great Heads, Bunches, Bow-Legs, great
Ancles, Unseemly knees, and at last are Lame when they begin to go, which
deformities in the beginning of their Age, whilst their Bones are soft, may be
amended, and how can a man amend them rightly, unless he know the Bones at that
time exactly?

Excellently said Galen, in Lib. de causis Morborum Chap. 7. When he describes
the deformities of Bones, which are in Children. The Natural figure, (says he)
of the members, and of the whole Body, is changed either in the Womb, or at the
Birth, or after the Birth; It is depraved in the Womb when the formation is
vitiated, by reason of abounding, or unfit matter, It is depraved in the Birth,
when the Midwife takes it not righly, or binds it not up rightly, being born,
after the birth the Nurse, in taking of it up laying it down, or carrying of
it, or washing of it, or binding it up; in all these the Nature of every member
is easily turned out of its course, and corrupted. These also happen in unfit
Motions, whilst it is set to stand or walk, before its time, or exposed to
vehement Motions. For unseasonable, and vehement motions weaken the Limbs, and
the Legs, are turned inwards or outward by the weight of the Body; and those
Limbs which should be straight are made crooked, the Parts of the breast are
usually inverted by Nurses, by binding them too bard, in their first education;
this we see almost continually in Virgins, whilst Nurses study to increase
those parts, which are about the Hips and Bowels that, they may exceed the
bigness of the Breast, they bind the Parts about the Breast so vehement heard,
that the breast becomes sharp, and they look as though they were broken backed;
and sometimes are crook Shouldred.

You see by Galen, what miseries and deformities little Children are subject
too; by reason of ill forming the Bones, which may be corrected whilst they are
Young, and Flexible, and brought into what form you will.

Hippocrates Lib. de Septimestri Partu, gives the reason, why Children are Born
Blind, Lame, or other wile ill formed* The Women that go with such Children are
ill, or like to miscarry, in the eight month, for the maimed Embrion was
greavous Sick, in the eight month; and the Disease, Caused, Impostumation, as
it does in men, but when the Embrion is main sick, at any other time it rather
dies then suffers Apostumation: Hitherto Hippocrates, and Aristotle writes
Sect. 10. Probl. 40. That Children may be hurt in the Womb, because their Legs
are so tender.

The greather Bones of Infants are hollow, and the Marrow Bloody. After six The
Marrow of the Bones Bloody.
Months, the Marrow waxes white, they have a Periostion, and a Cartilage at
the ends, the extremities of the Bones, are Epiphyses, some few Apophyses they
have, but a great number of Epiphyses, that according to Ingrassias they amount
to, three hundred twenty one. But I think it is no such matter, neither indeed,
have I yet been very sollicitus about, the counting of the number.

I never observed any Bone, of any bigness or length; which ended not in an
Their Epiphyses. How they wax hard.
Epiphyses; now all the Epiphyses of Infants are Cartilaginous, and grow hard
and are turned into Bones by degrees: Their hardness begins not at the Bone, to
which they are joined, but they take their bony substance first at the Center
beginning at the internal part and increasing by degrees to the external. Or
from the Center to the circumference, outwardly they grow dry and hard by heat
which is stirred up by Motion and rubbing the Joints one against another in
walking.

Chap. 27. Of the Head.
THe Sutures of the Head seem to be rather Harmonioe, distinguished by a The
Sutures
Line, and not joined together like Teeth of a Saw by mutual ingress. The
joynings of the Skul are loose, so loose that they suffer the Dura Matter to
pass Sagittal.
out for the forming of the Pericranium. The Sagittal Suture always passes to
the extremities of the Nostrils, but very seldom descends by the hinder part of
the Head to the hole of the Marrow of the Back. The coronal Suture has a
membranous gaping at which place the pulsation of the Brain may be both seen
and felt, this place is vulgarly called T. 15. f. 4. C.
Fontanella Coronal. Fontanella.


The temperal Bone seeing it is framed of two parts scaly and rocky, the parts
of it are distinguished by Harmonia, which is not disanulled above the hole of
the Ear, but beyond it, about the Apophysis Mastois.

The Bones of the Skul are very thin, neither shall you find the two tables or
plates Bones of the Skul. Their thickness.
in them, before one year be Elapsed, between the Bones is some disparity
because the Bones of the hinder Part of the Head are the thinnest, contrary to
what they are in such as are grown up, at the concourse of the sagittal and
coronal Suture is a cleft called Rhomboides, which a thick and hard membrane
shuts and grows bony in process of time.

The T. 8. f. 4. A A.
Frontal bone is always two without any sinuous Cavity, the bone of the Of the
Forehead.
hinder Part of the Head in Children new born; most commonly consists of four
bones even til they are a year Old. The first is the whole and superior breadth
of the bone which compasses and embraces the Cerebellum, this is rarely
divided, and yet there is a certain cleft in the top, caused by the sagittal
Suture produced thither. The Second and third portion make the sides of the
hole of the Marrow of the Back, and the middle part of the Circle. The fourth
bone is placed in the extremity of this, and makes a portion of the great hole,
this as yet I never observed. A transverse Line intersects the circle as though
it were two. The Bones of c Bregma, at Bregma.
the concourses of the sagittal and coronal Suture, are imperfect by reason of
the Fontanella.

The Bones of the Temples are manifestly separated into two Parts, scaly and
Bones of the Temples.
rocky, neither the Epiphysis called Stylois not the Apophysis called Mastois
appear in it, only the Zygomatica is seen, but that part of the rocky Bone
subject to the hole of the Ear, makes the basis of the Skul, it is called next
to the Sphenois and next to the Lithois by some, but may be called Auricularis,
because it comprehends the whole structure of the Ear, in Children it is an
Epiphysis which easily is severed, and this is often observed in the Sculs of
bruit Beasts that are grown up, Passage of the Ear.
in which not with standing it is other wise framed.

In this auricular Epiphyses many things come to view, the passage of hearing
is altogether Cartilaginous, about the fifth or sixth month it begins to be bony,
and yet it may be separated even to the seventh month, but in the basis it is
hollowest; even to the third year and longer.

But proceeding inwards to the extremity of this passage their is a bony f. 4.
B B.
circle to Bony Circle.
which the Timpanum is fastened, this also is easily severed, but when the
passag of hearing grows hard, the bony circle is so strongly knit to it, that
it is inseparable. The T. 8. f. 5.
Cavities are very straight, neither can the admirable structure of the
Labyrinth be perceived in Boys, and yet that which is wonderful the three
little Bones of the Ear f. 7. and 8.
Malleolus f. 6. A.
Incus and f. 6. A.
Stapes, are of the same substance, bigness and form, even from the birth to
extrame Old Age.

The Os Sphenois is divided into four Parts according to Fallopius of which the
Os Sphenois.
process called Pterigoides, constitute two; the seat which receives the
Glandula Pituitaria, a third; The fourth part is subservient to the optic
Nerves, which portions grow together, not long after the Nativity: but
Fallopius very ill decribed these portions of the Sphenois; for the third
comprehends the seat, or Saddle, and also is subservient to the optic Nerves:
The fourth is streched out below the Saddle, even to the Corone of the hinder
part of the Head, and that division remains Conspicuous, even til three or four
years be passed. In this Bone, are no winding Cavities; and the Os Ethmois, is
totally Cartilaginous; the bridge of the Nose is bony at first, but grows hard
along time after the other parts.

In the Eye-hole of such as are grown up, are six bones noted, Zygomaticum, The
Bones of the Eye-holes.
Sphenoides, Frontal, Ethmoides, Lacrymal, and Maxillare: The portion of which
makes the pavement in Children, and is severed with a kind of Suture, which
remains even till three or four years of Age.

The Lines, or Harmoniae of the upper Jaw, are like those, in such as are grown
Upper Jaw.
up, a certain cleft only apears in the brim of the Inferior Orbita. In the
beginning of the Pallat is a transverse line espied, which is stretched from
one of the Teeth, called Cutters, to the other; and comprehends the four
Cutters. As for the bones they are like the bones of such as are grown up, both
in figure, number, and Situation. The Jaw Bone is not hollow, and the cells of
the Teeth are covered, and as it were stopped up with a membrane.

The f. T. 8. f. 6. C.
Inferior Jaw in the midst, where the Chin is, is divided by Harmonia, and
Inferior Jaw.
so consists of two parts, so continuing til two years be past.

The Teeth are engendered in the Womb, when the rest of the parts are engendered;
Teeth.
but within the holes of the Jaws: they are in number twenty, ten in each Jaw;
of which, are four Cutters, two Dog Teeth, and six Grinders, they al want Roots.

They begin to pass out of the Gums about the seventh Month, sometimes sooner if
the Nurses Milk be very hot. Some few have Teeth when they are borne as, Cneus
Papyrius Carbo and M. Curtius.

They do not break out altogether, but by degrees, in two years space; and the
At what time they apear.
upper Teeth usually, come out sooner then the lower: first of all the Cutters,
afterward two Grinders, then the Dog Teeth; the breeding of which, is most
painful to Children.

When Children have twenty Teeth, then they usually say, they have al their
Teeth; neither indeed have they more, before they are three or four years of
Age.

But when Anatomists say, that there is only twenty Teeth contained in the
Gums, They do not tell you where the other Eight or twelve reside; neither does
Where the hinder Teethly.
it seem like a truth, that new Teeth should be bred after the other are
formed, and lie hid in the Gums. In the upper Jaw I have observed the other
four, or six, hid under the Zygoma; but those of the lower Jaw under the
extremity of the same, where they lie hid like points. Under the coronal
Apophyses, because the space of each, seems at the Narrowest, to comprehend
twenty eight, or thirty two Teeth.

Neither do these eight or twelve Teeth break out before the Jaws are made
larger, When they break out.
which hapen about the fourth year of the Age: but contrary to the Nature of
other Teeth, they continue as long as life continues: neither do they come out,
as the other twenty teeth do; neither being plucked out, do they grow again.

Their generation is twofold; one in the Womb, the other without the Womb;
Their generation.
for in the Womb the Teeth are formed with the other parts, but are imperfect.
Within each hole, is contained a Mucous, and hardish substance, concluded in a
little white Membrane, which grows dry, and take a bony Nature by degrees, and
to get out pierces the Gum with its top; the Membrane compasses the hole
round, and like Glue retains the Tooth: The other portion, namely, the Root of
the Tooth, remains still within the hole, being soft and Mucous, as the
Feathers of Birds are; but it grows hard by degrees, and is parted in the
middle, into three or, four Rots.

Under these Teeth, in every hole, is subjected the Seminal matter of another
Tooth, a Membrane passing between them; which whilst it is fermented by the
formative faculty, and growing up, it expels the former. This second matter
thus included with a membrane, has deceived many Anatomists, which thought the
Teeth consisted of two Parts; and that other Part of the Tooth, was an
Epiphysis of the Root: therefore Vesalius, and Columbus, held the Teeth in
Children, ought not to be pulled out by the Roots, but transversly to be broken
off, as thinking that a new Tooth grew up from the same Root, which could never
be, if the former were pulled up by the Root. But Celsus in my Judgment wrote
more truly, that there was a new Tooth in Children, which did expel the former,
and sometimes grew out besides it, either above, or below it.

The middle part of the Hyois, being the basis of the whole bone, is
Cartilaginous, Hyois.
but soon becomes bony; and yet the sides remain Cartilaginous a good time. b
T. 8. f. 4. G.
k T. 8. f. 4. D.


Chap. 28. Of the Back and Breast-bones.
THe Backbone consists of twenty four Vertebrae, the Os Sacrum excepted! all The Vertebrae
of them for one years space, are divided into T. 8. f. 9. A B C.
three parts, the two first of the Neck excepted: the first part constitutes
the Body; the other two make the sides of the hole, neither do they send out
any process. Fallopius has seen the first Fallopius his Observation.
Vertebra of Children constituted of five parts; but the rest, of three only.
The first part was where it was joined with the Tooth of the second. Vertebra,
called Pyrenois; the second, and third parts, were on the sides, in which both
the superior, and inferior Cavities of the Joints were; the fourth, and fifth
parts perfected the rest of the hole. The second Vertebra of the Neck, besides
the three parts common with the rest, has a fourth eminent Epiphysis, called
Pyrenois or the Tooth.

In all the Vertebrae, the hinder part is f. 11.
Acute, and altogether Cartilaginous, and then grows bony, and like an Appendix
is joined to the other parts. The transverse processes, are also Cartilaginous,
but soon acquire a bony Nature.

The Os Sacrum consists of f. 12. B.
five Vertebrae, with Cartilages between: So as they Os Sacrum.
may easily be discerned the one from the other: the hinder sharpness is
totally Cartilaginous.

All the Vertebrae consist of three parts, as all the Spines of the Vertebrae.
The Os Coccix is altogether Cartilaginous, and undivided; Age divides it into
three Os Coccix.
or four parts, which remain Cartilaginous til seven years be expired.

The extremities of the Ribs that are f. 10. 11. A.
joynted to the Back, are altogether Cartilaginous, Ribs Sternum.
yet they soon grow hard: the Sternum of Infants, is at first. Cartilaginous,
and yet divided by no line, and yet the Superior are Sooner bony, then the
inferior, and the middle parts of them before the extremities, whence it comes
to pass that the bony part is compased about with a Cartilage one each side,
and resembles so many bony Knots in a board.

So soon as the Child is born, the inferrior part of the Sternum is
Cartilaginous, and has no division; then it grows bony, as I showed you
before; at last it is cut into six particulars, by a transverse line drawn from
the Cartilages of the Ribs, to which you must number that which is by the
Sword-like Cartilage.

Fallopius in his Observations, notes eight bones in the Sternum of Children*
which Falopius his Observations.
afterward are brought to seven, the two last being reduced into one:
afterward they are brought to fewer, six only apearing by that time the Child
is seven years of Age; and though Fallopius think six always remain, yet I
have always observed fewer.

Fallopius thus describes the Union of the bones. After seven years the bones
of the Sternum are joined together and become fewer by degrees, so that six
only apear, one bone being made of the fourth and fifth and another of the sixth
and seventh. Besides this Union increasing, there are only four found, the
third fourth fifth sixth and seventh growing together. Of the Sternum of
Infants Read Sylvius, com. ad chapter 2. Lib. Gal. de Ossibus.

Chap. 29. Of the upper Limbs.
IN the Omoplata both Apophyses, and Epiphyses, are Cartilaginous, also Scapula.
the Neck with the Cartilage Glenois are of the same Nature. The eminence
called Coracoides is an Epiphysis, yet the bone Acromium does not seem
separated but it is an Apophysis incru^^ed and terminated with much Cartilage,
which is dried after three or four years, and changed into a bony Epiphyses.
called Acromium, as it is, described by Hypocraetes and Galen, at last that
Epiphysis is turned into an Apophysis.

T. 8. f. 13. a b.
The appendices of the shoulders in each extremity are Cartilaginous, and grow
hard by degrees. Also the Trochlea is Cartilaginous, but is sooner turned into
bone then the superior parts: the superior part of the Cubit called Olecramen,
is an Epiphysis and after one years time grows hard and is joined to the bone.

The T. 8. f. 13. c.
bones of the Wrist when the Child is born: are composed of one Cartilage,
Wrist.
afterward they grow bony and are distinguished from one another. But first
they are spongy as the rest of the bones are, which from Cartilages become
bones. The eight bone of the Wrist, turns bony last of al.

The extremities of the f. 13. d.
bones of the Metacarpus and Wrist are Cartilaginous, Metacarpus and Fingers.
which are hardened within less then a year.

Chap. 30. Of the Inferior Limbs.
THe Ilium in Children is composed, of three bones even til they are seven
years Ilium.
of Age, to which the Ancients gave proper Names. T. 8. f. 12. C C.
The first bone comprehends that widness which passes to the midst of the
Funnel, the other part is equally divided into two parts, a line being drawn by
that Cleft of the Funnel Cross the Oval hole, and makes the Symphysis of the Os
Pubis, the superior Part of this division is called T. 8. f. 12. D D.
Os Pubis, the inferior f. 12. E E.
Os Ischium, the Lips of which are Pubis. Ischium.
Cartilaginous.

f. 14. a. b.
The Thigh on the superior part sends out three appendices; a Head, and two
Thigh.
Trochanters which remain Cartilaginous Epiphyses, a good time, the inferior
part of the Thigh has two knobs, the appendix in Cartilaginous.

The Knee-pan at first is totally Cartilaginous; and is a long time ere it grow
Patella.
bony.

The bones of the Tibia and Fibula, differ nothing from those that are grown up
Tibia. Fibula.
save only in their appendices, both above and below, which are Cartilaginous,
then grow hard, and remain separated even to the tenth year and upwards.

In the Foot all the bones of the f. 14. c.
Tarsus are Cartilaginous for some months, the Tarsus.
bone of the Heel excepted which is Bony within, though covered with
Cartilages, without.

The Sesamoides remain Cartilaginous almost to consistent Age, two only
excepted, Sesamoides.
which are in the first Joint of the great Toe, for these grow bony presently
after the Birth,

Chap. 31. Of the Number of Bones.
INgrassias, Propounds a fourfold number of the bones of Infants, the first
contains The Number.
two hundred thirty seven. The second three hundred forty five. The third two
hundred fifty nine. The fourth one hundred ninety two. But this last Number I
doubt is devised, or else I do not understand what Ingrassias means.

These Numbers he thus composeth.

In such Children as are grown up are found three hundred five bones, in the
Head seventy, to wit, eight in the Skul, twelve of the upper Jaw, one of the
lower Jaw, six of the Ears, thirty two Teeth, eleven small bones of the Os
Hyois, which al joined together make seventy. The Trunk comprehends sixty
seven, Vertebrae twenty four, Scapulae two, Ingulae two, Sternum three, Ilium
two. These joined together make sixty seven. But if the Os Sacrum consist of
five and the Coccyx of three, (as often it does) then there will be only sixty
six. In both hands, eighty four, (adding the twenty four Sesamoides) in both
Feet eighty four, the twenty four Sesamoides being also added, the total Number
of bones will be three hundred and five; form this Number if you take away
thirty two Teeth which does not appear in Infants, the result is two hundred
seventy three, although the Teeth being formed lie hid in the Gums, yet because
there is no use of them, they are not reckoned amongst the bones.

In reckoning the second Number he proceeds thus, the Vertebrae of the
Backbone and Os Sacrum in Infants are divided into three Parts, the second
excepted which is divided into four by reason of the Teeth, the Ilium is
divided into three bones the Sternum into eight, the inferior Jaw of two, and
the Frontal bone is double.

These diligently considered you should find amount to seventy two, which added
to two hundred seventy three make three hundred forty five, from which if you
take away the bones which deserve rather the Names of Cartilages than bones, as
the bones of the Wrist sixteen, of the Instep eight, of the Coccyx four,
Sesamoides forty eight; each Knee-pan and Hyois eight (the three small bones
remaining) which are in number eighty six, there remains two hundred fifty
nine. In these Numbers the three hundred fitty one Appendices are not Numbered
which if you ad to three hunded forty five, the Body of the Infant will be
composed of six hundred seventy Bones.

The End of the First Book:
THE SECOND BOOK OF ANATOMY AND PHYSIC, OF John Riolanus.
Chap. 1. General Precepts, which he that would be an Anatomist, must be first
Acquainted with.
SEeing that according to Aristotle Chap. 1. Lib. 1. post. Analyt. Every
Doctrine and discipline which consists in reason and intelligence, is perfected
by fore-knowledg, and Tullius Lib. 1. de not. Deorum, says that without
fore-knowledg, neither any thing can be understood nor studied, nor disputed.
Before I set about my Anatomical work I thought good to premise certain general
Precepts, which are the foundations of Anatomy, and will give great light to our
proceeding.

The Body of man is considered by Anatomists as composed of many How Anatomists
Consider the Body of Man.
Parts, which they examine Limb by Limb, and by a diligent Dissection, they
divide the whole Body, into its smallest Parts. They divide it first into three
grand Parts, Containing, Contained, and Impelling; that is into the Parts,
humors, and Spirits. But in the Anatomical dissection of a dead Body, the
Humors Its Parts.
and Spirits, are not considered, the Speculation of which belongs to
Physiology, only the Sollid Parts are regarded, which are either such as make,
or such Sollid Parts how many fold.
as contain Humors and Spirits or the instruments of Motion, which is the Chief
Action of a living Creature, for which it was made. The sollid Parts are
similar or dissimilar. They are called similar Parts because they are most
simple, from Similar Parts what how many.
which, as from a principle, the dissimilar Parts are composed. The similar
Parts according to Anatomists are Bones, Cartilages, Ligaments, Membranes,
Fibers, Veins, Arteries, Nerves, Flesh, Fat. These are found almost in all
Compound and dissimilar Parts, and the Corpulency of the Parts is formed of
them. The Hairs, and Naills are excrements of the external Parts: Therefore an
Anatomist ought to be well instructed what these similar Parts are, that when he
searches out the structure of the organical parts, Limb by Limb, he may know
the Fundamentals of this structure.

1. A bone is a part of the Body, most cold and dry, Terrestial; and therefore
1. A Bone.
hardest, that so it may prop up the other parts of the body.

2. A Cartilage, or Gristle, is not so hard as a bone, which in Old Men
sometimes 2. A Cartilage.
degenerates into a bone: The Cartilages are placed about the extremities of
the bone, to ease them in their Motion; some are found separated from the
bones, as the Cartilages of the inferior Jaw, in the Articulation of the
Claviculae, in the Sternum, in the Articulation of the Tibia to the Thigh;
besides the Cartilages of the Larinx, Windpipe, and such as are placed to prop
up other soft Parts, as the Nostrels, and Ears.

3. A Ligament, or bond, is a part which binds the bones together, being of a
3. Ligament.
middle substance, between a Cartilage, and a Membrane; softer than a
Cartilage, harder than a Membrane.

4. A Membrane, Skin, or Coat, is very soft, and subject to dilation. It is the
4. Membrane.
covering of other parts, or the Receptacle of something; as the Stomach,
Bladder of Gal: I^ being a hollow body, it receiving something, it may be called
Tunica, a Coat; If it Embrace and cover a sollid body, it is propperly called
Membrana.

5. A Fibrae is like a thread stretched over a Membrane, or Interwoven
therewith, 5. Fibra.
to strengthen it: and because of its various Situation, it is called Right,
Oblique, and Transverse; not only to help the Membrane, but also to strenghten
it. Every sort of Fibers, is thought to perform a several action; as the Right,
to draw to; the Transverse, to retain; and the Oblique, to expel. Which Motions
notwithstanding, absolutely depend upon the inbred faculty of the Part; which
as it has a violent dilation, so has it a willing, and Natural contraction,
and is helped in these by the Fibers.

6. A vein, is a Membranous Vessel, round and hollow, allotted to contain 6. A
Vein.
Blood, and distribute it for the Nourishment of the whole Body.

7. An Artery is a Membranous Channel of the same Nature, but something 7.
Artery.
harder, and thicker; ordained for the containing and Distributing of the
Arterious blood: The original of both which, Aristotle thought was from the
heart; but wiser Physicians, hold the beginning of the Veins to be in the
liver; but of the Arteries in the heart.

8. A Nerve is a Channel made to carry animal Spirit; and because this spirit
is 8. Nerve.
most subtle, therefore the Cavity is so small, that it is not discernable.

9. The Flesh is the foundation of organical, and dissimilary Parts, where bone
9. Flesh.
is wanting, and makes up the chief Part of our bulk. The flesh is in
substance, soft and thick; made of blood alone, compacted together, and well
concocted, if it be red; but of blood, and Seed, if it be white.

A fourfold sort of flesh, is observed in the Parts; Viscerous, and Musculous,
both of them very red; Membranous, and Glandulous, both of them white. For
every substance of the bowels is called Flesh, or Parenchyma. The thicker
substance of certain Membranes, which are the containers of something, which by
dilating and contracting their bodies, they attract, retain, and expel, are
also called Flesh, or a Flesh-like substance. The thick, and spongy substance
of the Glandulae, is called Flesh; but especially the substance of the Muscles
deserves the Name of Flesh.

10. The Fat although it appear not til the whole body be formed, and when the
10. Fat.
Child is big, and grows to the Parts; yet because in the composition of
organical Parts, it often concurs to make up the bulk, it is Numbered amongst
the similar Parts. Fat is the thinnest substance of blood, Fat, and Oily,
sweating out through the tender Coats of the Veins, and hardening between the
Membranes: It is twofold, according to Aristotle; Soft, and external; Hard and
internal. The one is Grease, The other Suet.

These three similar Parts; Bones, Cartilages, and Ligaments, shall be treated
of, as they are showed in a Carcass, from top to Toe, after we have showed the
Muscles; because they are so joined together, that one cannot be showed without
another.

But I desire al such as are studious in Physic, first to be well acquainted in
the Osteology or History of the dry bones in the Skeleton of a Man, before they
come to the inspection of a Carcass; for so they will the better understand the
whole anatomical discourse of the dissection, and find out the reason of my
other Osteology in the bones of Carcasses.

The Rest of the similar Parts shall be showed severally in the explication of
the dissimilar Parts, seeing of the similary Parts aforesaid, viz. Bones,
Cartilages, Ligaments, Membranes, Fibers, Veins, Arteries, Nerves, Flesh and
Fat, the Bulk, or Material substance of the dissimilar Parts, is made up, and
therefore you shall hear similary Parts often mentioned, in the explication of
them; howbeit, in some places they exist apart, no ways joined, or united unto
others, to constitute an Organ; but are considered with reference to their
Particular uses.

But they concur together, and are united one with another, in organical Parts,
Organical Parts, what?
that they may perform their various Offices: for the effect of which, they are
divided into four orders: For in every Organ there is the principal Part by
which the Action is performed: Another, without which the Action cannot be
done: A third, by which the action is preserved. But in every Organ, the
principal Part ought to be similar and proper to it, such as is not found in
another Organ. But this similar Part cannot perform its action alone, unless it
be helped by others; and therefore the concourse and Union of similary Parts is
necessary. Wherefore, every Movable action, belongs truly, and poperly to an
Organical Part; and none unless it be alteration, belongs to a similar Part;
which out of the composition of the Organical, has only use, which
notwithstanding, it contributes to perfect the action of the Organical.

More over, organical Parts according to the dignity of their action, are
divided How many.
into Principal, and Administering. They are called principal, which supply the
whole body with matter and faculty: Physicians hold them to be three; the Liver,
Heart, and Brain: Aristotle held but one principal Part of the body, viz. The
Heart, which is King and Ruler of al others. The rest of the Parts Minister,
and are subservient to the principal. According to the various composition of
the Organical they are divided into compound, more compound, and most compound:
For the Finger is compound; the Hand, or Foot, more compound; the Limbs, are
most compound.

But that we may seek out the structure of eath Part exactly; we must observe
What is to be observed in each Part.
the Name, Substance, Temperature, Original, Situation, Quantity, Number,
Figure, Color, Connection, Communion, Action, and Use. Connection differs from
communion; for Connection is the sticking of one Part to anther, of one or more
Parts by which they depend; it is sometimes taken for the Original of the part
it self, and yet the Original of some Parts is distinguished from Connection:
But communion is either universal, with Parts remote and near, which is done by
Veins, Arteries, and Nerves, by intervening of which, all the Parts have
community with one another; or Particular, when some Particular Part
communitates its self to some near, or remote Parts, and so the Gal
communicates it self by the Biliar passages to the Liver, and the Gut Duodenum:
The Reins, and Bladder have communion by the Vreters. In this Method you may
comprehend whatsoever may be spoken, or demanded of any Part: But in the
History of Parts we must begin first of al with those things that are common to
the whole Organ, then with those things which are Proper to the same Organ: but
in describing the Fabric of the body of Man, we will follow the common order of
Dissection.

Chap. 2. Of the Natural and Legitimate Conformation of the Body.
SEeing my design and intent of handling Anatomy, does not consist in a bear
and The necessariness of it.
simple comtemplation of the Parts of the Body, but is also referred to the use
of Medicine; before we come to the dissection of the body of man, we will
describe in a few words the Legitimate and natural conformation of the Body of
Man when it is alive, which is the basis whereby we judge of the Sicknesses and
imperfections of Men or Women: this was necessary of Old in buying of Servants,
in joining Men and Women in Marriage that they might have Children, and in
choosing select Men for Soldiers. And this knowledge is necessary even to this
day; for in some Monasteries such as desire to lead a Religious life, the
Physician views them Naked from the Crown of the Head, to the Sole of the foot;
and notes their respiration, and pulse, and voice in singing. This is done in
buying Slaves in diverse Countries, and also in buying Horses; and also Nurses
are exactly viewed by Physicians for the education of Children, I mean the
Children of Princes.

Therefore in Mankind, you may consider the difference of Sex: Substance of
Considerations in a Man well formed.
Body, Temperature, Greatness, Color, form, or Figure; as they are convenient
in a perfect and well formed body, that so by this, the difference of a body not
well formed may be known.

As for that which belongs to Sex, Mankind is twofold: Male and Female. The
Latin 1. Sex.
word Homo comprehends both: and a Women has been called Vira, and therefore a
stout Women is called Virago: the differences of both I have Accurately
expounded in my Anthopographiae. Lib. 2.

The substance of the Boby in Man ought to be fleshy not Fat; firm and sollid,
not 2. Substance.
soft: the Limbs meanly hairy, for smoothness in Men, such as is in Women,
argues effeminate conditions.

A healthful temper ought to be hot and moist, because life consists in, and is
3. Temper.
preserved by such a temper, yet is there a peculiar temper in every person,
which by Physicians is called Idiosyncrasia; which if Galen could exactly have
known, he would have thought himself equal with Aesculapius: but we must reduce
this to the General. But by what signs this may be known, Galen has declared
in his little book of Art of Physic, and other Authors.

The Magnitude of the body is threefold, according to the threefold Dimension
of 4. Magnitude.
the body. We shall consider chiefly the Longitude and Latitude: The natural and
decent Longitude of the body ought to be four Cubits, the Latitude one Cubit as
Goropius Becanus teaches: this also is confirmed by Vitruvius who defined the
just Longitude of the body of man to be six Roman Feet. And Agellius Lib. 3. ex
Varrone, Noted that the highest pitch of a Man's height was seven Foot: but more
Men are shorter, than taller than this. Vegetius Writes that Soldiers ought to
be choson six Foot high, yet by Reason of difference of sex, Region, and
Diseases, Men are either taller or shorter, for each soil has its Particular
Nature: so the people of Asia are taller than those of Europe, and in Europe,
those of the North parts, as Denmark, the Low Countries and those of upper
Germany are tallest.

The various Mensuration of bodies Hippocrates has described Leb. de aer. aq.
et loc. Commonly men are taller then Women; whereas in some other living
creatures, Foemales are greatest.

The Latitude or thickness in a well Proportioned body ought to be, almost half
the Longitude, so that if the Longitude be six Foot, the Latitude ought to be
almost three: slenderness of body is subject to Consumptions, neither can the
body be strong and fit for labor unless it be thick.

In the bigness of the body is Magnanimity and beauty, quoth Aristotle, Ethic.
Lib. 4. For a man of a little and small body cannot be fair; yet if you regard,
understanding, there is little Wit commonly in those Tal bodies.

Elegantly said Celsus, Lib. 2. Chapter 1. The best disposed body is well set,
neither slender nor Fat, a tal stature is comely in youth but not so in Age, a
slender body is weak, a Fat body dull.

The Color of the body is diligently to be marked, for such a Color as
flourishes 5. Color.
in the Skin and countenance, the same is predominant in the Humors, and
therefore sanguine people are Red, Chollerick Yellow, Mellancholly Black or
brown and dusky, Phlegmatic are pale: a brown and ruddy Color are preferred
before pale, which argues softness of body.

There is some difference in Authors about the Color to be Chosen in a Nurse,
Aristotle perfers brown, others a Mingled Color of Red and white.

Now the Natural and Legitimate form of the Head, Breast, Belly, and Limbs, is
to 6. Form. of the Head.
be considered. The Head ought to be round, and not Copped, unless the Neck be
very thick: a great Head is preferred before a little one: from the Head ought
the Nature of the Nerves, Veins, Flesh, and Humors to be collected.

A great Head requires a great Neck, which gives indication of a great breast,
by reason of the Parts contained in the Neck: a great breast makes a large
belly, and therefore the proportion of the rest of the Cavities depends upon
the Head.

The Chest ought to be large, of an Oval Figure, and the Backbone straight,
the Breast.
breast ought to be somewhat unequal, not sharp, nor flat, nor depressed.

The Papps of Men, ought to be depressed, but in Women swelling round, and
Glandulous, rather than Fatty, or Fleshy, because they are the Emunctories of
the breast if the Woman give not Suck. If the Duggs be small the Women are
sickly, and if the Nipples look pale the Womb is Diseased, according to
Hippocrates.

Whether are large breasts to be chosen in Nurses, or such as are mean in
bigness? What Breasts are to be chosen in Nurses.
Great breasts please not Moschio, because they are Fat, neither have they
plenty of Milk; and therefore Fat Nurses are not to be preferred before such as
are Lean, and Juicy; neither such as are tal, before such as are of a mean
Stature: Aristotle Lib. 3. de hist. animal.

White colored Women, because they are Phlegmatic, have but bad Milk.

From the breast, we pass to the belly, which ought to be round and sticking
out: Belly.
Women that have such bellies, the Poets praise, and say Venus had such a one.
Hipp. Lib. de ve^ Med. Notes that long and round bellies, ought to be
considered of Physicians, because by looking upon them, it is easy to know
which are fit for strong Purgations; for such whose Parts in the Abdomen are
strong, and well disposed, may easily Purge; but such as are slender, take
strong Medicines with danger.

Very Fat Women are hard to conceive with Child, Hippoc. Aph. 4. Lib. 5.

As for what belongs to the Privities; Heliogabalus chose such for Soldiers as
Privities.
had large Privities, because he thought they were lusty, stout Men. A very
long yard is not fit for Venery, either because the strength of the Seed
passes out, by reason of the length of the Yard, if you will believe Galen; or
because the Muscles are tired, by erecting a great, and long Yard. A mean Yard
is most fruitful, and Limbs.
gives most and longest pleasure in the act of Copulation. A long Yard, though
indeed it fill the Neck of the Womb, yet it makes it not so fruitful; and is
hurtful to such Women as are subject to the fits of the Mother, by stretching
the Genitals: Neither are the Testicles when they are great and Pendulous, to
be commended.

We pass to the Limbs, viz. The Hands and Feet, which ought to be equal in
proportion to the rest of the Body: The Longitude of the Foot, from the Os
Pubis, to the extremity of the Heel, ought to be equal to that of the Hand,
from the Ala, to the top of the middle Finger. If the whole body be six Foot
long, the Foot is three: both Hands and Feet, are somewhat fleshy in strong
bodies; for although slenderness of Legs be commended in Horses, it is not so in
Men.

An example of a perfect and absolute body well formed, is to be Read in
Sidonius Apollinaris, Lib. 1. Epist. 2. de Theodorico rege, wherein is one
remarkable fault to be amended, not Noted by interpreters, for Excrementa read
Extrema. Inter Extrema Costarum spi^a discriminat.

Chap. 3. The Division of Man's Body.
BEfore we expose the whole Body of Man, to Anatomical dissection, it ought to
be divided into its Parts, or principal regions, that the Number and order of
the regions, and where they begin, may be known.

A among the various divisions of the Body of Man, this in my mind seems the
Division of the Body.
best, and to be preferred before the rest.

The body is divided into the Trunk, and the Limbs.

The Trunk is divided into three Principal Regions; the Head, Breast, and Belly.

The Head obtains the Superior place; The Breast, the middle: and the Belly,
the lowermost.

The Members or Limbs are four branches sticking out from the Body, two Arms,
and two Legs.

What are the bands of these Regions, I shall show, when I come to speak of each
Region apart.

The Medicinal Consideration.
I will not stand here in rehearsing and designing the external Parts of the
whole body, which are expounded in every Region of the same; but only consider
the corporature, or fleshy habit, which is covered with the Skin, like a
Garment; which though it look for the most part beautifully without, it looks
ill favoredly within. This habit of the whole body, makes the third Region of
the body, to which the Humors come from the deepest Parts; the ill effects of
which, are clearly seen in the Diseases, and Symptoms which appear outwardly.
The juice which is seen in the leaf and branch comes from the Root.

I shall reckon up the chief Diseases which use to infest the outward habit of
the body. Viz. Immoderate Fatness, or Leanness, Defluxions, Gouts, Dropsy,
Cachexia, the whores Pocks, Plenty, or defect of Sweat, by reason of the
openness, or closeness of the pores, Palsy, Convulsion, Unquietness, and
weariness and al kind of swellings.

The Flesh of man, because its Nourished by purer Blood, is delicater than the
flesh of other Creatures, and prefered before it by Canibals, or Man-Eaters.

Flesh, seeing it is Porous and Musculous, it has empty spaces, which in men
in health are filled with spirit and blood, but in such as are sick, with Water
and wind; thence come Defluxions over the whole body, and other Diseases of the
Skin.

The Habit of the whole body, is Purged and emptyed by sweating, by
Cupping-Glasses, Scarrification, and Rubbing, according to the Doctrine of
Galen, Lib. de Sanitate; by Bathings, Whippings, and Beatings, and blistering,
and Rubifying, or Pimple-raising Applications.

Therefore seeing the small Pocks and Measses, are but the scum of the whole
habit of body, that is, of the Flesh, and sollid parts, their coming out is to
be furthered, either at the beginning, or at any other time, with Sweating
Medicamants, and such things as draw to the external Parts. Neither need you
let blood so often, though the Patient be strong, twice if need be, is enough,
because it hinders the Motion of Nature in expelling, unless either a dead
sleep, or strangling with a Fever, or bloody Flux, which is for the most part
deadly, draw us to that remedy; not neglecting young Pigeons Cut alive through
the middle, laid to the Hands and Feet,: and sometimes to the Heart, and small
Cupping-Glasses fastened al about the body, with light Scarification. And
sometimes bathing the Body in Luke warm Water profits, if the season of the year
be convenient, to make the Measses and small Packs come out the better.

Chap. 4. Of the lower Ventricle.
THe Dissection and Anatomical demonstration, must be begun at the belly,
because Why the Disection begins a^ the lower Ventriole.
it is the sink and Kitchen of the body: and therefore soonnest Putrifies and
stinks.

It is called in Greek Coilia because it is coile that is hollow; in latin
Venture, in English the Belly.

Its substance is fleshy composed of various similar parts, which we shall
propound Its Substance.
in order hereafter.

The belly seeing it is a most compound part, its own temperature is none at
al, but Temperature.
it follows the temperament of the parts contained in it, and especially of the
Liver.

It has its Original from the first comformation with the rest of the Parts.
Original. Situation. Quantity.


It is Situated in the inferior part of the Trunk of the Body.

Its Quantity or widness is from the bastard Ribs, or Diaphragma to the Os
Pubis or share Bone; and with these bounds it is Circumscribed above and below.

The whole widness of the belly is distinguished into three Regions; the
superior called T. 1. f. 1. A. B.
Stomacbal, the middle called f. 1. C C.
Vmbiliar, and the lower called f. 1. E E.
Hypogastrica.

Again in every part, both the lateral and middle parts ought to be observed;
the lateral parts of the stomachal Region are called T. 1. f. 1. A B.
Hypochondria, of the middle Region f. 1. D D.
Ilia. The middle is called the infra. C C.
Navil which is the center both of the belly and of the whole body.

The lateral parts of the Hypogastrick Region are called f. 1. F F.
Groyns, the middle f. 1. g. f 2. D D.
Pubis, the share which after the fourteenth year both in men and Women is
adorned with Hair, as a natural covering for those parts, which the common Law
of bashfulness commands us to conceal.

In respect of number, the belly is but one; yet by the Peritonaeum it is
divided into to Cavities; The greater holds the parts which prepare for
nourishment. The lesser holds the bladder, and Genitals in men; and the Womb
also in Women which never bear Children.

It is divided into parts containing, and contained. Parts containing, are
proper, Parts containing. Common.
common, and diverse: common are five; f. 2. B B.
Cuticula, or scarf Skin; f. 2. C C.
the Skin, f. 2. D D.
the Fatty Membrane, T. 2. f. 8. 9.
the Fleshy Membrane, and the Common Membrane of the Muscles.

Proper are, the Muscles of the T. 2. f. 3. and 4.
Abdomen, and the T. 10. f. 10. O O.
Peritoneum. Proper. Diverse.


Diverse are, partly Fleshy, partly bony: bony are the T 23. f. 1. A.
Vertebrae, and T. 14. f. 2. L L. f. 3. B B.
Pelvis, which are parts of the Os Sacrum, and Ilium. Fleshy are, the Muscles
T. 14. f. 1. C C. D D.
Psoas, f. 4. B B.
Sacrolumbus f. 3. D D. f. 4. A A.
Latissimus, f. 2. O O.
Sacer f. 4. C C.
Semispinutus, T. 10. f. 1. N N.
Quadratus. I call them diverse, because those bones and Muscles, being
Scituared in the hinder part of the belly, do make something toward the
constituting of the belly, though they are referred to another part, and
pertain to another use.

The parts contained, are manifold; which are divided into such as nourish, and
Contained ^ Parts. Figure.
such as engender; such as nourish are such as make Chyle, and such as make
blood. The Genitals are of men, and of Women. The Figure of the belly, is Oval,
by reason of the parts contained; which if removed, it is hollow, that it may
be the seat of the Vessels dedicated to nourishment, and Generation; and
therefore the latins call it Abdomen, and the Greeks Epigastrion.

The color of the superficies of the belly, is like the color of the rest of
the body; Color.
in men of ripe Age it is Hairy from the Pubis, up to the Navil.

It is outwardly knit to the breast, and inferior limbs by the Skin; inwardly
by Connection.
the Peritoneum.

It communicats with the principal parts, by Veins Arteries, and Nerves.

The use of the Belly is, to comprehend, and involve the parts of nourishment,
Use.
and generation; take it individually, it consists of Musculous Flesh.

It has action to compress the parts contained within its self, for the
expultion Action.
of excrements, upwards and downwards; and to force the Child out of the Womb.

The Medicinal Consideration.
From this discourse, a Physician collects many things, in his Practice,
useful. 1. That the Belly is the Sink of the Body, in which the vices of our
intemperance reside; the Mother of all mischeifs, and the Nurse of Physicians;
in which condition 'cis called Collatibus Venture, an Aldermans Belly.

He whose Belly grows to a great bigness, is called Ventrosus, Fat Guts. Some
we read of, whose Bellies grew to a monstrous bigness, as Nichomachus
Smyrnaeus, in Galen; in Athenaeus, Lib. 12. Deipnosophist, we read of a King
that was choked with fatness. But famous is that History in Michael Neander, in
Erot. Hebr. ex. Talmud. in Jona. Rabbi. Ismael, and Rabbi Eliazer, had such
great Bellies, that when they stood with their Faces together and their Bellies
touched, two great Oxen might pass between them, and touch neither of them.

By reason of the Fleshy, and fatty substance of the Belly, it is subject to
diverse Swelling in the Abdomen.
swellings, Especially Aposthemes, either from the liver by the Vmbilicar Vein;
or else the matter is sent from the Suppuration of the Reins; which being shut
up in the Doublings of the Peritonaeum, may send their impurities into the
external parts of the Belly.

This fleshy and fatty substance, ought to be mean; if it be greater, it is a
discomdity Its Constitution what it should be.
to life, if lesser it shows an ill Disposition of the Bowels: Therefore
Hippocrates wrote, that in every Disease, the parts belonging to the Belly, had
better be some what gross, then to slender; for if they consume, it is very evil:
therefore Physicians were wont to handle the whole belly, especially the
Hypochondria, which ought to be soft, equal, and fleshy.

The Situation of the Parts in the Belly.
The largeness of the Belly is considered, according to longitude and depth,
that The Situation of the Parts in the lower Ventricle.
so the Physician may know in pains and wounds in the belly, which part is
afflicted, or wounded.

According to depth, the parts are divided into upper, and lower; and therefore
according to Hippocrates the pains in the upper part, are more light; those in
the lower, more strong and dangerous.

According to Longitude by the division of the places, you may understand by
the Viz.
bare looking upon them, or feeling them with the hand, what parts are
afflicted, pained, or wounded. In the right Hypochondria is the liver, which
passes even to the Cartilage Xyphois; It passes a fingers breadth beyond the
bastard Ribs, on the sides forewards, two fingers. In the middle region, is the
Stomach placed, Liver. Stomath.
which incliness more to the left Hypochondrium, and descends four fingers
breadth below the bastard Ribs.

In the left Hypochondria, lies the Spleen, which* Naturally hangs under the
Spleen.
bastard Ribs, the breadth of a man's Thumb.

The umbilicar Region, the Navel possesses, above which, is the Gut called
Colon.
Colon, transversly seated; and in the whole compass of that Region, is the Gut
called Jejunum, disposed: Toward the Backbone, are the Kidneies. The beginning
Jejunum.
of the Colon being bowed back from the right Kidney, under the Liver and
Stomach, to the Spleen; afterward passes obliquely to the left Kidney: and
Kidneies.
therefore the pains of the Colic, must diligently be distinguished from those
of the stone.

In the middle, and side-Region of the Hypogastrick, in the Gut called Ilium
concontained; Ilium. Bladder. Right Gut.
In the bottom of the belly, the bladder, under which lies the right Gut.

In Women, the Womb lies between the bladder, and the right Gut: under the Womb.
Guts, lies the Mesenterium, as the Sweat-bread does under the Stomach. A
little below the Navel, the Omentum is stretched about all the Guts, and divides
all the internal parts with the Peritonaeum, from the external; those that lie
deep, from those that lie at top.

The Medicinal Consideration.
In the Belly, are frequently al sortsof Tumors, Impostumes, Rumblings of the
Diseases of the Abdomen.
Guts, and Croaking; which proceed either from Tumors of the Parts contained,
or from wind, or collection of Water.

It is Cut on the sides toward the Hypogastrium, in the Caesarian dissection,
to draw out the Child in a difficult labor. It is pricked near the Os Pubis, to
draw out Urine, when a Catheter cannot be put in. It is pierced in the bottom
of the Hypogastrium, near the Navel, to draw out Water in the Dropsy Ascites,
which Operation is called Paracentesis.

Chap. 5. Of the Scarf Skin.
AMongst the parts which make the Abdomen, the first that comes to view, the
Greeks call Epidermis, the Latins Cuticula and we the Scarf-Skin.

Although, by its substance it seems to be Spermatical yet it differs much
Substance.
from it.

It Is Temperature is none at al, and therefore no more words about it, but for
its Original.
original, it is framed of the Excrementitious and Viscous Vapors of the Skin,
which Sweating, out grow dry by the coldness of the Air, and like a thin Skin,
compasses the Skin round, and therefore it sticks to the Skin firmly and
universally, and has no other bounds then the Skin has.

And although to the sight its substance appears simple, yet Fabricius ab
Aquae pendente will have it double, one which is inseperably fixed to the pores
of the Skin, the other seperable, without any offense to the Skin it self, but
the thickness of the Cuticula, be it more or less, does not increase it is
number, for though in some places it may be divided into many small Skins, yet
in no place can one be pulled off without another.

It has no Proper figure besides what it borrows from the Skin it self, from
which Figure.
it differs in this, that it is no way porous.

It is thought to partake always of the same color with the Skin, and yet in
Black Color.
Mores this being pulled of, the Skin it self is white.

It sticks firmly to the true Skin, and is an Excrementitious part as the
Hairs Connection.
are, and has no communion with the principal parts, by Veins, Arteries, nor
Nerves, because it wants them, and is insensible, as you may find, if you
please to scrape it off from your hands, or any parts, or thrust a Pin or
Needle under it.

It has no action, only use, which is to shut the pores of the Skin, to make
it ^se.
smooth, and bewtiful, polished and even.

The Medicinal Consideration.
By these things thus considered, a Physician may see that the scarce Skin has
also its Diseases, though Hippocrates thought them to be only deformities, He
makes a distinction whether they may be called Impostumes or diseases, at the
end of Lib. 2. Prorrheticorum, because such as belong to the Scarfe-skin,
pertain most of al to the dignotion and Cure of Affects.

It is infected with diverse Spots, both natural, and sickly; natural, are those
many deformities of the Skin; Sickly, are the Meazles, small Pocks, purple spots
in Fevers, or any Spots of other Color; sometimes without a Fever, when Nature
sends any Wheyish substance of another Color into the Scarf-Skin.

Diseased spots of the Scarf-Skin may, and ought to be cured: but such as are
Original from the birth, are very difficultly taken away, because they stick
firmly to the Skin, as well as to the Scarf-Skin.

This Scarf-Skin may be beautified; which Galen denies to be done, by an
honest, It may be Beautified.
and honorable Physician; but allows it to be done, by Court Physicians, and
Bauds, and Chamber-Maids that wait upon their Ladies. In Women, the Cuticula is
thick, smooth, and many time stops the pores of the Skin, and hinders free
perspiration. In men it is usually full of pores, that so the Hairs may pass out.

Lastly, as the Scarf-Skin of the Body, being well looked after, and adorned,
procures beauty and and comeliness to the Body; so being made rough with Spots,
or burnt by the Sun, it unhandsoms a man. It is ridiculous to draw it off with
blisters, that so it may come again the cleerer, you loose your labor as much
as though you washed a Black-more.

The Scarf-Skin peels off in diverse persons whilst it is dried or burnt, and
the Skin it self in Leprosies, and diverse that have the french pocks; The Skin
it self comes off by fleakes in such as are Leprous, and in some that are
troubled with the Whoremasters Pox.

Chap. 6. Of the Skin.
AFter the Scarf-Skin, follows the Skin called in Greek Derma; it has a
substance diverse from other Membranes, the like of which you shall Its Names.
never find in the whole Body, because it consists of Seed and Blood mixed
together; Substance.
yet so as that portion of Seed is predominant, which may be bowed, and
distended: from which the Skin is accounted Spermatical.

Its temperature is cold and dry, or more properly, exquisitly temperate, yet
so Temperature.
it may be the Judge of feeling.

It is extended over the whole body, and on wraps it like a garment, and
therefore its dimention is as the dimention of the Body is.

Although it seem but one, both to sight and touching, yet some hold it to
consist Number.
of two Skins; but I could never find them to be seperable, only it may be cut
into many parts by reason of its thickness.

It has the same Figure which the body has, that it cloatheth. Its textur
Figure.
is Slight, and very full of small holes, for insensible transpiration, and the
passing out of excrements: and in diverse places, it has visible great holes;
as in the ears, Eyes, Nose, mouth, fundament, and privities of Men and Women.

It takes its Color from the predominant humor; for of what color the Humor
Color.
predominant in the Body is, of that color is the Skin, unless it be such from
their birth, as in Ethiopia.

It is straightly knit to the Parts under it, and therefore immovable,
excepting the Connection.
Skin of the Forehead.

It has communion with the principal Parts, by innumerable veins, Arteries,
Communion.
and Nerves; the extremities of which, it takes on every side, for it has
neither of them all three peculiar to its self.

Whether by reason of its feeling, it perform action, a man may make a doubt;
Action.
for otherwise the membranes, which are the instruments of inward feeling,
perform action also; but what Author ever said that the Membranes performed
action?

We grant that it has an excellent, and particular use, to defend and adorn
the use.
body, to receive the exc^ements of the third concoction to cleanse the Body of
fil^h fuliginous Vapors, and Sweat.

The Medicinal Consideration.
Let us now reduce this same conformation of the Skin, to a Physical use. Its
Actects in Substance. Temper.
substance against Nature, consists in i^s over thickness.

Its temperature is changed in diverse di^eases.

It Is number is viciated, when the Cuticula is viciated, or gnawn through; or
the Number.
Skin it self lost.

Often times its smoothness, is turned into roughness; or it is disfigured by
Figure.
pustles.

Sometimes its passages are stopped, or more open then they should be.

Its connection, is marred in wounds, and Ulcers. Connextion. use.


Sometimes it is use is hurt, when it is insensible; or when it receives not only
the excrements of the third concoction, but also of the whole Body.

Therefore the Skin, seeing it is the breathing place of the whole body, is
subject to an infinite number of Diseases; and if the pores be shut, the Body
suffers great discommodities, by reason transpiration is hindered; for the Body
ought to ease it self that way, according to Hippocrates, Lib. de Alimento: The
motion of the Body, to perspiration, the w^der it is, the healthfuller are men;
the less perspiration men have, the more sickly are they; they which have quick
perspration, are weaker, though better in health, and soonest recover when they
are sick: such whose perspiration is bad, are strongest before they are sick;
but when they are sick, their Cure is most difficult.

Diseases proceeding from disorder of the Skin, are more dangerous in winter;
and in mal^gnant Fevers, by reason of the interc^ption of the transpiration,
the Native heat is choked. Breathing a Vein is a remedy for such.

From the substance, and Color of the Skin, Hippocrates propounded two
prognostics: Lib. 5 Aph. 71. and Lib* proegn. Part. 7. and 8.

Of the spots of the Skin, read Soranus, Chap. 38.

The Skin is like in Color, to the predominate humors, in the Body Hippoc. de
humoribus.

Of divination by the Moles of the Skin, wrote Polemon, a Greek Author; and and
amongst modern writers, Ludovicus ^eptalius, Mediolanensis, Wrote most
accurately.

Aristotle concluded the subtilty of a persons wit, from the subtilty and
thinness of the Skin, rather than of the blood.

The thinne^s of the Skin, is the cause why man alone is troubled with the
Leprosy, according to Aristotle, Prol. 5. Sect. 10.

It is certain that concagious Diseases, may be drawn in through the pores of
the Skin.

The Skin grows hard and dry, through burning Fevers, and sometimes it becomes
Whether Skin l^st, can be regained.
as thick as an Elephants Hide: especially about the Back, Limbs, and Thighs,
as I have seen it in many, like a tand Hide. The Skin lost, grows not again,
but degenerates into a Scarre: For it is made by the first in^ention of Nature,
but repaired by the second.

Chap. 7. Of the Fatty Membrane.
THe Greeks call it Stear, and ^imele* i^ makes a common membrane, by reason Its
Names.
of its consistence: in (...) is called (...); and why not so then in men?

^^substance, although it be something (...), yet is it soft, and Oily, as you
may Substance.
perceive if you handle it with your Fingers, or lay it by the Fire.

It arises from the thinner portion of the Blood, distilling through the Veins
Original.
like dew, and congealing about the Flesh: this is the certain matter of the
Fat; of the efficient cause only is the question made, Namely, Whether it
obtain its consistence by heat, or cold. Al acknowledge a moderate heat about
the membranes, compelling, and applying this same fatty, and Oily Liquor.

The Temperature then of the Fat, is moderately hot and moist. Temper.
Situation.


It is contained uuder the Skin, univer^ally over the whole body; the Forehead,
Cods, and yard, (where there is no Fat) excepted.

Therefore the Fatty memb^ane, is large, as the Skin is.

In Number it is only one, unless you connex the Fleshy membrane, internexed
Number.
with it, as Sylvius does.

It has no Proper Figure. Figure. Color.


In Color it is white; if at any time it be red, it is because blood, by reason
of some Laceration, is mixed with it.

It sticks firmly to the Skin, neither can it be divided from it without
scraping; and so it does to the Fleshy Membrane.

The Fat cannot communicate with the principal Parts, because it is not truly
nourished; nor yet lives, unless by apposition as stones do; neither yet is it
sensible: therefore it wants both Veins, Arteries, and Nerves; and yet al three
of them pass through the Fat, that so they may come at the Skin.

As for the use of it; it warms the body in Winter like a Garment, and cools it
use.
in Summer, by hindering the penetrating of the heat: It is like a Cushion for
men to sit on, and in long fasting, it is turned to Nourishment of the Fleshy
Parts near to it, which Suck out its juice.

Chap. 8. Of the Fleshy Membrane.
THe Fleshy Membrane lies under the Fat, and sticks to it, and is conspicuous
in young Children newly born, where it is not hid with Fat. It is more obscure
in such as are grown up, and yet it retains it Fleshy substance, as is evident
Substance.
about the Loins, Cods, Forehead, and Neck.

Its temperature, is like the rest of the Flesh, ho^ and moist; and it has its
Temperature*
original from the Blood.

It is situated under the Fat, and stretched out over the whole body
universally, Situation.
and is the fourth covering of the body. In bruits it is next to the Skin,
which often moves by the intervening of this Membrane.

It is one single Membrane. Number. Figure. Color.


It has no proper Figure, unless the Figure of the body which it covers.

It has various colors in Disverse places; for it is more red in the Neck,
Forehead, and Cods, than else where.

It is joined to the Fat inseperably in some places; so that the (...), and
Connection.
Fatty Membrane, seem to make but one: in other places it may be separated.

It communicates with the principal parts, by the extremities of the Ve^^s,
Arteries, (...).
and Nerves.

And that it is very Sensible, the rigor, and trembling of the body, which
depends Action.
upon this Membrane, witnesses: besides it has a peculiar Motion in the Neck,
Forehead, and Cods, where it is Musculous, and endued with Nervous Fibers.

Its use is to give foundation to the collecting and generating the Fat, to
Cloth Use.
the Body, and cherish* the internal heat, and defend it from external injuries.

The Medicinal Consideration.
Although, Cutaneous Diseases seem to belong to the Skin; yet if they continue
long they have their foundation in the fleshy and fatty Membrane; shivering,
shaking and trembling, belong especially to the Fleshy Membrane.

Chap. 9. Of the Common Membrane of the Muscles.
THe Fleshy Membrane being taken away, the common Membrane of the Muscles of
the Abdomen follows next, being the fi^t common covering of the body, which
comprehends all the Muscles in the body, (besides the proper Membrane of every
Muscle) least in their Motion, they should pass out of their places.

Its Substance is very strong, yet thin and Nervous. Substance. Temper.
Original. Situation. Quantity.


It is sperma^^cal, cold and dry, in temperature.

It has its original, from the first formation.

It immediately covers, and straightly binds in the Muscles, over which it is
stretched.

Its wideness is thought to equal the dimension of the whole body; but in the
Face, Neck, and superior Limbs, it is not easily found; and in the Legs, the
Fascia Lata performs its Office.

Seeing it is admirable thin, it cannot be divided into two Membranes. Number.
Figure. Color. Connection.


It acquires its Figure, from the Parts it contains.

In Color, it is whitish.

It sticks stoutly to the Muscles, which it compasses, neither can it be
pulled off, but by a Skilful Dissector.

It has no peculiar Nerves, Veins, nor Arteries

It is nourished, and is sensible, like the other common parts, Communion. Use.


It is of admirable use, for it compasses the Muscles like a girdle, and
together with the Fleshy Membrane, is the foundation of the Fat; therefore,
where it, or something like it, which performs its Office, is wanting, there the
Fat also is wanting; as in the Forehead, Head, Face, and Cods, where the Fleshy
Membrane immediately touches the Skin, without any Fat: between them.

Chap. 10. Of a Muscle in the general.
BEfore I treat of the Muscles of the Belly, I will premise the general Doctrine
of the Muscles.

A Muscle is an instrument of voluntary motion, which depends upon our own
Definition. Substance.
will, and because it governs the actions* It is a dissimila^ part, compounded
of many similar ones; but of those Parts, Flesh is predomina^te. So that the
substance of the Muscle, is judged to be Fleshy: Yea and the Muscles are to be
understood by the word Flesh in ancient Authors; as Hippocrates, and Aristotle.

Besides, the Flesh, a Vein, an Artery, a Nerve, Fibers, a Membrane, a
Ligament, or ^endon, help to make up the composition of a Muscle.

(...) they are Fleshy, their Temperature it hot and moist. Temperature.
Original. and ^nsertion.


The true original of a Muscle, is from blood in the conformation of the first
Parts; but by reason of its Connection, in two extremes, It is said to arise
from a stable Part, and to be inserted into a movable part, because it is
ordained for motion, and al motion is caused by that which moves not.

This original and insertion, is known by the ducture and series of the Fibers,
by which you may Judge of the Situation of the Muscle, whether right, Oblique,
or transverse* for in these positions all the Muscles in the body of man, both
internal, and external, lie.

Their quantity and magnitude, is various, according to the variety of places,
Quantity.
and parts to be moved, which require either greater, or smaller Muscles.

There are abundance of them in number, which according to my Observation
Number.
and computation, are four hundred thirty one: but because our body is double,
the Muscles also are double; few their are without fellows, such as are the
Sphincters; and the Diaphragma, or Midrif.

Their Figure is various, T. 10. f. 1. N N. T. 14. f. 2. O O.
Square, T. 10. f. 1.
Triangular, T. 22. f. 1. C D.
round, T. 14. f. 2. M M. T. 15. f. 18. A A.
Long, T. 14. f. 1. A A.
Trapezia, Figure.
Lozing fas^ond, T. 22. f. 1. A.
Deltois, like the Greek Delta D T. 13. f. 18. B B.
Scalena: usually they are round, whether you regard their Circumference, or
bulk in long and thick Muscles: Therefore Hippocrates in Lib. de art. Defines a
Muscle to be Flesh Circumducted in an orb: but the greatest Parts of the
Muscles have a longish figure.

For the most parts, you shall observe the middle Part swelled, the extremities
Belly. Head* Tendon.
narrow. The middle part is called the Belly; in the immovable extremity; the
Head, the moveable extremity, the Tendon, or Aponeurosis, which is the end, or
insertion of the Muscle into the Part to be moved. Each extremity of the Muscle
for the most Part, is Nervous; but the Tendon is Nervous in almost all the long
Muscles: the Belly is fleshy, and Seldom Nervous.

The Color of a Muscle, for the most Part, is red; of a leaden Color in some
Color.
few, by reason of their impure Situation, in some fil^hy place.

The Connection of the Muscles is twofold; in the two extremities, and in
diverse Connection.
Parts; the one of which stands still, the other moves: also the Muscles move
the Parts to which they stick, though they were not appointed for that use.

All the Muscles have communion with the Parts, by Veins, Arteries, and Nerves;
Communion.
which they admit above the Belly* or middle part of their Body, by which they
obtain their motive power.

The Action of the Muscles, is either universal, or particular. Universal
action, Action*
is that which agrees to al of them, Viz. Motion: particular action, is the
motion of some one certain Part; this motion is performed by contraction of the
Muscle* whilst it is drawn back, toward its beginning, made shorter, and swells
outwardly; and this agrees withal the Muscles, those of the Abdomen excepted,
which being drawn back, swel within, because they have no opposite bone to
withold them.

Therefore the true action of a Muscle, is contraction, or conservation of what
is drawn; which motion is called Tonicus, in one Muscle remaining long in on
figure; or in more Muscles extended, and acting together, as when the whole hand
is long held elevated, and extended.

The motion of others Muscles, as extention and relaxation, are only by
accident; from these motions depend the motions of the parts, which are not
only distinguished by difference of place before, behind, upwards, downwards;
but also by figure.

Their Situation is either larger, and that right, and is called Exten^io; or
Oblique, Diversity.
and that is either lateral, as the Abductor, and Adductor of the fingers; or
with inversion, as the Pronatio, and Supinatio in the hand and Radius.

Also the Muscles, by reason of their like motion, are called fellows, Or
pairs; fellows are sometimes in diverse and opposite places, and ^et perform the
same actionas; the Muscles which bow the Arms: such Muscles as perform a
contrary motion are called Antagonists, and so such as bow the Arm, are
antagonists to those that extend it.

Such as are fellows are alike* for the most Part* in Magnitude, Number, and
strength; such as are antagonists differ according to the weight of the Part
moved, or the vehemence of the action.

The ducture of the Fibers, shows the manner of action in every Muscle; and by
How it is known.
them you may easily distinguish a right Muscle from a transverse, and Oblique.

The ducture of the Fibers is various also in the same Muscle, according to the
diversity of its rises or insertions; and therefore one Muscle performs diverse
actions, as the Tranpezium; for by the extremities of the Fibers, you may know
the Head and Tendon.

The Tendon is directly opposite to the Head.

If the Muscle act but one action, or many; according to the variety of its
originals, it obtains various Connexions, to wit, Heads and Tendons.

Chap. 11. Of a Tendon.
A Tendon is the least Part of a Muscle, by which we bend and move the bones.
It is thought to consist of a Nerve, and a Ligament mixed together; so as that
a Tendon is not found, unless it be in that Part of the Muscle where it is
affixed to the Parts moved.

But a man's Eyes (if he will believe them) tells him, that they are from the
first for Original.
mation, and that they are the chiefest Part of the Muscle, and take their
beginning where the Muscle begins, and are disseminated through its whole Body.
if it be a Nervous Tendon in the beginning, such it is in the end; if it be
like small strings at beginning, they are united to form the Tendon afterward.
Such Tendons those Muscles have which perform strong actions, in bowing and
extending, and tonical motion; as in the superior and inferior Limbs, and in
the back to uphold the Trunk of the body. The rest of the Muscles, as they are
fibrous at the beginning, so they are at the end.

The hard and stiff Tendons have much Fat about them to soften them, that they
may the easier be moved; and therefore those Fibers dispersed amongst the
Flesh, are nothing else but the Tendon divided, and the Tendon nothing else but
the Fibers united; and therefore a Tendon is either compact and solid, or else
divided into Fibers.

Also Tendons are sollid or plain, or Membranous or round, or short or long. If
they are Nervous at the beginning of the Muscle, so they are at the end.
Sometimes they are Nervous at the end of the Muscle, though the Head of it be
Fleshy.

The hardness of a Sollid, long and Membranous Tendon, its thickness and Silver
color is excellent: So that Fallopius affirmed, nothing was more beautiful in
the Body of man, than a Tendon, and the Chrystalline Humor of the Eye.

Wherefore a Tendon, seeing it is a Similary Part, is bred of Seed, and is of a
peculiar substance, no where to be found out of a Muscle. It well deserves to be
called the chiefest part of the Muscle, upon which the action of the Muscle
depends; the other Parts work together with the Tendon in the same action.

Chap. 12. Of the Muscles of the Belly.
THe Flesh extended over the Belly, is Musculous, which being joined together,
do make the Fleshy covering, which is Proper to it.

They are divided into twelve Muscles, six on each side, which have names
partly Number.
from their Situation and rise, and partly from their Figure; of which Sort
are Obliquus Descendens, Obliquus Ascendens, Rectus, Transversus, Pyramidalis,
and Cremaster.

Of these ten are ordained to compel the internal Parts, and some to move the
Os Sacrum, and Ilium; the two Cremasters hold up the stones.

Every one of them has his proper Figure; the Oblique ones, in regard of their
Figure.
Situation action and Fibers, are divided into ascending and descending; the
ascending and Transverse, carry a plain Figure like a Membrane.

Their largeness is as great as the Latitude and bigness of half the Belly, and
yet Largeness.
the descending Oblique Muscle is larger then the Ascending, and the Ascending
then the transverse: the lenght of the right Muscle, reaches from the
sword-like Cartilage to the Os Pubis.

Although their Original be different, yet they al join so at the white line,
that Original. The white line.
they seem to be but one Muscle. The White Line passes from the Sword-like
Cartilage by the Navel, to the Os Pubis, and makes a difference between the
Muscles.

Although the Muscles of the Belly stick to diverse parts, from which they are
said Connection.
to arise, yet are they al inserted at the white line of the Belly; and at the
Os Pubis, each of them receives peculiar Veins, Arteries, and Nervs.

The action of the Belly, is common, or particular. That is common which al
Action. Common. Particular.
of them equally act, Namely, to compress the Belly on every Part; neither can
they act asunder in this. The particular action is, when Muscles that are parrs
act apart, viz. Ascending or descending Muscles; those compress the breast,
these move the Os Pubis, Ilium, and Sacrum, being joined together, without any
the least compression of the Abdomen; but these bones remain unmoved whilst the
Abdomen is compressed.

The use of the Muscles of the Abdomen, is whilst they lie still, to cover the
internal Use.
parts, and defend them from external injuries, to cherish and conserve the
internal heat.

Pass we now to a particular description of the Muscles of the Abdomen, then of
the Muscles that move the Os Pubis, and Sacrum. Particular Description. Oblique
descending.


The T. 1. f. 2. G G. H H. I I.
Oblique descending being situate Obliquely, by reason of its Fibers, Oblique
descending arises from the T. 2. f. 2. G. H H. f. 8. a a.
seven or eight inferior Ribs, by certain fleshy intersections or Fibers
intertexed with the Fleshy Fibers of the Serratus Major, and sticking to the Os
Ilium, and Pubis, it ends in a broad T. 1. f. 2. I I I I. T. 2. f. 8. B B.
Tendon in the white line, and together with its fellow, makes one individual
Tendon.

The Oblique T. 2. f. 8. B.
Ascending, arises from the T. 2. f. 8. c c c c.
Os Pubis, and Ilium, and being Oblique ascending.
knit to the brims of all the bastard and true Ribs, even to the sword-like
Cartilage, it ends in the T. 2. f. 8. d d.
white line die a broad Tendon. In this Muscle the late Anatomists observe a
double Tendon embracing the right Muscle like a sheath; but the duplicity of
the Tendon appears only above the Navel; for below, it is altogether
inseparable.

The right Muscle remains f fleshy from the Sternum, near the T. 2. f. 8. e e.
f. 9. B.
Sword-like Cartilage, Right.
and being extended along the longitude of the Belly, it is inserted with a
Nervous end into the Os Pubis.

In it you may observe three Nervous T. 2. f. 9. c.
Intersections which strengthen it, and Veins which run a long the longitude of
it; and the f. 9. c.
Mammary descending, and the f. 9. d d d d.
Epigastrick ascending, meet about the ^. 2. f. 9. d.
middle of this Muscle.

By this Anastomosis, Galen thought the consent of the Womb with the Dugs, was
caused, and many modern Anatomists after him, which indeed is true.

Upon the extremities of the right Muscles, ly two small Muscles, called T. 2.
f. 9. f.
Pyramidales, Pyramidales.
which sometimes are wanting, especial lie the right; but flesh makes up the
defect. Their office is to compress the Bladder, and therefore they send their
Tendons between the right Muscles, into that Part of the Peritoneum which
includes the Bladder. And in the Child in the Womb, the T. 2. f. 9. e.
Vrachus is a production of the Pyramidal Tendons, which in Men of Age, makes
but one string affixed to the bottom of the Bladder, and passing to the hole of
the Navel, and remains still in such as are grown up.

The T. 2. f. 9. D D.
transverse Muscle, arising from the T. 8. f. 2. C.
transverse Apophyses of the Vertebrae of Transverse.
the loins, and being fixed to the Os Ilium, and the bastard Ribs, ends under
the right Muscle, by a broad f. 9. A.
Tendon in the white line, and is stricktly united with his fellow.

Besides the Muscles which compress the Belly, near the Pubis, by the
transversal Cremaster.
Longitude of the groin, is the Muscle f. 9. a a a.
Cremaster, prepared for the holding up of the stones. It is distinguished from
the flesh of the Oblique ascending Muscle, because it has red flesh, is
thinner, and disjoined from it a singers breadth; it is involved with the
Peritoneum, even til it come to the Testicle, and makes the Tunicle called s f.
9. b. b.
Erithrois.

You shall perceive in the groin, the perforation of the Tendons of the Muscles
of the Abdomen, that they may give passage (...) the Peritoneum, and the
Cremasters:

Seeing some of the Muscles of the Abdomen, conduce to the motion of the Os How
the motion of the Os Ilinm and Sacrum is performed.
Ilium, and Sacrum, I shall faithfully describe the motion of them, and the
Muscles appointed for that motion. These bones are closely joined by Symphysis,
and lie above the Thigh-bones, and under the bones of the loins, for the
procreation of man in the act of Copulation; in which action, the Thighs, and
Backbone remaining immovable, only these bones move forewards, and backwards;
the right and Oblique descending Muscles move them forewards, the breast
resting; or very lightly moving, and that by longer intervals; the Muscles, b.
f. 2. D D.
Sacer, and T. 14. f. 4. B B. f. 3. D D. f. 4. A A.
Semispinatus, move them Backwards.

And therefore sacred Scripture, constitutes the Seat of lust to be in the
Loins, because by the motion of the Loins, the Reins wax hot, which provokes
the Genitalls to Eiaculation of Seed: Genesis 36. It is written, Kings shall come
out of thy Loins; and Psalm. 73. The Kingly Prophet complains, His loins were
filled with delusions, that is, with lustful Concupiscence, as St. Jerome
interprets it; and in Luke, Let your Loins be girded, that is, preserve your
Chastity.

The Medicinal Consideration.
In the Muscles of the Belly, are often Inflammations, Imposthumes, and pains
arising of wind; for according to Hippocrates, the pores of the flesh, and
space between the Muscles, are filled with Blood and Spirit in such as are
healthy; but with Wheyish substance, and wind in such as are Sick; and
therefore Cramps happen in these Muscles, as is described by Sennertus Lib. 3.
Part. 10. Chap. 8. Med Pract. And therefore these Muscles are sometimes troubled
with a windy Spirit, arising from the Hypochondriacal Parts, being filled with
Melancholy.

Chap. 13. Of the Peritoneum.
THe Museles of the Belly being taken away, the Peritoneum comes to view, which
is a T. 2. f. 9. g g.
Membrane stretched out over all the Parts of the Bowels, or Guts; from which
extension, it has it is Greek Name.

Seeing it is spermatieal, Its temperature can be no other than cold and dry.
Temperature. Substance.


Its Substance is not simple, and uniform; but double, and unequal in
thickness: for it is a double Membrane, joined in some places, and disjoined in
other Some, to give passage to the Navel Vessels; and in the Hypogastrium, it
is so doubled that it contains the Bladder and the Genitals, the Reins and
Vreters, the Vena Cava, and the great Artery, and the Seminal Vessels in its
duobling.

The inequallity of the substance of it is observed in Women, to be thickest
from the Navel to the Pubis, that in the conception it may be stretched as the
Womb is. But in men it is thickest from the Navel to the Sword-like Cartilage,
that in Gluttons it may stretch when their paunch is full.

It takes its original from the first formation, unless, as some think, it take
its original Original.
from the Dura Matter, which as they produce the Pleura, so the Pleura should
the Peritoneum; and so their should be a continuation of these Membranes
throughout the Body, as their is of the Skin.

Its Situation is immediately after the Muscles, and compasses about all the
Bowels Situation.
of the Abdomen.

It is the largest Membrane in the whole Body, and most capacious, and answers
to Quantity.
the inferior Ventricle both in Longitude and Latitude,

It is double every where, because it consists of two Membranes; of which, ^^^
internal is the shortest; not so much because it bestows a Membrans upon every
Part of the Belly and produces the Mesenterium; but because it does (...)
accompany the external to the Testicles, but ends in the Cavi^^^^ o^ the
Abdomen.

The external passes even to the Cods, and wraps the Testicles round and
^^^kes that tunicle called Erythrois, and in its progress makes a small Channel
by when the Spermatick Vessels pass.

The same production of the external tunicle, is observed in the groin of
Women, and is diduced even to the T. 7. f. 4. I I. K. f. 5. A.
Clitoris, and the round and lower Ligament of the T. 7. f. 2. S S. f. 4. F F.
Womb.

The Figure of the Peritoneum is Oval, and longish, by reason of the Belly, for
Figure.
of it self it has no Figure at al.

Its continuity is not pierced, it being an admirable piece of workmanship; for
although Vessels pass into it, and out from it, yet all this is performed
through the doubling of it, so that the internal Tunicle remains unpierced,
which comprehends the Parts of the first Region, as the external does the Parts
of the second Region, which are placed within the Belly.

The Color of the Peritoneum is white, as the Color of other Membranes i^.
Color. Connection.


It is firmly knit to the Vertebrae of the loins, I mean the external
Membrane, the internal has no Connection with them, but is disjoined to receive
the Rein, and redoubled to make the Mesenterium; also it gives a covering to
the Diaphragma, and the Liver, and produces the Ligament which holds it, and
depends upon the Sword-iike Cartilage.

Besides the general communion it has with the principal Parts, by Veins,
Communion.
Arteries, and Nerves; It has a particular communion with all the Parts
contained; to which it gives Membranes, either thick or thin; and therefore it
may be called the Mother of all the Membranes in the Belly.

It performs no action; but its use is great through out the Belly. Use.
b T. 6. f. 2. C C. E E.


The Medicinal Consideration.
Let us now bring this contemplation of the Peritoneum, to a Physicaluse. By
reason of its doubling, you shall perceive Serosus and sharp Choleric Humors
^o to get into those spaces, which make a bastard Colic, but have no
foundation at al within the Guts, as a true Colic has, but between the
Peritoneum and the Guts; whence the Disease is bitter, and usually lasting: of
which see Fernelius in his Pathology.

Sometimes other Humors flowing from the Liver, or from the Reins, get within
Colic.
this Duplication, toward the Navel, or groyn, or Os Sacrum, and there
impostumate, unless they were turned into Quittor before they fell into this
Part.

Such Collical pains lie usually on the top of the Belly, and not deep; neither
will they suffer the Belly to be handled never so gently. Sometimes they come up
even to the Diaphragma, by reason of the continuation of the Peritoneum, and
then the danger is the greater.

Sometimes, by reason of those Productions of the Peritoneum which reach the
Ruptures.
Stones, Serosus Humors pass down to the Cods, and make a watery Rupture.

You must diligently observe the production of the Peritoneum by the groyn;
which being dilated (for it is seldom broken) receives the Gut Ilium, or the
Call, whence is bred that swelling in the Groine, called Entero-Cele, or that
called Epiplo-Cele; or when both the Gut and the Call do fall down, that other
called Entero-Epiplo-Cele.

Cha. 14. The Division of the Parts of the Belly.
THe Parts of the Paunch included within the Peritoneum, I thus divide. They
Parts first.
al pertain to the first Region, which are nourished by the branches of the
Vena Porta; therefore the T. 2. f. 10. E.
Omentum, the Hollow T. 4. f. 1. A.
Part of the Liver, the f. 1. C.
Gal, T. 2. f 10. C.
Stomach, T. 4. f. 1. ^.
Spleen, f. 1. E E.
Sweetbread, T. 3. f. 1. and 4.
Bowels, f. 1. A A.
Mesenterium, and T. 4. f. 1. F F. f. 6. A A.
Vena Po^ta, and the F. 5. K.
Coeliacal Artery, make the First Region of the Body, contained within the
Abdomen. The other Parts which are included within the doubling of the
Peritoneum, are referred to the Second Region, which comprehends the T. 5. f.
1. B C.
Reins, Second.
f. 1. F F. G G.
Vreters, f. 1. K.
Bladder, T. 6. tota.
Genitals in Men; and the t. 7. tota.
Womb, with the Parts annexed, in Women.

It is extended even to the upper Part of the Breast, and T. 7. f. 1. II. f. 6.
A A. F F.
comprehends the Diaphragma, f. 4. A A.
Mediastinum, t. 11. f. 2. B. f. 5. I.
the Heart, and f. 1. A. f. 2. A.
Pericardium, f. 1. B B. f. 2. K K. f. 7. F F.
Lungs, f. 7. E. f. 8. A B C. T. 13. f. 10. 9.
Trachea Arteria, T. 3. f. 2. E E.
Oesophag^s, T. 13. f. 14. A.
Tongue, T. 13. f. 9. 10.
Larinx, with the Trunks of the Vena Cava, and great Artery, even from the
Throat to the groyn, according to Fernelius: but I extend it farther, even to
the Limbs; whither so ever the greater Channels of the Aorta or Cava, the T.
12. f. 1. 4. B B.
Axillars, and f. 1. 4. D D.
Crurals pass.

Chap. 15. Of the Navel.
THe Navel from the birth, even to extreme Age, is a knotty T. 8. f. 2. D. D.
Coition of the What it is.
four Navel T. 8. f. 2. A B B C.
Vessels; by which the Child is nourished in the Womb. That they should stick
out on the outside of the Belly, is impro^itable; therefore they are Cut off
the T. 9. f. 2. P.
Child being born.

The continuation of the Vessels within the Abdomen remains, which grows dry by
degrees, being deprived of its a^cient Office; and therefore it is to be
considered under another Notion, in one that is grown up.

We shall treat of the Umbilicar Vessels, as they are found in the Carcass of a
man ^mbilicar Vessels.
grown up; they are like Ligaments, included in the doubling of the Per^toneum;
that which outwardly appears is the middle both of the Belly, and Body.

The T. 2. f. 8. G. T. 4. f. 1. a f. 6. a a. T. 8. f. 2. A.
Umbilicar Vein passes to the T. 4. f. 5. C.
cleft of the Liver, The Umbilicar f. T. 8. f. 2. B B. f. 4. e ^.
A^teties are T. 2. f. 10.
two, and descend to the Iliack f. 4. dd.
Arteries, Sometimes creeping along the sides of the Bladder to the f. 4. vel.
zz.
Hypogastricks, between the Arteries lies the T. 8. f. 2. C. T. 9. f. 2* O.
Vrachus fixed to the sides of the Bladder, and this is the original and
insertion of the Umbilica^ Vessels. The Vrachos is like a long and round
Ligament, and its use is to hold up the Bladder.

The Umbilicar Vein pulls the Liver foreward, lest by its weight it should
depress use.
the Parts under it, The Umbilicar Artery upholds the t. 2. f. 10. ^. I.
Bladder that it fall not down, although it be included in the doubling of the
Peritonum.

The Medicinal Consideration.
To reduce that is said to Medici^al use; this shows that the Cutting of the
Navel Vein is dangerous, that the place of the Navel is very perspirable
because it penetrates the containing Parts, Neither is there any thing* either
within or without, that stops that passage, and therefore purging Medicines
applied, to the Navel Purge, and sweet things applied to the Navel of Women
pene^rate to the Womb: The Water in Dropsies many times breaks out at the
Navel* and the affects thereof are grievous, not so much by reason of the
sensibility of the Part, but the sudden hu^ting of those Parts whose Office it
is to nourish the whole Body.

Therefore consider whether the Navel be the center of the Belly or not, for
otherwise, if the Parts below the Navel be longer than those above it, A
multitude of Diseases are bred in the lower Part, because the Umbilicar Vein
being shorter does not sufficiently, pull back the Liver, which, by its weight,
compresseth the Stomach and Parts under it.

Chap. 16. Of the Omentum, or Call.
BEfore you proceed to the Omentum or call you must view how it covers all the
Parts of the Belly, then their Situation, which is of no small moment to the
art of Phy^ick.

The T. 2. f. 10. E. b c d. T. 3. f. 1. D D.
Omentum, or Epiploon, or Call, is a thin Membrane endewed with much Number.
Fat, neither is it single but double, and so disjoined in some places, that
you may thrust your hand between, this you may see in that Part which is
stretched out above the Guts, but about the Stomach and Spleen near the
Diaphragma, the space is not so evident, but it has certain hid^ng places as
the Poet Lucan says, which not appearing was a bad Omen.

It was held to be an ill Omen also amongst the sooth saiers if it were not
extended over the Guts.

The portion of it which is subject to view, is Naturally stretched out even to
the Situation.
Navel, sometimes to the groyn and Cods in Women between the Neck of the Womb
and the Bladder, the greater portion is hidden in the left Hypocondrium.

It may be divided into four Parts, the first is called T. 2. f. 10. d d.
Intestinal which is stretched out over the Guts; the Second f. 10. b.
Hepatical, which arises from the Cavity of the Liver, including the small Lobe
of the Liver, and turns down to the deep Cavities thereof, the third is called
f. 10. c.
Lienal, because it lies upon the Spleen, the fourth T. 3. f. 1. T. 4. f. 1.
Mesenterical, being a production of the Mesenterium to the external Parts, and
Original.
from it is its original to be fetched.

The Medicinal Consideration.
The Omentum has its Diseases, both Similar, Organical, and Common, for
Diseases. Similar.
sometimes it is distempered and inflamed, and ye^ but seldom, it is oftener
troubled with Imposthumes or Aposthemes which you will, because it receives the
filth of of the Liver and Spleen. Sometimes its mightily increased with Phlegm
gathered together, and grows to a huge bigness; neither is this swelling easily
allayed either by internal, or external Medicines. If it be soft, Suppuration
is to be sought, which seldom succeeds as i^ should do, although you open the
Part with a Caustic.

Sometimes a dropsical Water is concluded in the Cavities of the Omentum*
according Organical
to the Judgment of Hippocrates, and this is worse then if it were within the
Abdomen, because it is easier drunck up by the Meseraick Veins; or by the
Spunginess of the Spleen, the passages being first opened, and those Parts
stirred up to it by some convenient Medicine.

The Omentum Falls down into the g^oine or Cods: and causes those swellings
which are commonly called ^uptures: the Belly being wounded, the Omentum Common.
breaks forth: and then a great portion of it may be tied with a string near
the Belly and so cut of, because it soon putrisies, neither is it ^afe to put
it back again.

The first Concoction is made never the weaker by cuttings off Part of the
Omentum, (though Galen thought otherwise) For the Concoction is made in the
Stomach: and the Omentum does not cover the Stomach, But is only knit to the
bottom of it.

Chap. 17. Of the Guts.
THe Guts follow next according to the order of dissection, which are organical
Use.
Parts, hollow, appointed to carry the Chyle and to receive the Excrements. The
thin Guts are appointed for the Chyle, the thick for the Excrements.

Their substance is Membranous and full of strings, which may be divided into
two Substance. Fl^shy.
proper Membranes, of which, the T. 2. f. b. R.
Inner is Fleshy, the f. 5. Q.
outward Nervous. But the Inner is rugged, and as it were ^oulded that it may
stay the Chyle in its wrinckles. that so the Mesaraick Veins may draw it the
better, which like Horse-leeches draw the thinner Part of the Chyle from the
Guts.

Besides the wrinkles, the Inside of the Guts is bedewed, And as it were
desended Nervous.
with a certa^^e Phlegmatic Slime, least the Membrane should be hu^t by the
passage of Choler.

Besides these two proper Membranes there is a T. 3. f. 5. P P.
common one, added from the Peritoneum, Slimy.
which it bestows upon a^ the Parts it contai^es.

The Guts are placed in the Abdomen and fill its whole Cavity without any
confusion; Situation.
the Hypochondria excepted; and are disposed in various turnings by reason of
the Connection they have with the f. 1. A A.
Mesenterium.

They are seven times as long as the Body, and something longer. Longitude.
General Division.


This Longitude is divided into f. 4. from B. to I.
thin, and f. 4. from 1. to ^.
thick, not according to Situation, but in respect of the Membranes: The thin
which is taken from the inferiore Orifice of the Stomach, is the first and
supreme in order, it consists of thin Membranes, the thick, is the Inferior in
order, But the superior and shorter in Situation, and more Capacious and has
thicker Membranes.

Again, the thin is distinguished into three Parts, or three Guts; of which the
first Special.
is called f. 4. F.
Duodenum, the second f. 4. G G.
Jejunum, the third f. 4. H H.
Ilium. The thick Gut is also divided into so many Parts or Guts: The first T.
2. f. 4. H H.
Caecum: The second f. 4. K.
Colon. The third f. 4. M.
Rectum.

All the Guts are hollow, that they may give passag to Chyle and Excrements.
They Cavity.
are n f. 6. R.
n T. 3. f. 4. F.
wrinckled round about within, al along their Longitude, even from the Stomach
to the Fundament, that so they may stay the Chyle and Ex^rements of the first
Conco^tion; but for expelling the Excrements, they have a kind of motion which
presses downward by degrees. And thus much to wha^ is common to all the Guts: It
remains that we speak of them al severally.

The first Gut is called T. 4. f. 5. H H.
Duodenum; because in length it is twelve Fingers 1. Duod^num.
bread^h.

The finding of this Gut is hard, for toward the back bone it must be sought
for under the Sweetbread with the beginning of the Jejunum; this position and
Intertexture is diligently to be noted, because oftentimes the cause of
obstructions and vomitings is without any failing of the Pylorus* but the
choler flowing by the f. 3. D D.
Biliar Pore is hindered in his passage, and returning back into the Stomach
causes vomiting.

In the very con^ines of the Duodenum and Jejunum, the passage of Choler Bi^iar
Pore.
pierce^^ the Gu^, and creeps downward a little way between the Membranes
before i^ pe^^ceth the Inner Membrane, nee^ which the f. 3. C. f. 5. H H.
Channel of the Sweetbread i^ observed by Virs^ngus.

Where the Guts begin to be turned toward the left side, their the T. 3. f. 4.
G G.
Jejunum begins, 2. Jejunum.
which is thought to be emptier than the Ilium, by reason of his neerness to
the Liver, and its Multitude of Mesaraick Veins: It lies altogether in the
umbilical Region, and is in length about a Cubit, and an half.

The f. 3. E.
Ilium follows, which is more slender, but in length surpasses all the rest 3.
Ilium.
of the Guts. It occupies the Ilium, and Hypogastrium, and compasses about the
Jejunum it self with its inferior Part. In this Gut is that Disease which is
called the twisting of the Guts, and the Iliack passion.

The fourth Gut in order, and the first of the thick Guts, is called f. 3. B B.
Caecum by Thick Guts. 1. Caecum.
Ancient Anatomists, and does retain this Name, although it is altogether
unlike to the Ancient description of it. It is not large like a Sack, neither
does it perform the Office of a second Stomach to Concoct the Chyle, which was
not perfected before: the Ingress and Egress, are by one hole. Now in its
place, a Membranous Appendix is showed, which is larger in a Child new born,
than in a man grown up: and thence Sylvius took occasion to write, That many
things were changed in ou^ Bodies, both in regard of growth; and of the Guts,
Duodenum and Caecum.

The Gut T. 3. f. 4. H H.
Colon succeeds this; in which are many things worth our Consideration, 2.
Colon.
to wit, its Largness, Situation, Use, S^utters* two Ligaments, Its fringes of
Fa^, and its Connection.

Of all the Guts, none more large, and Capacious, then this. It begins at
Largness.
the right Kidney near the f. 4. I.
Appendix; and being turned upwards, it lies under the Liver and Stomach, and
passes to the left Hypochondrium, where it is wrea^hed, and made ^arrower.

In its Obliquation descending, it touches the left Kidney; and a little below,
being Situation.
bowed like a Roman S. it ends in the top of the Os Sacrum.

In it, the Dunge and filth of the Guts, is kept: as also the wind of the first
Region. ^se.


Least it should be dilated too much by Multitude of Dung, and Violence of
wind, Ligaments.
Nature has strengthened this Gut with two strong Ligaments; which being
stretched along its Longitude, they make greater foldings, and wrinckles in
this Gut, then in any other. Insomuch that they seem like Ce^s to retain the
Dung and because it wants the bond of the Mesenterium, and consequently that
Humor which proceeds from the Fat of it; Nature has placed about it, here and
there, Fat.
certain fringes of Fat to Moisten it.

That f. 4. K K.
Volve, or Shutter which Authors quarrel so much about, is not to be Shutter*s.
passed by, being fastened to the beginning of the Colon, like a Membranous
Circle, which hinders the flowing back of the Dunge into the Ilium* and the
ascending of a Glister to the same place. Therefore it opens toward the
Inferior Parts; that it may let the Dung pass out, and hinder it from flowing
back.

It is knit to the Membrane of the Peritoneum, by a Membranous ^ye, whatsoever
Con^^xion.
Laurembergus wrote, accusing Riol^n^s of Ignorance* or dul-sightedness.

The last of the Guts is called f. 1. C C.
right, because it passes straight from the top of the 3. Right Gut.
O^ Sacrum, to the Fundament. This Gut, contrary to the Nature of others,
besides the Internal fleshy Membrane, has also an external f. 4. ^.
fleshy Musculous covering, like a sheath; that so it may the more forceably
expel the D^^g, which uses to clod in the extremity of the Colon, and right
Gut. Therefore besides the compression of the Muscles of the Abdomen* and the
Natural motion of the Colon, this same fleshy Sheath, crusheth the Dung; as it
were with ones hand* that so it may pass out.

The Medicinal Consideration.
I pass now to the Diseases and Symptoms of the Guts. They suffer Diseases
General Diseases of the Guts.
boch Similar Organical and Common. For they are distempered by heat and cold,
either with or without Humor. They are inflamed, wounded, Ulcerated, dried,
bound, loosened, made smooth the wrinckles being taken away* as in fluxes and
bloody fluxes. Sometimes they are so stopped that the Excrements are Vomited up.

Besides these the common Diseases, the Guts severally considered, have their
peculiar Peculiar Diseases. Of the Duodenum.
Diseases.

The Duodenum may be stopped by compression of the Sweetbread, and then the
food is Vomited up again two or three hours after it is eaten; because the
passage is stopped.

The Ilium is subject to the Iliack passion, which is an Inflammation and not a
Ilium.
twisting of that Gut; Sometime it falls down into the groyn, and sometimes into
the Gods, which causes Ruptures in those places.

Sometimes the Peritoneum being loosed or broken near the Navel, the Disease
called Jejunum.
Omphalocele comes, in which the Jejunum slipps down.

The Colon is subject to the Colic, which arises either through sharp
Humors, Colon.
or wind, or extreme cold Air. In it worms are bred, which sometimes creep up
into the Stomach and are Vomited out; This Gut alone is subject to Ulcerations,
which causes Putrefaction: which many think, comes from the Mesenterium, and
most unfortunately use purging Medicines and Glysters which increase the evil
and no way help it: Because the extremity of the Colon which is joined to the
right Gut is more fleshy, painful Impostums are bred there, which suppurate and
are sooner cured then they would be, if they came from the Mesentery.

Sometimes Melancholy hard swellings are bred there which cause difficulty in
going to the stool and hasten death.

The right Gut has its peculiar Diseases, Tenasmus, Inflammation, Impostumes,
Right Gut^
which end in Ulcers and fistulas, which are difficult to be cured and require,
the help of the Surgeon.

The Peristalcick motion of the Guts is Sometimes so perverted, that the Dung
flows upward, and Glysters are cast up at the Mouth. And so are suppositaries
also, if you will believe some Practitioners, but then the shutter of the Colon
must needs be broken.

All the Symptoms of the Guts are to be referred to the Excrements when they
are Symptoms.
excessive, as in Fluxes, or deficient, as when men go not to stool unless they
be provoked by Medicine, both which Symptoms impair the health.

Fluxes are called Diarrhea, which is either Chylous or humoral: humoral is
either Caeliacal, or Mesenterical, or Intestinal. When it comes with
Ulceration* Pain and Blood, it is called a Bloody Flux. If it come without
pain, and be like the Water in which raw flesh has bin washed, it comes from the
Liver, and is called Hepatica. If it come through smoothness of the Guts, It is
called Lienteria: if it come with Quitter it is called Mesenterical. The causes
of al these Diseases yea may find in all Practtioners, and therefore we will
make no longer stay upon them.

The internal Tunicle of the Guts Sometimes is severed and lost, which is
thought to be turned into a long worm of two or three Cubits long, caled Tania,
of which you may read in Spigelius Lib. de Lumbrico lato.

Chap. 18. Of the Mesenterium*
THe T. 3. f. 1. A A. T. 4. f. 1. H H.
Mesenterium is the bond of the Guts, which keeps them in there places, ^ What
it is.
that they pass not into confusion and be thereby deprived of there action and
use.

It is a double Membrane, between which, is Fat, and many T. 3. f. 1. a a a a.
Glandulae, or Its Structure.
Kernels, and a fourfold kind of f. 1. B B.
Vessels. This is the structure of it.

It is feared in the midst of the Belly, because it sticks to the transverse
processes Situation*
of the Vertebrae by Lygaments: thence is its original.

It sticks so firmly to the T. 9. f. 1. M M.
Guts, that no division at al appears: between its two Vessels.
Membraines, innumerable T. 4. f. 1. a a a. T. 9. f. 1. c c c.
Veins pass, which are called meseraick or Mesenterick. Also an infinite number
of f. 1. b b b b.
Arteries from the Caeliacal Artery. Also it has f Nerves from the Lumbals, or
Nerves of the Loins.

The fourth kind of Vessels, are called f. 8. n n.
Venae lacteae, by Aselbus, the first finder Vena Lactcae*
of them out; of which we need not doubt, seeing it is now a common received
truth.

This one thing troubles many, Namely, the diversity of their distribution: For
in a beast full fed, that is opened alive, these milky Veins are noted scattered
about the Mesenterium; but some pass to the Sweetbread, others to the Liver,
others to the Trunck of the Vena Cava, none of them to the Spleen; neither like
other, veins are they gathered into one Head; they seem rather to have their
Root, and Foundation in the Sweetbread, and from thence to be distributed this
way, and that way.

These Milky Veins being granted, al difficulties which were formerly about the
Vs^
distribution of Chyle and blood by the same Channel, cease. For the Milky
Veins carry the Chyle to the Liver, and the Meseraick Veins carry back the
Blood to the Nourishing of the Guts. Therefore both these Channels may be
stopped severally; which is to be noted of a Physician, in curing of the
Diseases of the Bowels.

The Mesenterium, seeing it communicates with the Liver by the t. 9. f. 1. a a
a. b b b.
Vena Porta; with the Spleen by the T. 4. f. 1. F F. f. b. A A A.
Caeliacal Arteries; and the Splenical f. 5. K. etc. I I.
Vein; with the Guts by their Connexions, and has a fatty Glandulous substance
fit to receive Humors, and to retain all the impurities of the first Region;
Physicians well call it the Nurse of Diseases; for from that, as from a
Fountain, do all the Diseases of the Bowels proceed: and al Physicians in
prescribing Purges, and Remedies, have a special eye to that.

The Medicinal Consideration.
The Mesenterium labors under Diseases, both Simple, and Compound; it is
Diseases of the Mesenterium.
inflamed, and oftentimes uffers impostumes. It is Ulcerated, and by reason of
its Vessels, often obstructed.

By reason of his fatty and Glandulous substance, it often swells to a great
hard swelling, and is the Foundation of al Kings evil Swellings; which seldom
come in great Number, but the Foundation is here.

It is subject to bastard Collicks, which proceed of sharp Choler, and
degenerate into Palsies in the inferior Limbs, and sometimes in the superior;
and hence comes the Morbus Ructuosus, mentioned by Hippocrates, and Morbus
Siccatorius. Of the Diseases of the Mesenterium, you may read Daniel Sennertus,
and Matthews Martinius, who treats expressly of the Diseases thereof. Although
the Mesaraick, and Milky Veins, which carry Chyle, are fastened to the Guts like
Horse-Le^ches, yet the matter is diversely drawn by those Channels, For the
Liver draws Chyle by the Milky Veins from the Guts, but sends Blood by the
Mesaraick Veins to the Guts; therefore both of them may be diversely obstructed.

For the milky Veins may be obstructed either al along through the thickness of
Chyle; or else in their Roots within the Liver. How the Milky Veins are
affected.


If the obstruction be in the whole passage al along, then there arises a
Chylous

Flux, either white, or tauny in Color. If in their Roots, either within, or
near the Liver, the Chyle has a light Tincture of Blood.

If the Mesarick Veins be stopped within the Liver, the Liver cannot disburden
it How the Meseraick.
self of his Excrements, but they remain either in the Liver, or in the
Mesaraick Veins, and make most terrible obstructions, by reason of the
multitude of the Veins, both within, and without the Liver.

The Milky Veins have no Trunck, but are separated when they enter the hollow
Part of the Liver; and therefore they are not so easily obstructed. And
therefore al Humoral Fluxes of the Belly flow from the Liver or from distempers
of the Mesaraick Veins. Thick Fluxes proceed from the Milky Veins, by reason of
corrupted Chyle.

The Cure of both sort of Fluxes is the same, Namely, by such Medicines as cut,
Cure.
and purge out thick Humors: but in Liquid Fluxes of the Me^araick Veins, you
must sometimes use strengthening Medicines, And sometimes bleeding and Vomiting
is more proper for these Fluxes, than for those of the Milky Veins.

Chap: 19. Of the Sweetbread, or Pancreas.
THe T. 4. f. 1. E E.
Sweetbread is a body neither truly f. 2. A A. f. 3. A A.
fleshy, nor truly Glandulous, but Substance.
in a middle between both: Yet it is very Syongy, that so it may receive the
Excrements of the Spleen and Liver.

It lies under the Stomach like a soft Cushion* and is stretched from the f. 1.
A.
Liver to Situation.
the f. 1. D.
Spleen; and if it have its Natural conformation, it is as broad as the Palm of
the Hand.

It receives the T. 4. f. 1. F F.
Trunck of the Vena Porta; the Milky Veins, and the T. 9. f. 1. a a a. b b b.
Splenical Vessels.
Vein, passes to the f. 1. I.
Spleen through its Cavity.

Besides, Virsungus Discovered a new f. 1. D. f. 3. E E.
Channel in the Sweetbread, passing a A new Channel
long the length of it; which is inferred into the f. 3. B B.
Jejunum, near the f. 3. D D.
passage of Cho^er: but for what end this was framed is yet uncertain, whether
it be to cleanse the Excrements of the Sweetbread; or rather of the spleen,
which are carried thither.

So Fallopius found the Channels in the Sweetbread, no way to communicate Its
Use.
with the Veins, but that being filled with Choler, they empty themselves into
the Bowels: o^ whether rather, they carry a portion of Chyle to the Spleen, for
a particular making of Blood: but if this Channel do not touch the Spleen, then
this Office is void, and it must be to cleanse the Sweetbread of the
Excrements it receives, either from the Liver or Spleen; o^ to carry away the
fi^th of the Chyle, which happily may remain there.

It is observed, that this Part increases, when the Spleen decreaseth; so that
it may well be called the Spleens deputy. There is the Seat of Hypochondriacal
Melancholy, and it is the entertainer of many Diseases, as well as the
*Mesenterium* both of them breed Sicknesses to the Body, if they be filled with
evil, and filthy Humors.

Chap. 20. Of the Vena Porta.
WIthin the Belly, are two notable Veins contained; both of them take Two
Veins. Porta.
their original from the Liver: The one is called T. 4. f. 1. F F.
Porta, which is subservient to the Places dedicated to nourishment, nether
passes it further. The and Cav^*
other is called T. 5. f. 2. F. T. 12. f. 1. C.
Cava, which nourishes the whole Body, from the Crown of the Head to the sole
of the Foot, and passes out of the Peritoneum, and creeps along the Back and
Loins, with the great T. 5. f. 2. G. T. 12. f. 2. C.
Artery: Some think it is produced from the Heart, and not from the Liver. The
Vena Porta arises from the hollow. Part of the Liver, which it fills, and is
called the Gate of the Liver, or the Vein which is seated at the Gates of the
Liver.

The Trunk of the Vena Porta descending into the Belly, sends out a branch
called Branches of the Vena Porta.
Gastro Epiploon, which is distributed to the Stomach, and Omentum. The second
T. 4. f. 6. m.
branch is called Intestinal, which is carried to the Duodenum: after that,
Superior.
it sends f. 6. d d.
two branches to the Gal, and the last f. 6. B.
branch it sends to the right side of the Stomach.

These branches thus produced, the Trunck is divided into two famous branches;
the f. 6. g g.
Splenical and f. 6. C D.
Mesenterical. This again, is divided into four branches, of Inferior.
which, the greatest keeps the name Mesenterical: The second is called f. 6. I
I.
Haemorrhoida, and passes to the right Gut: The third is called C^calis, and
passes to the Gut Cae^um, or else to the beginning of the Colon: and the
fourth passes to, and nourishes the remainder of the Colon.

The splenical branch, when it has passed through the Sweetbread, produces
four opposite Veins, above and below. The first is called T. 4. f. 6. e e
Gastrica Major, which ascends to the left side of the Stomach. Opposite to
this is the right f. 6. e.
Epiploica, which is distributed to the Omentum. The Coronaria succeeds this,
and is distributed to the Somach, and the left Epiploica, to the Omentum.

Chap. 21. What is to be considered in the Vena Porta.
MAny things come to be considered in the Vena Porta.

1. It makes the first Region of the Body, with those Parts which it
nourishes, and passes with its Blood.

2. It contains a peculiar sort of blood, which is not circled, as the Blood of
the Place.
Vena Cava is; and yet it may with the branches of the Caeliacal Artery, have a
Blood.
have transflux, and transvasation.

3. That it carries only Blood, and not Chyle, which is done by the Milky
Veins, as also the impurities of the Liver and Spleen, to the Mesenterium,
Sweetbread, Office.
and Guts.

4. That within the Liver, it has either very small, or no Communion at al by
its Roots, with the Roots of the Vena Cava; and therefore each Vein carries its
Communion.
peculiar Blood. The blood of the Vena Porta is thick, and nourishes the parts
of the first Region. The blood of the Vena Cava, is subtle, fit for
circulation, which nourishes the parts of the second, and third Region.

5. That the branches of the Vena Porta within the Liver, are larger than those
of the Vena Cava, if that do arise from thence. Larg^.


6. That in a Diseased body, it is usually filled with Caco-Chymia; which,
whether it ought to be emptied by breathing a Vein, a man may well make a
scruple, lest the Circulation of blood infect the whole Mass.

7. Whether the Vena Porta, after two or three Evacuations by the Arm, may not
better be purged by the Hemorrhoids, or opening a Vein in one of the Evacuation.
Feet?

8. That al impurities of the Belly, are contained in this Vein, from whence
come terrible obstructions of the Spleen, and Mesenterium. Obstructions.


9. That there are no Shutters found in this Vein, as there are in the branches
of the Vena Cava.

10. That the Vena Porta has ways, whereby it disburdens it self, as the
Veins of the Hemorrhoids: its reflux into the great Artery by the Caeliacal,
and Vomiting of Blood against Nature, in Plethorick Bodies.

Chap. 22. Of the Caeliacal Artery.
THis is a branch of the great Artery descending, and accompanies the branches
Original.
of the VenaPorta: for look how many branches the Vena Porta is divided into,
so many also, is the T. 12. f. 2. p. q. r.
Caeliacal Artery divided; which notwithstanding, has Pulse from the heart,
and follows the motion thereof, as other Arteries do: but seeing his blood
injoyes not the benifit of circulacion, as other Arteries do, so that it seems
like a separated Artery, Sometimes his motion is hindered, when there Motion.
is an Inflammation in the Abdomen; the rest of the A^^eries gently mooving, as
is often observed in Hypocondriack Melancholy, and other inflammations of the
Hypoc^ondrium.

Notwithstanding it has Communion with the Vena Porta by mutual conjunction
Anastomosis.
of their mouths; by which means there is a conflux of blood between them,
whereby the vital Spirit of the Abdomen, is preserved.

This Pul^ation, or Palpitation, was known to Hippocrates, in Lib. 7. Epid. In
that History of his, about the pulsation of the belly, near the Navel; and in
his Pr^gnosticks he makes mention of the same; If the Veins about the Midrife
^eat, they foreshew either trouble of mind, or Madness.

The Caeliacal Artery in Hippocrates Book of the Diseases of Women, is called,
the breathing place of the inferior Belly: See Duretus in Coacis. Page, 183.

The f. 2. t.
Splenical Artery, is notable; which is not brought by the Sweetbread,
Doctrine of the Splenical Artery.
but creeps along the Longitude of the Diaphragma, near the back bone: it is as
big as the Splenical Vein, but Ambiguous in his progress, and gives no branches
to the Parts near it.

It is inserted into the Spleen by a double branch, as the Splenical Vein is;
and therefore when the Caeliacal Artery is taken away, it is in vain to look
for the Splenical; for there remains none, but two or three sinal Arteries,
which pass to the Stomach.

From the Splenical Artery, near the Spleen, pass two small Arteries to the
Stomach. From this faithful and true relation, you may easily know how
malignant Vapors are carried from the Spleen and Mesenterium, to the Heart;
whence in Pla^tus, he complained, that he had a Splenitick Heart, it leaped,
and beat his Breast.

Chap. 23. Of the Stomach.
THe Stomach is the Kitchen of the first Concoction; it consists of proper
Membranes, Membranes of the Stomach.
and one T. 12. f. 2. t.*
common, one which it receivs from the Peritoneum. The T. 3. f. 4. C C.*
internal is rugged, and hairy, like a piece of Silk: The T. 3. f. 4. E.*
External is fleshy, that it may receive the heat of the Bowels which lie upon
it, to wit, of the Liver and Spleen which heat it. And that it may the more
easily compress, and hold together the internal, it has a threefold sort of
strings, which strengthen it to that end; and also when it is slackened with
store of Meat, they do contract it again, so soon as the digested Aliment is
forced out of the Stomach. Its Situation.


It is T. 2. f. 10. C.*
Situate between the Liver, and the Spleen, as it were between two fires,
bending a little toward the left Hypochondrium, if the Spleen hold its natural
bigness; otherwise, when the Spleen is bigger than ordinary, it thrusts the
Stomach Its Size.
into the middle.

The greatness of the Stomach cannot be exactly defined, because being empty,
and exhaust, if strong, it is so contracted, that it is no bigger than a man's
Fist. Being stretched and widened with store of Beily Chea^, it wi^ contain
six pints of Drink, with a Pound or two of Meat, as is daily seen in Gluttons,
and Toss-Pots.

There is but one Stomach in Mankind, which is sometimes divided according to
Number.
the Longitude into two Cavities; which have their Ingress and Egress, like the
Stomachus, and Pylorus. And such persons do vomit with great difficulty; and
when they do, they cast up Excrementitious Humors without that broth which they
took the same moment. Shall we say the separating faculty can work so quick, or
rather that the broth is slipped down into the Lower division of the Stomach
from whence it cannot easily return, because of the narrowness of the upper
Orifice.

If the Stomach be single and rightly shaped, it is of a longish Spherical
Figure, Figure.
and is compared to the Belly of a Bag-Pipe, setting aside the Oesophagus and
Guts.

The Egress of the Stomach is equal in height unto its Ingress; that is to say,
the Two Orifices.
two Orifices thereof, are equal in height, least the Meat and Drink should
slip through, before they be digested; and then being digested by the strength
of the Stomach Contracting it self, the Pylorus is opened, and the Chylus sent
into the Gut.

The Ingress, or upper T. 3. f. 2. H. f. 4. A.*
Orifice of the Stomach, is in a special manner termed The upper.
Somachus, being the Seat of Hunger and Thirst, because it is crowned with two
Nerves, called f. 2. F G.*
Stomachici Nervi; and is consequently of an Exquisite sense.

The lower Orifice, is called f. 2. K. f. 4. B.*
Pylorus; in which you shall observe a Valve, The Lower*
round in shape, and as visible and remarkable as the Valve in the Gut Colon.
This Valve is to hinder the Chyle from returning back again into the Stomach.

Besides these two Orifices in the Stomach, there is observable its f. 2. III.*
Bottom, or Its Bottom*
Inferior Part, more fleshy than the rest; because therein the Meat is boiled
or digested.

The internal f. 4. E.
surface of the Stomach is wrinckled, and stored with fibers, that Inner
Surface*
it may thereby retain what is taken in for nourishment.

The Action of the Stomach is the Coction of Aliments; which though they be
Action. Digestion how Caused.
many, and of diverse kinds; yet the Stomach, by a propriety, or inbred faculty
which it has, does dissolv^^ and as it were melt them, and turn them into a
substance like Creme; which is (...) Chylu^. How that is done, I have already
examined in my Anthropographia; and in my Answer to Wallaeus, a very learned
Physician of Leyden.

The Stomach has Communion, by reason of neighbor hood, with the Liver,
Communion with other parts.
the Gal, the Spleen, the Sweetbread, the uppermost Guts, upper Part of the
Mesentery; and also by the veins which it has from the Trunk of Vena Porta,
and the Splenical Branch. It Communicates also with the Heart and Lungs, by the
Stomachicat Nerves; of which some Part is Communicated to the Heart and Lungs:
it Communicates also with the Brain, by the T. 3. f. 2. F G. f. ^. III.
Stomachical Nerves, which proceed from the sixth Conjugation.

It does chiefly Sympathise with the Kidneis, when they are misaffected, either
Great Sympathy with the Kidneys.
by want of Appe^ite, or by frequent Vomiting, by reason of T. 3. f. 8.
a complication of the Costal and Stomachical Nerves, disposed between the two
Kidneis. From whence are derived Nerves, that are dispersed into al Parts of
the Belly.

By reason of its Nervous substance, it has Communion with the whole Body;
Communion with the whole Body.
whence it is the in the Disease Cholera, the Ancles are contracted; and there
is anxiety, and Unquietness of the whole Body, when the Stomach is disordered.

The Medicinal Consideration.
THe Stomach is afflicted with diverse Diseases, Simi^ar, Organick, and Common.
Stomachs Distemper.
For it is troubled with a Simple, or Compound destemper, while it is over
cooled, over heated, over-dried, or over-moistned: of which, Galen discourses
accurately, in the seventh of his Method.

Also, it is Inflamed, Impostumated, and Vlcerated; and these three happen
Inflammation. Apostumation. Ulcer. Incision of its Bottom.
chiefly in the upper, or lower Orifices, because of their fleshyness: sometimes
they may happen in the bottom, which is wounded, and healed, yea, and can bear
incision, that any Iron, or other hard thing which hurts the Stomach may be
taken out, when it cannot otherwise be voided, either upward or down ward: as
we read in that story of a Prusian, who had swallowed a Knife.

Hippocrates observed a burning Heat about the Stomach, in his Aphorisms:
^urning.
which is dangerous, by reason of Choler shed between the Coats of the
Stomach; or by reason of the neighboring Parts burning, and Inflamed.

Sometimes the Gall touches those Parts of the Stomach which are next it, and
^red by the Gall.
scorches the same, as if it were burnt with a Fire brand red hot.

It is also troubled with Diseases of Magnitude, Increased o^ Diminished;
Diseases in Situation, in Cavity, in Figure, and in Smoothness.

The Magnitude of the Stomach, Augmented, and Widened, as in Gluttons,
Distended.
does over much stretch the Stomach, and loosen its Fibers. So that afterward,
it cannot be sufficiently contracted to embrace the Meat in such sort, as to
turn the same into good Chylus: which is the Cause of crudity, and weakness in
the Stomach.

And when the Substance thereof is so streitghned, through dryness or Swelling
of Stra^^ned.
the Membranes, that it cannot sufficiently widen it self to contain the Meat;
then is it pained after Eating, though but a little Meat be taken.

But the Stomach is more frequently Diseased by Dilatation, and Exolution,
Widened and and slackned.
or Flaggyness, and Slapness, both in persons otherwise in health, and such as
are sick; while with Broaths and plenty of cold drink the Tone or (...) vigor
of the Stomach, is so dissolved, that a looseness of the Belly is thereby
caused: which is a^tributed to the Corruption of the Meat through an hot
distemper of the Stomach; or to the Obstruction of the Mesaraick Veins: which
Symptom, notwithstanding, is often Caused by the over great Laxity of the
Stomach, which Fernelius calls Morbum Materiaea a Disease in the matter; and it
must be Cured with strengthening and astringent things. This has been ^served in
the opening of dead Bodies, where the Stomach is found so (...), and so
widened, that it would contain the Head of an Infant. And therefore it is very
necessary for a Practitioner to observe the Diseases of the Matter, which are
Cured with drying and astringent things, both given in, and applied outwardly.
This was the Doctrine of that sect of Ancient Physicians, which were termed
Methodici, who made Laxity, and Astriction, the Chief things observable in all
Diseases.

Sometime the Stomach changes its natural Situation, and is drawn back toward
Changes po^^ure.
the Midrife, which Causes shortness of Breath after Meals. Sometimes it hangs
down as low as the Navel, as has been observed in Bodies dissected, which makes
a bad life, and a bad Concoction.

It is obstructed when its upper, or lower Orifice, is troubled with some
swelling, Obstructed.
which hinders the coming in of Nutriment into the stomach, and its going out
after digestion.

It is also Diseased with Smoothness, when the Inner Surface, which naturally
Made smooth.
should be wrinkled, is become smooth, which Causes that symptom which is
termed Lienteria, which is, when there is such looseness of the Belly, that the
Meat comes away unchanged, just as it was Eaten.

Diverse Symptoms infest the Stomach in respect of its Action being hurt, and
in regard of the disorder of such things as are Evacuated therefrom. The A^tion
of Action Hurt.
the Stomach is, Appetite, Concoction and Chylification. The Appetite is hurt,
when it is Abolished, Diminished, or Depraved. It is Abolished, when there is
no Stomach or Appet^te, or when Meat is loathed, especially flesh, which is the
Want of Appetite.
worst. Appetite is often Diminished in Diseases, which is not so bad. But the
Depravation of Appetite is worse.

Now it is depraved, when there is a Dog-like Appetite which cannot be
satisfied; Dog appetite. A^surd longings.
or when evil things are desired; which kind of depraved Appetite, Pliny terms
Malacia; and Galen, cally it Citta; in Latin Pica, the Mag-p^e

Chylification Abolished, or Diminished, is called, Apepsia, Inconcoction; and
Undig^stion. S^ow d^g^stion. Ill dig^stion.
by vulgar Physicians, Corruption Chyli, a corruption of the Chyle. When Meat is
long in digestion, it is called Bradu^epsia, slow Digestion. When the Meat is
corrupted, its called Dysp^psia, ill digestion.

To Action hurt, belong the Feeling, Motion, and Pain of the Stomach. There is
feling in the whole Stomach, but it is exquisite in the upper Orifice, by reason
of certain Nerves of the Six Pare, which are there interwoven with admirable
workmanship.

Feeling, is Abolished, and Diminished, when there is need of hungring and
Re^^sing Meat.
thirsting, and yet the Stomach perceives it not, but refuses both Meat and
drink. This proceeds from a great di^temper of Heat, or Cold; which causes
Mor^ification, unless the Patient be distracted.

The sense of feeling is depraved in the Pain of the whole Stomach, or of the
upper Heart-burning
Orifice thereof, which draws the Heart and noble Parts to Sympathise
therewith: wherefore this pain of the Stomach, is called Cardiogmos, Cardialgia
and the aching of the Heart, or Heart-burning; and causes that kind of swouning,
which is called Syncope Stomachica, the Stomach swouning; and comes through the
Hearts Sympathising with the S^omach.

And to this Pain of the Stomach, belongs Anxiety, and U^quiet tumblings and
Anxiety.
^ossings; which the Greeks term Riptasm^s, or Ass; from whence the Fever
Assodes, has its Name; in which the Sick are full of unquietness,

The motion of the Stomach, is Relaxation, Coarctation; By the Want of
Contraction upon the Meat H^ccuping. Bel^hing.
latter, it shuts it self upon the Meat to digest the same, and when that
motion fails, there is nothing but ^^uctuations, and risings, both when a man
is full and fasting.

The motion of the Stomach is depraved in Hiccupings, and Bel^hings. Hiccuping
is more trouble some then Belching, and is an il sign in fevers, whether it
come by fault of the Stomach it self, or by its Sympathising with some other
Part, especially the Li^er. Hippocrates mentions a Disease called Morbus
Ru^^uosus, the Belching Disease.

Disorders in point of Excret^on are frequent in the Stomach; either upwards,
in Symptoms in excretion a^e.
Vomitings, and Spawlings; or downwards, in the Lienteria, Diarr^^a, and
Coel^a^a Affectio.

Vomiting happens, either by reason of obstruction of the upper, or of the
lower Vomiting.
Orifice; if the upper be obstructed, the Meat is stopped in the upper Orifice
a while, and presently after Vomited: if the fault be in the lower, the Meat is
retained a longer time, and at last Vomited up.

A daily Vomiti^g up of Choler, without further trouble, is no Disease, nor ill
Of Ch^ler.
Symptom; because it happens by reason that a branch of the Choler carrying
Vessel, is carried into the Stomach; as Galen observes and proves by examples.

Vomiting of Blood is an evil Symptom, whether the Blood flow from the Liver,
Of Blood.
by the Veins which are branched from the porta, into the Stomach; or from the
Spleen by the Ta^. 4. Fig. 8. let. h.
Vas Breve. Sometime the Patients life is Vomited up this ways, according to
that expression of a Poet.

O^t of his Mouth, he sperves his Purple Soul.

The frequent breaking up of wind with Belching, may be reduced to this
Symptom Of wind.
of Vomiting; and this may be that which is termed Cholera Sicca, known to
Hippocrates, and declared with its signs, by Ludovicus Dure^us in his Comment
upon the Coick Praedictions of Hippocrates.

But there is a Malignant Symptom, called Cholera humida, Of Choler up and
down.
which is a violent, and plentyful voiding of Choler upwards and downwards,
which kills within four days; becauses very much Evacuation suddenly caused,
is dangerous. H. p. 1. Book of Aphorisms; and al excess is an Enemy to Nature,
according to the same Hippocrates. It proceeds from an Inflammation of the
Stomach, which is allayed by cooling and astringent Remedies, inwardly taken,
and outwardly applied, but especially by the drinking of the spaw Waters, and
other Medicinal springs of the like Nature; and by Laudanum discreetly given.
We must avoid the use of cordial, and Stomach Pouders of an hot Nature, because
they vex and fret the Stomach. The Physicians of Paris do let Blood, in a small
Quantity, though the pulse be very weak, least the Stomach Heat being
suffocated, a Gangraene should arise.

Spawling, or Salivation, unless it be caused by anointing the Body with
Quicksilver 2. Spawling.
(which they call Fluxing) comes either from the Brain, or else (and that
oftentimes) from the Spleen, whose superfluous serosity is received into the
Stomach and voided at the Mouth by spitting and spawling.

The Cardiacus Morbus belongs to the Diseases of the Stomach; of which, read
Morbus Cardiacus.
Trallianus Lib. 3. Chap. 5. 25. And Mercurialis in Varjis Lectionibus. It Was
knowingly said of Seneca in his 15 Epistle; Bibere et sudare Vita Cardiaci est;
drinking and sweating, is the Life of a Cardiacal Person. Pliny, in his 23.
Book, Cap. 1. of his Natural History, says, that al Hope of Curing this
Disease consists in the use of wine. Which he borrows from Varro, out of the
14. Chap. of the 13. Book. This Morbus Cardiacus, is an extreme Faintness of
the Stomach, joined with much sweating: it proceeds from an hot Distemper
thereof.

Among Diseases of the Stomach Rumination ought to be reckoned, which is an
Rumination.
inversion or turning of the Stomach, as it were Inside out, which in some
Living Creatures is no trouble, as in those that chew the ^ud. Of this Disease
see what Horstius says in his Epistles.

Out of this Anatomical and Pathological Discourse may be collected, what parts
Vomits warily to be used.
are purged through the Stomach by way of Vomit: whether it be safe to
exagitate this Part by Violent Vomits: whether it be good to use a man's self to
this kind of Evacuation; seeing no good Hu^wife makes a ^lo^e-stool of her
Pottage-Pot. The best way is, diligently to preserve the Stomach* and to
Roborate ^s Tone or contractive Vigor, rather than to dissolve and s^^cken the
same by Vomiting, unless Nature desire to di burden her self that way, and the
patient be easy to vomit, and such preparatives be prem^^ed as the Ancients
were wont to use.

Wherefore they deal unskilfully, not to say wickedly, who after many other
Vomits not to be given to persons very weak.
Medicines tried, do give vomits to such as are at Deaths door, as the last
help, which suffocate that little life which remains, and bring a speedy
death. But some will say that Empericks and Mountebancks, do this with good
success. I answer, if you should reckon up those patients who have taken them
to their cost, you would find an hundred dead, for two robustions persons
saved; who escaped by their good fortune, not by help of the vomiting
Medicament: it is better to use vomits rather at the beginnings of Diseases,
while Choler works and ferments in places near the Stomach, than when the Pangs
of Death have seized upon the Patient. It Is Man slaughter, to wrong People in
their health. The discreeter sort of Empericks, when they are called to such
Patients, are wont to find fault with what other Physicians have acted, and to
declare the Patient dangerously sick, and there upon, warily to give their
Aurum Potabile or some such other. Medicine as a cordial and restorer of
strength, until Nature being freed from al disturbance of Physic, begins to
gather strength: and then they take opportunity to give a gentle Vomit which
Purges serous, or such like Excrements, up and down. In very many Diseases,
Hippocrates says, it is better to be quiet, than to do any thing; that is, it is
better to leave the work to Nature, than to give any Medicament. And if the
Physician knew that he is the Servant and Assistant of Nature, he would cure
more Patients than he does. See Valesius upon the 19. Text of Sect. 2. of the
6. Book of Hippocrates Epidemicks.

Sluggishness of the Belly, and impurity of the Vessels, brings al into
confusion. Hippocrates.

Chap. 24. Of the Liver.
THe Liver, which is the Instrument of making Blood, consists of a Substance
Substance of the Liver. Its Color.
proper to it self, fitted, and ordained to that end; for it is like congealed
blood, and therefore red, and the same color it imprints upon the blood;
howbeit the Liver of some Fishes, is of another Color, viz. green, black,
yellow as Saffron; in which Creatures, the blood receives its red color by
passing through the substance of the Heart.

But in Men, and other living Creatures, which have the two Veins distinct,
called Blood, where, and how made.
Porta, and Cava, the whole Mass of blood is wrought in the Liver; but one part
thereof, less perfect than the rest, is by the Vena Porta distributed among
those Parts which serve to nourish the Body; another part being conveyed by
the Vena Cava, is perfected in the Heart, of which is made the Arterial blood,
which is distributed to all the parts, and afterward is transmitted into the
Veins, that so in a Circular motion, it may pass again into the Heart, that by
its flux, it may maintain the perpetual motion of the Heart; as the Wheels of a
Mil, are continually turned about by force of the Wind, or Water-fal.

Such blood is furnished to those parts, which having sense and motion, depend
upon the Brain or Heart.

The Liver is T. a. f. 10. 1. D. T. 4. f. 1. A B.
situate in the right Hypochondrium, under the bastard, or short Situation of
the Liver. Bigness.
Ribs, and fills with its bulk, all that Cavity to the Sword-like Cartilage.
Sometimes it is so enlarged, as to exceed those Natural Bounds, and then it
rests upon the Stomach, reaching as far as the Spleen, and descends three or
four fingers breadth below the bastard, or short Ribs: which happens, partly
through relaxation of the bands wherewith it is bound to the Midrif, and short
Ribs, partly through swelling of the Liver it self, over loaded with Nutriment.

In Mankind, there is one single Liver, which is not divided into Lobes, or
Fingers, Number.
as in bruit Beasts; yet there is a certain T. 4. f. 5. C.
Cleft to be seen, where the Umbilical f. 1. a. f. 5. B. T. 2. f. 10. G.
Vein creeps into the Liver; and many times two little Lobes, or Laps, are T.
4. f. 4. A A.
seated Lobes, or laps.
under the greater ones: sometimes there is only f. 5. B.
one, which being hollowed, receives the Trunk of Vena f. 5. I.
Porta, which is included in a Duplication of the Omentum, or Call, that the
Excrements of the Liver might be derived thither.

Although the Liver be one continued Substance, yet Anatomists divide the same
Two Regions of the Liver.
into two Regions; the one superior, and exterior; the other inferior, and
internal. The superior, or upper, is called the f. 1. B. f. 4. A A.
Gibbous, or bunching part of the Liver: the inferior is called the f. 1. A. f.
A A.
hollow part of the Liver. Into the upper Region, the Vena Its Vessels.
f. 4. D D.
Cava sprinkles its Roots: into the nether Region, the Vena f. 5. I. etc.
Porta sows abroad its Suckers.

Besides these Roots, there are observable, certain Branches of the Channel of
Choler, dispersed among the Roots of Vena Porta; and certain little twigs of
the Milky Veins, which near the Trunk of Porta, do enter into the Cavity of the
Liver. m T. 9. f. 1. a a a a.
l f. 15. H.


It is the mind of Physicians, that both these Regions ought diligently to be
observed, Diversity of the Regions, to be observed in practice.
because in either of these Regions, the morbifick matter may be contained,
which is diversely to be purged, according as it possesses the one or other
Region: for as much as the bunching part of the Liver, is purged by the
Kidneys, through the Vena Cava, the hollow part is purged by the Guts, by means
of the Branches of Porta, which are terminated in the Guts, conveighing blood,
and the evil humors of the Liver. I have seen Impostumes in the bunching part,
when the hollow part has not been at al tainted: and on the other side, I have
seen the hollow part impostumated, without any detriment to the bunching part.

Howbeit, inasmuch as I cannot see those two Regions separated so much as by a
Membrane; I cannot believe that one part can be sick, and the other sound,
unless the morbifick humor be contained within the Pipes of the little Veins.

Many Anatomists do affirm, that the Roots of Vena Cava, and Vena Porta, do
Whether the Roots of Cava and Po^^^, are united in the liver.
meet together, and are united one unto another by many Anastomoses: others
deny that there is any such Conjunction; among which, I willingly acknowledge my
self for one, and give my voice on their side: my Reasons I have els-where laid
down, and Nature would have it so, that natural, and vicious Humors might not
be confusedly jumbled together in the Liver.

You shall observe, how the Vein which is taken for Cava, takes its rise out of
How blood is distributed from the Liver
the upper part of the Liver, and is inserted into the Trunk of Cava, near the
midrif, that the Cava may forth with power out the blood which it has received
from the Liver, or rather transmit the same into the neighboring Heart,
situate only two or three fingers breadths off, and enclosed in the
Pericardium, which cleaves circularly to the Nervous Center of the Diaphragma:
whereby thou may perceive, that the greater part of the blood, goes into the
right Ventricle of the Heart, that it may become Arterial, by a double
Circulation, Particular, and General. A double Circulation of the blood.
I call that the particular Circulation, which is made from the right Ventricle
of the Heart through the midst of the Lungs, so as that the blood comes again
into the left Ventricle of the Heart. The general Circulation, is that which is
made through the Channels, or large Pipes of the Cava, and the Aorta, after
that manner which is described in my Treatise of the Circulation of the Blood.

The Medicinal Consideration.
The Liver being affected contrary to Nature, is subject to any distemper,
either Diseases of the liver in respect of Temper. substance* Situation.
with, or without matter; and instead of good blood, it breeds that which is
Choleric, Phlegmatic, or Melanchollick. It is altered, and corrupted in its
substance, whiles it loses its Tone, and becomes flaggy, and faint.

It changes its Situation, when it is placed in the left side, and the Spleen
on the right, which seldom happens: or when upon the slackning of those
Ligaments wherewith it is fastened to the Midrif, and Sword-like Cartilage, it
sinks below the short Ribs, as far as to the Navel.

Its Magnitude is changed, when it is so overcharged with Humors that it swells
Magnitude.
again.

It Is Figure, or Shape, is also changed, if we feel it to be round. Oftentimes
its Shape.
passages are stopped, namely, the Roots of the Cava, and Porta; or the Roots of
the Gallbladder are stopped, though the other be open.

It has communion in regard of Neighborhood, with many parts which it touches,
Communion with other parts:
but especially with the Stomach, which it often harms, being inflamed, or
impostumated: and sometimes it exulcerates the same, and makes an hole therein,
to empty its self that way of its Quittor. With its hollow part, it touches the
Guts, which are offended in Diseases of the Liver; and also the Peritoneum it
self, by reason of the Coat which it imparts, and the Midrif, by reason of ^m
Connection they have with the Liver, are drawn to sympathize in its Disea^.

The Action of the Liver, which is Sanguification, or Blood making, is here by
Action.
the fore-recited Diseases: whereupon diverse Diseases, and diverse Pains do
arise.

Wherefore the Similary Diseases of the Liver are al Distempers, and the Laxity
Its Similar Diseases.
thereof, from which some are termed Hepatici, who having a looseness do void
Excrementitious Blood, like the Water in which Raw flesh has been washed, or
Excrementitious Humors of bad and diverse Colors.

Its Organick Disease is obstruction. Its Disease common to the Similar and Its
Organick, Common and Compound Diseases.
Organick Parts, is an Ulcer and a wound. Its Compound Disease is al sort of
Tumors, whence comes the Term of Inflammation of the Liver. also a scirrhus and
a purulent Impostum, which is frequent enough.

Its Symptoms are, Action hurt, and that manyfold: and first of all, its
attraction Its Symptoms.
of Chyle being abolished, breeds a looseness of the Belly, in which Chyle is
voided. Its Retention abolished, breeds the Liver looseness called Diarrhaea
Hepatica. But the Principal Action of the Liver, viz. Sanguification or
Bloodboiling is abolished in the Dropsy, is diminished in Atrophia, and is
depraved in Cachexia.

The Dropsy is defined to be, a frustration of Sanguification in the Liver,
when Dropsy.
in stead of blood or natural spirit, it produces nothing but Water and Wind,
which are emptied forth into the Belly, whence come the Ascites and Tympanites,
that is the Bottle-bellied, and the Drum-bellyed Dropsy; or else they are
conveyed into the Habit of the body, whence comes the Dropsy Anasarca and
Empneumatosis, viz. The Bloat-fac'd, Puf-Cheek'd Dropsy. Sometimes a Dropsy is
caused through fault of the Spleen and other Parts, but not without the Liver
be hurt, and likewise the heart, by means of the Circulation of the blood.

Atrophia (or falling away of flesh) is an hindrance of the bodies nourishment,
Atrophy.
by reason of the badness of the blood which the Liver Makes.

Cachexia is a depraved kind of Nourishment, by reason of bad Sanguification.
Cachex^.
Before these, is wont to march a simple accident, viz. Badness of Color in the
Skin, either bluish white, or Yellow, by reason of Serosity or Choler shed
into the Habit of the whole Body, even as far as the face, by which we discern
the evil dispositions of the Liver.

Chap. 25. Of the Bladder of Gall.
NOw follows the Folliculus Fellis, or Cystis Billiaria, the Bladder which Its
Name.
is ordained to contain that Excrementitious Choler which flows from the
Liver.

Its substance is Membranous, being distinguished into two Coats. Substance.
Situation.


It is placed under T. 4. f. 1. C. f. 5. F.
the Liver, and affixed to the greater Lobe or lap thereof, and as it were,
overwhelmed therein.

The bottom of the Gal Bladder respects the inferior Parts, Its Neck, the
superior Bottom. Neck. Sinus.
parts, and a pipe derived from the Gallbladder called Canalis Cysticus, is
carried obliquely til it meet the Canalis Hepaticus. There is a Sinus, or
bending near the Orifice of the Bladder,

Its Magnitude varies according to the plenty or Scarsity of Choler, It is only
one. Bigness. Number.
It has been found sometime double, but that was contrary to the intention of
nature. It Is divided into the bottom, which is the lower Part, and into the
Neck which is the upper Part.

It has an oblong shape resembling a large Pear, broad at the bottom and
straitter Shape.
toward the Neck.

It is hollow that it may receivve Choler, and retain it til a convenient time
of Passages of Choler.
emptying the same: is has certain pipes or Channels to carry Choler: the one
f. 5. H H. f. 3. c.
broader and longer, drawn out from the Liver to the beginnigng of the f. 3. D.
Intestinum Jejunum, that is the Hungry Gut, or Gut termed Jejunum, by which
the thicker Meatus Hepaticus.
Choler passes directly away; the other Pipe is T. 4. f. 8. b.
smaller and shorter, which is drawn Cross-waies, from the Neck of the bladder,
to the foresaid passage. The former I call Meatum Hepaticum, the Liver Channel;
the latter I call Cysticum Meatum, the Bladder passage, by reason of its Rise
and Orifice. For the Meatus Cysticus carries the thinner Choler into the Meatus
Hepaticus, which a porous Meatus Cysticus.
Membrane, full of little holes, rooted in the Liver had sucked therefrom.

And therefore we must observe, that there are two sorts of Choler in the
Liver, Two sorts of Choler ^in the Liver. Communion.
and two Channels to Purge them away at diverse times; which is a Consideration
of great moment in the Cure of Diseases.

The Gall Bladder communicates with the Stomach by touching the same, which it
heates so, as sometimes to burn the same, when the Gall Is inflamed in its
Bladder. Sometimes it sticks to the Gut Colon which passes along hard by, which
it often Colers Yellow, and provokes it to expel the Excrements.

This expurgation of Choler, being liable to be stopped, does vex the body with
many Inconveniences.

There is seldom observed a third channel of Choler, which goes into the
Stomach, unless some Part creep from the Meatus Hepaticus unto the Pylorus.

It has manifest Veins from the Porta called Venae Cysticae. Its Arteries and
Its Vessels.
Nerves are not so visible.

The Medicinal Consideration.
THe Gallbladder is subject to few Diseases. The most common are, when its
Diseases of the Gallbladder.
Cavity or its Channels are obstructed. When its Cavity is full of little
stones, or filled with one great one, by reason of thick Choler changed into a
stony substance. Its passages are stopped in the Liver, or in the Gut. Also it
is broken, through violeut motion in Vomiting; and sometime it is so distended
with Choler, when the passages are stopped that should Evacuate the same, that
it has been seen as big as both a Man's Fists.

Sometimes, when it is empty of choler, it dries up, so that nothing therefore
remains saving the ductus Hepaticus. If we believe Fernelius, there could be
no other Cause found of the death of some persons, than that their Gallbladder
had no Choler in it: if so, the evil and venomous Quality of the suppressed
Choler was so great, as to infect the heart, or to weaken and corrupt some
noble part.

The Symptoms of this Part are more manifest; which do consist in its action
Its Symptoms.
hurt, or in the undue proportion or quantity of the Excrementitious Choler.
The Action of the Gallbladder is attraction of Choler, which is either
diminished, or abolished. The undue proportions or quantity of the Choler is,
when either too little or too much is voided forth.

Which Symptoms chiefly appear in those Parts which Sympathise with the
Gallbladder, Their Signs.
as in the Stomach, when Choler is vomited up; in the whole body, when Choler is
shed abroad through the Veins into the habit of the Body, and deformes the
Skin; or when it takes its Course into the Guts and causes a dysentery, or a
Choleric looseness.

But the original of these Symptoms is to be charged upon the Liver, being il
disposed. Their Original.


And Democritus had good Reason to search diligently into the seat and Nature
of Choler, when he made dissection of diverse living Creatures, that he might be
more able rightly to cure the Diseases of Body and mind.

When I see in an extreme Yellow Jaundice, the whole Skin infected with Choler,
and Diversity of Choler proved.
that the Urins die clothes Yellow, the stools being in the mean time whitish;
And when I see in another sort of Jaundice, both the Urins and stools Yellow;
This confirms to me, that there are two sorts of Choler, and several ways for
the expurnation of each of them. In the Yellowest sort of Jaundice, in which
the stools are By the different sorts of Jaundice.
whiteish, the Meatus Hepaticus or Liver passage of Choler is stopped in the
Cavity of the Liver. In the other sort of Jaundice when the stools are Yellow,
it shows that a quantity of Choler passes away by the Urins and Guts, and the
obstruction is not so great nor so stubborn, as in the Yellowist sort of
Jaundice, and therefore it is to be hoped the Cure will be more speedy.

Chap. 26. Of the Spleen.
THe Spleen is a Bowel placed right against the Liver, as its Lieutenant, and a
The Spleen described.
kind of Bastard-Liver, that when the Liver is Diseased, it may assist the same
in Sanguification or blood making.

It is of a T. 4. f. 7. C.
Substance spongy, soft, sprinkled al over with very many Vessels like Its
Substance*
Fibers or threads; yet it is altogether unlike the substance of the Liver. It
is infolded in a Membrane f. 7. B B.
proper to it self, seeing it receives none from the Peritoneum.

Its Color is Black and Blew and obscurely Reddish. Color. Greatness.


Its greatness is uncertain and not determinable, because it grows greater or
less, according to the abundance, or defect of Humors which flow thither, and
are collected therein. So that there is none of the Bowels which does so easily
grow bigger and lesser, as the Spleen.

In respect of Number, it is wont to Be single; Sometimes it has been observed
to Number.
be double and threefold.

Consider in the Spleen its upper Part, which is termed the Head, and its
nether Parts.
Part which is called the Tail.

It Is T. 4. f. 1. D.
placed in the left Hypochondrium, under the short Ribbs, opposed as it
Situation.
were to weigh against the Liver, that the Body might remain equally balanced.

When it keeps its Natural Constitution, its Temper is hot and moist enclining
to Temper.
dryness.

It is of an oblong shape, like a Tongue, in Brutes; but in Mankind, it is more
Shape.
like the Sole of a Man's Foot. In the fore Part toward the Stomach, it is T.
4. f. 8. A A A.
hollowed, that it might receive the T. 4. f. 1. I. I. f. 8 B. and C.
splenical Veins and Arteries, on the back part toward the Ribbs, its T. 4. f.
7. A.
bunching.

Its knit into the Stomach by two or three Veins remarkable enough, which do
Connection.
make that so famous T. 4. f. 6. h.
Vas Breve, so called by reason of the shortness of the way. Through those
Veins it disburthens it self into the Stomach: by the Veins and Arteries
Splenical, it Purges it self into the Guts and Kidneys.

Ii's fastened to the bastard Ribs by Membranous Fibers sufficiently strong:
sometimes it is fastened to the Stomach, and is knit at its point to the Midrif
or Diaphragma.

It Communicates with the Heart, by a remarkable peculiar and admirable Artery
which it has, which by a short way carries thither, the Vapors or ^l Juyces
thereof.

The Action of the Spleen is much doubled and controverted among Physicians
Action controverted, diverse Opinions thereof.
and Anatomists: so Many Men, so Many Minds: Hippocrates did believe that it
drew superfluous serosity out of the Stomach: which Opinion Aristotle followed,
though others draw it to an attraction of Chyle, either out of the Pancreas and
Mesentery, or out of the Stomach.

Galen will have it employed in Purging away Melancholy, which it draws from
the Liver.

Others are of Opinion that it prepares Blood for the Heart that it may become
Arterial, whether it be of the thicker parts of the Chyle, or of the dregs of
the Blood carried thither.

Others say it prepares a superfluous wheyish matter, being the excrement of
its own digestion, which it sends back again into the Stomach, to ferment the
Meats when they are turned into Chyle.

The Arabian Physicians acknowledge such an Humor, but they assign its office
to be the provoking of Appetite. Galen thought that it did help to strengthen
the Stomach.

In so great dissent of Authors what shall we resolve upon? every one brings
probable reasons for his Opinion. Hofmannus conceives he has so sufficiently
establshed his Opinion, that no wise man can contradict him. Shall I venture my
Opinion among so many learned Champions?

I conceive that the Spleen does attract slimy Blood to nourish it self, and
that The Authors Opinion.
it sheds a special kind of fermentative Serosity through the Splenick Arteries
into the Stomach; and because its Parenchyma or substance is of a Spongy and
soaking Nature, it does by the Veins attract and suck out the superfluous
humidity of the Stomach, that the Coction may be the better.

Howbeit, I deny not but that it may by Accident supply the Office of the
Liver, when the same has lost its faculty of Sanguification; but Blood cannot
be made so good and perfect in the Spleen as in the Liver, seeing it is but a
bastard Liver, and consequently makes but bastard Blood and impure, because not
Clarified.

Hofman makes himself Ridiculous, while he eagerly contends in a little Book
Hofmans Opinion of the Spleens Sanguification examied.
which he has put forth, and up and down in his other writings, that the muddy
part of the Chylus, is carried by the Mesaraick Arteries unto the Spleen; where
it is turned into Blood, with which, the neighboring Parts are nourished: and
that the Excrements of this Blood are voided by Urins, Stool, and Sweat. That
good Old Man is to learn, that the thicker Parts of the Chyle are not sucked
out, but separated and sent away into the greater Guts; and that the Mesaraick
Arteries cannot do as he says, because they contain Arterial Blood. neither
do they reach any of them to the Spleen, because it has a peculiar Artery,
which Arantius first described, and which I my self have often shown.

Again he ought to have rejected the Milky Veins of Asellius, which he allows
of; seeing none of them reach unto the Spleen.

Furthermore, that same bastard and impure Blood, bred of muddy Blood by a
bastard Liver, will be unfit to nourish the neighboring Parts which serve for
Coction, though they appear filthy, for they need to be nourished with pure
Blood for their preservation*

The Choleric, Melancholic and Wheyish Excrements of the said Blood, cannot
be Purged away but by Veins and Arteries; the Arterics are already taken up
with carrying the muddy Parts of the Chyle. They must therefore of necessity be
carried by the Splenick Vein into the liver, that they may be voided through
the Guts or by the Kidneys, which would breed very great confusion in the Liver.

If Hofman had considered, that the substance of the Spleen is unlike the
substance of the Liver, its bigness different, its number uncertain, Color
diverse, Situation variable, because sometimes it sinkes down to the
Hypogastrium, more often ascends toward the Midrif, sometimes descends upon the
left Kidney, the Ligaments being slackned: and lastly, its shape, quite
contrary to that of the Liver, and sometimes there is no Spleen at all: also
that the structure of the Vessels of the Spleen, is altogether unlike that of
the Vessels of the Liver; he would never have so stiffly affirmed, that that the
Spleen made a peculiar kind of Blood out of the Chylus.

Nature does in none of the Bowels more sport her self, than in her shaping of
the Spleen so variously and unconstantly. But the Structure of those Bowels
which are necessary to the maintenance of life, is allwaies, one and the same
and uniform.

Furthermore you may know that the substance of the Liver and spleen are
unlike, by boiling the one and the other: for the substance of the Liver is
firm, sollid and Reddish; that of the Spleen is Spungy, soft, and black and
blue in Color: The substance of the Liver of Animals boiled, as of an Ox, a
Sheep, a Goat, is eaten with content: the substance of the Spleen is not Man's
meat, neither will other Creatures eat it, unless they be very hungry. But if
the Office of the Spleen and Liver were the same in Brute as well as in Men,
they should have both alike substance, and breed the same blood.

Where will you find a place to cleanse away Choler in the Spleen, as their is
in the Liver? If the Spleen draw the more thick Part of the Chyle, it ought to
have larger Veins, but they are exceeding small, like unto threads. Wherefore
Hofman does foolishly to enquire the Dioti or Cause why it is so, before he
knows the Hoti, that it is so, which ought to go before, and be diligently
enquired into, when the natural Action of Parts is sought after, because the
natural Constitution is Compounded and accommodated thereunto. What cannot an
ingenious Wit imagine? But al such speculations are ridiculous and void, unless
they are approved by the Eye, and confirmed by diligent Section and Inspection
of Bodies. See Aristotle in the third book of his Politics, at the beginning
of the 8. Chapter, who will there instruct thee.

If Hofman had known out of Aristotle, that such living Creatures as drink,
have a Spleen, Reins and Bladder, he had more truly expounded that passage of
Aristotle out of Hippocrates, of the true sense whereof he glories. The Spleen
draws out of the Belly superfluous humidities, it self being constituted of
blood.

The Medicinal Consideration.
The Substance of the Spleen is liable to alkinds of Distemper, and to diverse
Diseases of the Spleen in Substance.
swellings, especially that kind of hard swelling which is termed Scirrhus.
Sometimes it is inflamed, and then the substance thereof is perceived to pant,
by reason of the Multitude of Arteries, of which it is full. It seldom
impostumates. Its Coat does oftentimes grow thick and becomes Cartilaginous.

It often grows great by abundance of Humors, and grows ^^al again, sometime
Magnitude.
of it self, and sometime by use of Medicines. It is better that the Spleen be
small, than great.

A double or triple Spleen is not good, because it is a fault in the
Conformation. Number.


The Situation of the Spleen is sometimes changed, when its Ligaments being
Situation.
slackened, its weight bears it downwards, or they being broke, it falls into
the Hypogastrium or Parts beneath the Navel; and then it deceives unskilful
and heedless Physicians, who in Women take it for a Mole, or for a Scirrhus
Tumor of the Womb, and in Men for a sort of Glandulous Tumor which lies hid in
the Mesentery. In four patients it has been my hap to see the Spleen on this
manner fallen down into the Belly.

Sometimes one or other of the Kidneys is seen to fall down in the same manner:
Difference of the Spleen and Kidney when fallen.
but it is easy to know the one from the other. When the Kidney is fallen, the
swelling is round: when the Spleen is fallen the Tumor is oblong and an
emptiness is perceived on the left side under the short Ribbs. And if the Tumor
be movable, as it is at first, the Spleen or Kidney is easily reduced unto its
Natural place: The C^^^ of both.
otherwise, after the space of six months, it sticks so fast to the Peritoneum
before, to the bottom of the Bladder, to the Guts, and in Women to the Womb,
that it must of necessity putrify in that place; which it will the sooner do,
if either you give the patient Emollient Medicines inwardly or apply them
outwardly. If you would prolong the patients life, you must often let blood,
and bear up the Tumor with a truss or Swathe band.

What if the Spleen fall from its natural place, shall we sear and burn it with a
red hot Iron? when it slips into the Belly shall we take that Course with it? It
is a ticklish and dangerous piece of work, notwithstanding Old Farriers or
Horse Doctors have written, that the Spleen has been by that means consumed in
Horses; and in some poor slaves on whom they durst Experiment so cruel a Remedy.

Much more dangerous it is by opening the left Hypochondrium to take away the
Spleen; neither can its thick superfluous Humors be safely disolved by heating
the same. I should by such a practice sear a contusion, after which an
incurable suppuration of the whole substance would undoubtedly follow.

There is none of the Bowels which in Diseases does more change its shape.
Sometime Figure.
its long, sometime foursquare, sometimes round, according as it finds room to
dilate it self in.

when it rests upon the Stomach, it does much hurt and disturb the action
thereof; Communion.
and if it be fastened to the Midrif, is oppresses the same, or if it reach
thither in its Bulk, it hinders the free Motions thereof.

Upon the Spleen obstructed depend the Black Jaundice, Hypochondriacal
Melancholy, Obstructed, what Diseases it Causes.
the ill Colors of Virgins and other Women, The Scurvy, or Hippocrates his
great Spleens, out of which flows a Malignant Wheyish Humor, which being
spread into diverse Parts of the Body, does in the Mouth cause Stomacace or
Oscedo a sorenes with looseness of the Teeth etc. In the Thighs Scelotyrbe a
soreness with spots, and wandering pains through the whole body, which are either
fixed and abiding in certain Parts, which we call Rheumatismes, and the Germans
refer them to the scurvy, as may be seen in such German Authors as have written
of the Scurvy, especially in the Treatise of Engalenus. And therefore after
universal Remedies, they use other appropriate Scorbuticks, which are destined
to the Cure of that Disease.

Chap. 27. Of the Vena Cava and Aorta, within the Lower Belly.
THe Trunk of the T. 12. f. 1. A B C.
Vena Cava is commonly reported to arise out of the Liver, Liver is not the
Original of Vena Cava.
and to be divided into the superior and inferior Trunk, as if they were
separated, as it is in the stock of the T. 12. f. 4. A.
Aorta springing out of the Heart: but Ocular Inspection does demonstrate, that
the Trunk of Vena Cava is separated from the Liver, which creepes beneath, and
that near the top of the Liver by the Midrif it receives a branch which grows
out of the f. 1. r r.
Substance of the Liver, which carries blood into the Trunk of the Cava, that
it may be carried unto the Heart with other blood which ascends by Circulation.

Wherefore that same Trunk of the Vena Cava, is extended al along without
Interruption from the f. 1. B.
Jugulum or Neck even to the T. 12. f. 1. D.
Os Sacrum. There I make account is the Cistern of Blood, because a great part
of the Blood is contained therein.

The Trunk of Vena Cava, in regard of the Liver, which by a branch supplies i^
Vena Cava divided into Trunks.
with Blood, may be divided into the f. 1. B.
upper and lower T. 12. f. 1. C D.
Trunk. The inferior produces the Vena T. 5. f. a. g.
Adeposa, which is dispersed into the fatty Membrane of the Kidney; and then
the T. 12. f. 1. x x.
emulgent, which is distributed into the Kidney: after that the f. 1. z. z.
Spermatick Vein, whose right-side branch springs from the Trunk of Cava, and
its left from the Emulgent; finally, it sends three or four branches called f.
1. a a a.
Lumbares into the Loins, which are spread abroad unto the Marrow of the Back.

When the Trunk is come to the top of Os Sacrum, it is divided into two
Channels Distribution of the inferior Trunk.
or Pipes, which from their Situation are termed f. 1. D D.
Canales Iliaci, the Illiack Pipes. From these on either hand are produced
other Veins, especially the a Sacra, b Hypogastrica, Amplissima c Epigastrica,
and d Pudenda. In Women, the Hypogastrica, is longer than in Men, and Nourishes
more Parts, and holds the Menstrual blood, till the time come that itmust be
voided. Wherefore blood is contained in greater plenty about the Genitals of
Women, than of Men.

The Epigastrica is observed to be two-fould in Women; the one ascends into the
Musculus Rectus, the other opposite thereunto, descends as low as the Womb.

In this Trunk of Vena Cava, Fernelius after Galen, placed the seat of
continual Seat of Fevers continual and I^rmittent.
Fevers, supposing the Blood rested quietly therein: but seeing the blood is
in perpetual motion, I make the seat of continual fevers to be in the Trunk of
the Vena Cava, and in those great Pipes carried along through the Limbs; as the
sem^ry ^f intermittent Fevers or Agues, is in the Vena Porta, or in the
Bowels, which are nourished thereby.

Seeing the Veins are the Vessels and Cisterts to contain the blood, they have
a thin coat, saving that the Trunk of Vena Cava has a thicker and stronger coat
Why Cava h^^ a thick Coat.
than ordinary, to avoid breaking, in case the blood should work or boil
therein, which by means of the tenderness of the Coat, can sweat and breath
thorough.

It Is a Question, whether the Veins have Fibers or no? some say yea, and some
Whether Veins have Fibers.
no. But seeing the Blood is thrust forward by the spirits and Hear, it has a
natural ascent unto the Heart, and therefore it needs no Fibers to draw it, and
if any were necessary, the right* ones would suffice, but the circular ones are
interposed for strength, and some threads are observed in the Coat of a Vein,
not to draw, but to strengthen the Coat. Wherefore the Contentions about the
Fibers of Veins are but Vain Janglings; neither are we in Blood-letting so
carefully and scrupulou^ly to observe the rectitude of the Fibers, as the
Situation of the Part affected.

Hippocrates in his Book de Morbo Sacro, does Elegantly call the Veins
Spiracula Why the Veins are called the Bodies Wind-Doers.
Corporis, the Wind-doers or Breathing places of the Body; because when they
are opened, a Fuliginous or sooty Spirit Issues out with the Blood, and the Air
is likewise by them received in, to Cool the Body.

In Ancient t^nes, and the days of Yore, it was a Part of Sooth saying, to
view the blood which flowed from their sacrifices, which if it appeared pure
and laudable, it was a token of happy and joyful success; i^ bad and corrupted;
it was an ill sign, according to Lucan.

Nec Cruor emicuit solitus* sed Vulnere Largo
Effluxit nig^um rutilo pro sanguine Virus.
That is,
No usual Blood did spring from the large Wound,
But black and Venomous* for Red and found.
The Medicinal Consideration.
Seeing the Veins are the Cisterns of blood, it comes here to be considered how
The conditions of good Blood.
the blood ought to be qualified in sound bodies, that so we may be able to
judge of that which is corrup^* Now inbodies that are healthy the blood is Red,
Fibrous, and has a small quantity of Whey^^h Watermingled with it.

Whether the Eabres are made of an earthy and phlegmatic matter which is drawn
How the Fibers in the Blood are br^^^.
out into threads within the Channels or greater Veins, and is made smaller in
the lesser Veins, many doubt, supposing the four Humors to be contained in the
Mass of blood. Some admit of blood, but severed from the other Humors, which in
the first Region are separated from the blood. Others distinguish the
Alimentary Humors from the Excremen^^tions* the former are confused and mingled
with the Blood, the latter are to be seen collected in several Parts, as Choler
in the Gallbladder; Melancholy in the Spleen; and Phlegm is diffused through all the Parts of the Region of the belly, notwithstanding Hippocrates acknowledged
two fountains of Phlegm, the Head and the Stomach.

Now the Quality or temper of blood is hot and moist. Its Quantity cannot be
The natural Temper of the Blood. Quantity of the Blood.
defined. The Arabian Physicians, especially Avicenna, do write, that in a
Sanguine body well constituted, there are twenty four pounds of blood, so that a
Man may* bleed twenty pounds and live* but if he bleed more, Death follows
inevitably. That which preserves our life* is likewise the occasion of Death:
for as good Blood in a moderate quantity preserves our life, so the same being
vitiated, or too much in quantity, is the Cause of Sickness and Death it se^^.

When blood offends in quality, it is termed Cacochymia, when in quantity,
Cacochymia and Plethora, what they are.
it is called Plethora. Sometime the blood is corrupted and not the Serum o^
Wheyish Water, Sometime the serum is corrupt and the blood remains found. Now
the serum or Wheyish Water being corrupted, is the worst Humor in the body,
grievously infecting, weakening* and destroying such parts as are therewith
diseased.

Some Practitioners do make it a Question, Whether in the Veins, every Humor
has its own proper Serum or not. I believe that there is but one kind
Corruption of the Serum.
of Serum, which according to the several degrees of its Corruption and
Tincture, appears sometimes yellow and Choleric, sometimes green and livid, or
black and blue; sometimes Melancholic, and sometimes Milky. Aristotle counts the
Blood corrupted, when it is changed into Serum Sometimes the Putrefaction of
Blood is so great, that the whole Mass is turned into a rotten putrefied Serum.
When the Corruption of blood, is yet greater, sometimes Worms are bred Worms
breed in the blood.
therein, which I have seen come away in the opening of a Vein. Such a Worm
being bred in the Veins, may sometimes flow into the right Ear of the Heart, and
grow Heart eaten by worms bred in the blood.
great, and at length gnaw, and eat upon the Heart, as has been often observed
in the Dissection of dead Bodies.

The Veins have in them, a Retentive Faculty, whereby they hold fast the Blood
Retentive faculty of the Veins being lost, what follows.
within themselves: which Faculty being perished, they suffer the blood to leak
out through all the parts of the Body, yea, even to sweat out, as I have seen in
some Patients. But more often it flows out immediately by the Nostrils, Mouth,
Lungs, Guts, Bladder, by the Womb, and by vomiting.

I have diverse times seen in malignant burning Fevers, that the blood has been
Blood congealed.
congealed within the Veins, like unto the pith of an Elder stick; which has
been noted by Fernelius in his Physiologia.

Aretaeus writes, That the Vena Cava is sometimes inflamed, and thereupon Vena
Cava inflamed.
comes to break, which I have seen my self to happen. The Trunk of Vena Cava
cannot be dilated, so long as the blood circulates freely. Neither is it
subject to swellings, termed Varices, which are wont to happen only in the
Veins of the Thighs and Legs.

Of the Diseases of this Vein, and of the Blood contained therein, there is a
twofold Cure of the diseases of Vena Cava, and the blood, twofold. Purgation*
Blood-letting.
Cure; Purgation, and Blood-letting: but blood-letting is more necessary of the
two in a Plethora, either ad vasa, or ad vires; or in a Plethorick Cacochymia,
or in a very great and putrid Cacochymia, that a portion of the extremely
corrupted blood may be taken away.

Blood-letting takes away such Obstructions as are caused by blood, but not
those that are caused by Humors congested in some part of the Body: and
therefore that same Euro^a so often mentioned, that freeness of passage caused
by blood-letting, must be understood of the motion, and free passage of the
blood through the Veins, and not of the removal of an Humor that is gathered
together, and wedged fast into any part of the body.

I^ blood-letting cannot be put in practice, the Question is, Whether Purgation
If blood may be lessened by other ways beside bloodlessing.
alone, may supply its place, according to Galens Opinion, in his Book, de
Sanitate tuenda; or spare eating, exercising the body, frictions, sweating? I
suppose, where there is no Fever, the blood may be diminished by the means
aforesaid, and also by such Medicaments as draw the Serum out of the Veins; for
so the Veins being emptied, the rest of the body may be extenuated* and this is
observed, and put in practice in such Nations where the People are afraid of
blood-letting. Howbeit, to open a Vein twice or thrice, is a more speedy, and
safe Remedy.

Forasmuch as Sylvius, and Carolus Stephanus, have written, that there is a
Valve A Valve in Vena Cava.
within the Liver, by the Trunk of the Vena Cava, which hinders the blood from
returning back; Conringius says, that it is to be found in Oxen. This favors
that Opinion of the bloods being carried from the Liver unto the Heart. It
seems to me, that Nature has placed that Valve, that the filth of the mass of
blood should not Its use.
flow back into the Liver, and obstruct the same: which filth, either she
carries by some way out of the Cava into the Porta; or else she sends it forth
into the habit of the Body.

Of the Aorta descending. Distribution of the Aorta descendent. Arteria
Litnalis. Its Use.

The descending T. 12. f. 4. C.
Trunk of the Aorta, sends forth so many branches, as the inferior trunk of the
Vena Cava produces; but it sends withal, a remarkable Artery, called Lienalis
Arteria, undivided, by an indirect Course unto the Spleen.

That same Artery, as large, and wide as a Goose Quil, does furnish the Spleen
with Arterial blood, that thereby the thick, and slimy blood, might be
attenuated, and made fit to nourish the Stomach, and it is neighboring bowels,
and that it might afford a fermenting juice to the Stomach, to help its
Chylifaction, by that same permixion of both sorts of blood. Peradventure
likewise, when the Liver is vitiated, and extremely obstructed, Arterial blood
may be brought unto it, by the Splenick Vein, as it were a Natural Tartarum
Vitriolatum, to open its Obstructions.

Then it produces the T. 12. f. 4. p.
Caeliacal Branch, which is divided into as many twigs as the Vena Porta is,
and has communion therewith, by a mutual Anastomosis of the Vessels, that is to
say, by a mutual conjunction of their mouths.

This same Arterial blood, is not circulated, yet may it have a reflux into the
Trunk of the Aorta, to disburden the parts of superfluous blood; which
returning back into the Aorta, may conveniently be evacuated, by opening a Vein
in the Foot.

The Trunk of the Aorta is made of a Membrane, six times thicker than a Vein;
Thickness of the Membrane of the Aorta.
and therefore it is not subject to that kind of Tumor, called Aneurisma, which
the other smaller Arteries are subject unto, by reason of dilatation of their
Coat, or its Rupture, or apertion, when in the Arm, an Artery is opened instead
of a Vein.

The Aorta, and Vena Cava, do constitute that Region, in which the matter of
The Circulatory Vessels.
continual Fevers is contained; but the blood does not remain quiet in that
place, seeing it is perpetually moved round by Circulation: wherefore these two
Vessels, the Vena Cava, and Aorta, are ordained both to contain, and circulate
the blood, and may be termed the Circulatory Vessels.

Of the Nerves of the Lower Belly.
Between the two Kidneys, at the Base of the Mesentery, we must search
diligently Contexture of the mesenteri^ Nerves.
for that same T. 3. f. 8..
Intertexture of Nerves observed by Fallopius, which is woven together of the
f. 8. i i i.
Stomachick and f. 8. B B. Q. r.
Costal Nerves, concurring on both sides to form this Contexture; from whence
are derived all the T. 3. f. 8. l m n.
Nerves, which are distributed unto the parts of the lower belly.

When this Contexture of Nerves is full of evil Humors, Convulsions happen with
what diseases arise therefrom
the Colic pains, both in men and women, though the brain be no ways
misaffected.

Chap. 28. Of the Kidneys.
THe Kidneys, which are the Instruments of separating, and drawing out the
wheyish Excrement, do consist of a fleshy substance, solid and proper to
substance of the Kidneys.
themselves, so that the like is not to be found in the whole body.

They have a very thin f. 2. H I I. f. 5. B.
Membrane, or skinny Coat, which sticks close to their flesh; but they have
another Coat which is loose, covered with Fat, which is called Membrana f. 2. A
A.
adiposa, wraps, and infolds the Kidneys, and is produced from the Peritoneum.

Their Temper is hot and dry, that they may be the better disposed to attract
the Their temper*
serous Humidities.

They are T. 5. f. 1. B C.
situate in the Loins, between a duplication of the Peritonaeum, situation.
which is no other than the Membrana Adiposa, and they seem to be placed
without the Cavity of the Belly. The Reins are said to begin at the last
bastard Rib.

They have in length, the breadth of four or five Fingers; their thickness is
two Greatness.
fingers, and they are much about three fingers broad.

They are two in Number: sometimes, though rarely, there is but one, and then
Number.
it is commonly as big as two, and lies upon the back, the Channels of the
Aorta and Cava being a little removed to afford a place for the single Kidney.

They are shaped like those Beans we call Kidney-beans. shape. Color. Vessels.


Their Color is reddish.

You shall observe in their hollow side, the Emulgent Vessels, and the Ureter
springing forth of that hollowed side. Their Vessels are the Emulgent T. 5. f.
6. D D.
Veins and f. 2. a a b b. f. 5. C.
Arteries, proceeding from the Trunk of the T. 5. f. 2. E.
Cava, and f. 2. G.
Aorta.

And this is the outward Conformation of the Kidneys in a grown man or woman:
Kidneys, how shaped in children.
in Children it is otherwise til they are a year old, because the external face
of the Vva being like a thick bunch of Grapes, does neatly resemble the Kidneys
of a Calf: and upon the Kidneys, is placed the Glandula f. 2. A and C. T. 5. f.
1. A A. f. 2. B B. f. 3. and 4. A A.
Renalis, which is shaped like the Kidney, and in Children, dries up by little
and little, til it become flat, being separate from the Kidneys by a portion of
the Membrana adiposa, though it be found not far off in either side.

The internal Structure of the Kidney, is admirable; which that you may
conveniently Its internal structure admirable.
view, and search into, you must cut it artificially on the hollowed side; and
then there will present it self to your view, the enwidened T. 5. f. 5. A A.
substance of the Ureter, which forms the Pelvis, or Basin; into which, from
the upper part, as it The Basin.
were from an Housetop, the wheyish Humor rains down drop after drop, through
nine little fleshy Teats, called Carunculae f. 1. F G. f. 2. K K.
Papillares, which are acuminated The Teats.
without, and are encluded, and thrust into c nine Pipes, made of the substance
of the Ureter dilated. Therefore that covering, through which the wheyish
Excrement drops, may be called the Cribrum Renum, or Kidney-sieve. The sieve.


In those papillary Caruncles, or fleshy Teats aforesaid, the Serum, or wheyish
Excrement, is separated from the blood; which blood spends it self to nourish
the Kidneys, or flows back again into the Emulgent Veins. b T. 5. f. 6. E E.
g T. 9. f. 2. B D.
e f. 2. F.


The Medicinal Consideration.
The Similar Constitution of the Kidneys, contrary to Nature, consists in the
Depravation Infirmities of the Kidneys are Distemper. Impostume, Ulcer.
of their Temper, and of their Substance. A distemper either single, or with
matter, causes a Laxity or looseness in the substance of the Kidneys, whence
springs Atonia, or want of their wonted vigor to act by. By means of an hot
distemper, they come to be inflamed, whence follows an Imposthume, and at last
an Ulcer, as well in the internal, as external parts: for oftentimes a morbifick
matter, is collected within the Membrana adiposa, which breeds Impostumes which
compress the Kidneys.

Laxity proceeds from a cold and moist distemper, or from an exceeding hot one,
Laxity, how caused. Diabetes. Ischuria.
which corrupts the Natural temper of the part; whence comes Atonia, or an
impotency to contract it self; and from thence comes Diabetes, which is the
Pissing sickness; or Ischuria, which is a total suppression of Urine, not only
in one Kidney, but in both, by reason of Fraternity, and Co-partnership, by
reason of an afflux of a malignant air from one to the other; or by reason of a
reflux of corrupt and filthy blood. Sometimes want of Appetite to meat, is a
forerunner of this disease, by reason the Stomachs sympathizing with the
Kidneys. Observe diligently when the Stomach is ill, if there be no Disease in
the Kidney; for if there be, that is the cause of the Stomachs disorder.

The Number of the Kidneys is seldom changed, and if there be but one, it
cannot be known that there is more; neither can that one perform as much as
two: and therefore those that have but one Kidney, enjoy not their health so
well as they that have both.

Although the Kidneys seem fast fixed unto the Loins by the fat, as it were
with Falling down of the Kidneys.
glue; yet do they sometimes fall out of their place, and lean forward, sometime
they slip into the belly, not without detriment to the Patients life and
health: this is a truth not to be questioned. Which comes to pass chiefly, not
only by melting the fat in which they are wrapped up, but also by their weight,
when they are grown so great, by reason of some tumor or stone contained in
their Cavities, that they can no longer be kept in their place by such stays
as were wont to hold them. Being fallen into the belly, they stay there a
while, and at last they putrify, and impostumate.

Being in their natural Situation, if they prove greater, or more weighty than
ordinary, Their swelling
they cause a kind of numbness in the the thigh, by compressing the Muscle
Psoa, and the Nerves, which descend into the Thighs, which are conveyed
through the fleshy parts of the Muscle Psoa.

It the inner Passage of the Kidneys be stopped moderately, either by an Humor,
stoppage.
or by a stone, then the parties Urines are thin; or if the Obstruction be
total, the Urine is wholly suppressed.

If the inner Substance of the Kidney be exulcerated, the Patient makes urine
with Ulcer.
Matter, or Quittor in it.

If a Vein be opened, or broken, bloody urines are made: and because the
Kidneys Vein opened, or broke.
communicate with the Stomach by the Stomachical Nerves, the Stomach does
sympathize with them, being sick, and inclined to vomiting.

The Action of the Kidney, is to attract Serum, and to separate, and expel the
Action Hurt.
same: these things it cannot do, unless it be sound and perfect; and therefore
all the Diseases aforesaid, may pervert the same Action. The flesh of the
Kidneys is dull of feeling, but the inward Membrane is very sensible.

Stones are often bred in the Cavity of the Kidneys, either in the pipes, where
they stones bred in the Kidneys.
grow like Coral, or in the Basin, where a round stone is formed. If the Stone
increase so much as to cause a suppuration in the Kidney, toward the Loins, by
a when curable by Incision.
deep issue made in this part, the Quittor may be purged forth, and the stone
extracted; otherwise, unless Nature do go before us, and show us the way, it
were a wicked thing to attempt an Incision of the Kidney, by reason of the
thickness, and profundity of the flesh in those parts.

The Kidneys do sometimes consume away, and cause an universal Consumption
Consumptton of the kidneys.
of the whole body; which comes either from putrefaction of the Kidneys, or
through overmuch ejection of Seed or Sperm.

In new married Couples, and in such as are more wantonly disposed than
ordinary, who most subject thereunto.
this Consumption of the Kidneys happens; which would make some man affirm,
that the matter of Seed, comes from the Kidneys, and that they carry a great
stroke in the matter of Carnal Imbracements.

Observe, That oftentimes through weakness of the Kidneys, which cannot attract
Dropsy from the kidneys weakness. How to be cured.
the wheyish Excrement, a dropsy is caused without any fault of the Liver.
Neither can the most effectual Diuretics open those passages. And therefore
our chief Care must be to purge those, and the neighboring parts, and by
Fomentations, to restore the lost Faculty of the Kidneys.

Whether or no, may we force in a sharp pointed Iron, to one of the Kidneys,
that a passage may be made for the Serum, which is dammed up within the greater
Veins, in case we cannot purge the same away with Hydragogues, or Water-Purgers?

Chap. 29. Of the Vreters.
THe Ureters are Channels or Conduit Pipes ordained to conveigh the Urine to
Their Description. Substance.
the bladder.

They consist of a single Membranous substance, which being enclosed in a
duplication of the Peritoneum, therefore Anatomists have said, that they borrow
another Coat of the Peritoneum.

They are as long as the Space between the Kidneys and the bladder. Length.
Situation.


Resting upon the T. 5. f. 1. F F. G G.
Muscle T. 10. f. 1 o o.
Psoa, they are obliquely carried toward the Ossa Ilium, and rising up unto
the bladder in the bottom thereof, they slip in between the two f. 7. F F.
Coats almost as far as the T. 10. f. 7. D.
Orifice, where they pierce the T. 6 f. 6. c c.
bladder. They have no Valves placed in their Extremities, to hinder the going
back of the Urine: but two Membranes meeting together, do exactly shut the
Passage.

Naturally they are as thick as Goos-quils, but in such as have the Stone and
use wideness.
to void little ones from the Kidney, the hollowness of the Ureters is so
widened, that they have been seen as thick as a Man's Finger in the dissection
of dead bodies.

The Original of the Ureters is rather from the bladder than from the Kidneys,
because Original.
they are of a Membranous substance. Within the Cavity of the kidneys they are
divided into nine Pipes, which are fitted to the little fleshy Teates called
Carunculae Papillares, that they may distill the Serum into the Basin or large
Cavity of the Ureters, within the Kidneys.

They are thought to have Nerves whereby they feel; but being of a Membranous
Nerves.
Nature, their extreme pain in the passage of a Stone, proceeds from the
stretching of the Membrane.

Seeing therefore they are ordained to pass the Urine unto the Bladder, they
are Obstruction.
offended with such things as pass through them, whether it be sharp Urine, or
purulent matter, or a little Stone, or a thick and clammy Humor, by which they
are obstructed. So that the most usual Disease of the Ureters is Obstruction.

And if within the duplicature of the Bladder either of them be obstructed,
there is Stone.
bred a Stone, which grows by little and little, which is not movable, but
remains fastened to the Bladder, which when those that Cut out the Stone
endeavor to pull away, they tear the Bladder. Neither do I think there was any
other difference of the Bladder in these, in whom a double Cavity was observed,
and a Stone lying close in the one of them.

Chap. 30. Of the Piss-Bladder.
THe Piss-Bladder, is the Receptacle of Urine; being framed of a Membranous Its
Substance. Coats.
substance consisting of two 2 Coats. The b third which they attribute
thereunto, is a Duplication of the Peritoneum, within which it lies hid,
hanging like a Bottel with its bottom upwards, and with this Partition it is
severed from the Guts and other Parts, only in mankind, least with the weight
of the Guts bearing thereupon, it should be forced out of its place.

Its natural size is small when empty, because it is widened and contracted
according Magnitude.
to the quantity of the Urine, The efficient Cause of its Contraction, is the
second and external Membrane, which is altogether fleshy, which Fabricius ab
Aqua Pendente took to be Musculous, and after him Spigelius, who calls it
Musculum Detrusorem Vesicae. He might better have called it Expulsorem, the
Expulsive Muscle of the Bladder.

Its shape represents a bottle with the bottom upwards, whose bottom is in the
Shape.
lower Part of the Hypogastrium, and its Neck lies hid beneath, under the Bones
of the Pubis.

The Piss-bladder is but one in Number, yet severed sometimes into two Cavities,
Number.
after the manner before expressed.

It is perforated with three holes near the Neck. The first and greatest, is
that Holes.
out of which the Urine passes: the other two being those by which the Urine
comes into the Bladder, are the Ends of the Ureters.

Its Orifice is shut by the Muscle Sphincter, which is formed of the substance
of Muscles.
the bladder contracted. There is another Muscle called Externus Spleniatus, as
broad as two Fingers, which is pla^ed about the Neck of the bladder and the
Glandules or Kernels resting thereupon, termed a Prostatae. The power of
shutting and opening the bladder depends upon this Muscle.

The Piss-bladder has Veins and Arteries from the b Hypogastrical Vessels; it
Vessels.
has Nerves in its Neck, from the Os c Sacrum, and in its body from a Nerve of
the d six Pair. Which is diligently to be considered in Diseases of the bladder
causing stoppage of Urine, which proceed from a fall caught upon the Loins or
Os Sacrum

The Medicinal Consideration.
THe Piss-bladder is subject to an infinite number of Diseases. In its
substance Diseases of the Bladder.
it is subject to al kind of Distempers, especially hot and cold: it suffers
Inflammation, Tumors, Ulcers, and Palsy both in the Neck and whole Body
thereof. Of which we shall Discourse particularly.

Its temper is perverted, when the bladder naturally cold and dry, comes to wax
In its Temper.
hot, and fills into an inflammation.

Its Situation is changed, when that Part of the Peritoneum in which it is
included Saituation.
is relaxed, whereby it slips a little down; which causes a difficulty in
pissing, unless the lower Part of the Belly be lifted up with the Hand.
Sometimes by the weight of many little Stones it comes to have an hollow nook,
by the side of the straight Gut near its Neck, and then the Stones do nestle in
that corner, so that they cannot be perceived by putting in a Catheter: but the
best way to feel them, is by putting ones Finger into the Fundament.

Its greatness or widness cannot certainly be defined unless it were empty;
howbeit wideness.
it is enlarged and widened according to the quantity of Urine. But if it be so
much enlarged as to exceed the natural measure, then the Fibers of the Coats
being broken or too much slacned, the party cannot make Water, because the
fleshy Membrane is deprived of that motion, by which the Urine ought to be
expelled. And in this Case the Water cannot be voided otherwise than by putting
in of a Catheter, which sometimes for a Month or two, must be done twice a day,
until the Membrane have recovered its ancient tone or contractive Vigor.

Sometimes the bladder is so contracted and straightened, by reason of a painful
exulceration in its inner Part, and then grows thicker and as it were
Cartilaginous; which hinders its distention: and in this Case, the Patient must
often make Water with pain.

The Neck of the bladder comprehending its Orifice or the Channel of Urine, has
Diseases of the Nick of the Bladder.
also its Diseases. It is frequently inflamed, swelled Ulcerated, obstructed,
and is weakened by the Palsy, when it can neither be contracted not relaxed,
seeing it is thicker and more fleshy than the bottom of the bladder. It is
easily inflamed, and Fernelius was of Opinion that no other Part of the bladder
is subject to inflammation: from whence proceeds an Ulcer, which is not so hard
to Cure, as that which happens within the body of the bladder, because
injections and convenient Candles may be conveyed thereunto.

It is frequently obstructed by the Stone lying hid in the bladder, or by a How
Obstructed.
fungous body which grows therein. Yea and sometimes beyond the Neck, within the
bladder, fungous or Sp^^gy carnosities do arise, which do much trouble the
bladder and fill the ^ame. They arise often from a flux of blood, or a swelling
Vein, which being opened causes a^ incu^able Issue of blood, which ^oon causes
a Gangrene by reason of Clotte^s of Blood remaining there*

Spungy Carnosities do grow without the Neck within the Ureter, which are
te^^ed Hype^sa^^^ses, which are easily Eaten away with Medicinal Wax Candles,
made and fitte^ for that purpose.

Oftentimes they happen in the Passage of the Urine after a Venomous Gonorrbea
not well Cured.

Al^o ^he Neck of the bladder is obstructed by another external Cause, Namely
by swelling of the Kernels ^ermed Prost^^^, which rest upon the bladder. But
the Urine is often stopped by a Palsy in the Neck of the bladder, so that the
Sphincter Muscles cannot contract no^ dila^e themselves.

To open the Bladder and to search out the Diseases which are bred within o^
The Key of the ^ladder, an Instrument so called.
without the same, a wonderful new Instrument has been invented, which I call
the Key of the bladder; its commonly te^^ed a Catheter, and is u^ed by such as
Cut Men for the Stone, being different from the Ancient common Catheter. So
long as this Instrument can easily be put in, so long there is great Hopes in
Diseases of the Bladder: but when it will not Penetrate, all Hope as gone.

In such a Case, either the bladder is perfo^ated in the bottom of the belly by
the Bladder perforated. Perin^um opened. Urine let out with a Knife.
Os Pu^is, to let out the Urine, or the Perinaeum is opened. But when a
Catheter with grates in it, upon which the Section is wont to be made, cannot
be thrust in, to depress the Neck of the bladder which lies hid under th Os
Pubis, a small Knife is thrust deep in as far as the bladder sidewaies, until
the Urine comes away: for so I have often ^eed many from imm^^ent Peril.

In persons far in years, who are greivously troubled to make Water by reason
Ease for old M^^ that have the Stone.
of a great Stone, which cannot be taken out without manifest danger of Death,
to give them some releife in their Misery, the Perinaeum is out in the same
manner, as is used to take out the stone, and the hole is kept open with a
little Pipe. So long as the Pa^ient can be kept alive, the little Pipe is
stopped with a Tent, and a Sponge is applied to receive the droppings of the
Urine, if any be, until such time as the patient must needs make Water, and
then the stopp^e is taken out, and afterward put in again, and thus the cruel
pain and continual provocation to piss, is Mitigated in such as have the stone.

Also by th^s means Ulcers of the bladder may be cleansed and dried, if there be
no Ulcers of the Bladder cleansed. Zecchi^s his Vain Brag.
Stone, to fret upon the Ulcer.

Zecchi^s brags in his Counsels, that he invented this way of giving ease to
Aged persons vexed with the Stone* * but the Physicians of Paris did use this
Pal^iative Cure long before Zecchi^s was born, it having been practiced this
hundred years.

If a Stone in the bladder be little, and stick to the Neck of the bladder, or
in the The Stone Su^kt out.
beginning of the Ureter, it may be drawn forth by a strong and continual
^ucking of the yard, or it may be drawn out by an ^^cision made in the Ureter.

If the Stone ^e great it cannot be taken out ^^^ by Cutting of the bladder,
the Cut out of the Bladder.
In^ection being made upon the Perinaeum, as our Stone-Cutters are wont to do*
for the way used by the Ancients as it is described by Ce^sus is difficult and
dangerous.

And I believe that kind of operation used in E^ypt, when they would take out
the The Aegyption Operation ^aught.
Stone, (...) difficult, which is by blowing up the bladder with a Pare of
Bellows. For this operation described by P^osper Alpi^^^, is so absurd, that I
doubt the truth of the story, because it is exceeding cruel and painful by
reason of the extreme stretching of the bladder, which cannot indu^e
distention, neither in its Neck, nor in the Ureter.

That way which F^^b^^cius Hild^^^^ goes to take out the Stone, is also ab^^rd
And that of Hild^^^^ is ^aught.
and dangerous. The way used by the Operators of Paris and by some Italians of
the Nu^sion Family, is the only safe and easy way, by reason of the
Instruments The French and Italian w^y the best to take out the Stone.
and of the Industrious Dexterity of the Artists; wherefore I wish other
Nations had such Operators. a T. 5. f. 1. F F. G G. b T. 10. f. 1. O O. c f. 7.
F F. d T. 10. f. 7. D. e T. 6. f. 6. c c.
a T. 5. f. 7. B. and C. b f. 7. A A. c f. 7. B B. d f. 7. B. e f. 7. E E. f f.
7. D* g T. 6. f. 6. c c.
a T. 6. f. 5. F F. b T. 12. f. 1. and 4. z z. c T. 3. f. 8. o. T. 18. f. 50* d
T. 8. f. 8. A B.


Chap. 31. Of the Genitals of a Man; and first of the Yard.
I Proceed to the Genitals of a Man, among which, the Yard, which is associated
A Man's Yard
with the Pi^s-bladder, because it casts out Urine through the Pipe of the
Ureter, ought in the first place to be explained.

It is made up only of Skin for thinnes sake, of two hollow Ligaments, of the
Its Parts
Vretbra, the Glans or Nut, certain Muscles, Membranous bands, Nerves, Arteries
and Veins.

The Skin is by it self, has no Scarf-skin, and is terminated at the Root of
the Nut. Skin
Being loose, it is there doubled in manner of an Head*stal, that it may infold
the Nut or Head of the Yard and make the Foreskin, which the Jews and
Mahometans Foreskin
do cut off, out of a Religious Ceremony. Such Circumcised Persons cannot give
that delight to Women in their carnal Embraces, as those can who have the
Foreskin entire. And therefore their Women are better pleased with the carnal
society of Christians.

The Foreskin is tied to the Nut by a little band which is termed Fraenulum,
The Bridle.
the Bridle: it is extended in the nether Part unto the O^^fice of the Nut, in
young Men that have not had to do with a Narrow-board Virgin.

The Skin being removed, there appears a Membrane which closly girds in the
The Membrane
Ligaments of the Yard, which may be a production of the Panniculis Ca^nosus.

This being taken away, the Vessels are seen which run along the Back of the
Yard The Vessels.
viz. Nerves, Veins and Arteries. The Nerves come from the Os Sacrum, the Veins
and Arteries are portions of those termed Pudenda, which are spread out into the
external Parts.

Then follow the Muscles of the Yard, two of which are erectors, and two are
The Muscles.
Ejaculators. The Erectors do arise from the Tuberous Part of the Huckle-bone
and are sidelong fastened to the Ligaments of the Yard; the Ejaculators
springing out of the Transverse Ligament placed between the Huckle-bones, and
from a portion of the Sphincter Muscle, are spread along the Vrethra, to press
the Drops of Water or Seed which happen to rest there toward the O^^fice of
the Blader.

These Muscles being taken away, three Bodies come to view which form the Yard,
Viz. The two Ligaments and the Vrethra.

The a hollow Lig^ments being dis^oined beneath in the Perineum, do arise The
hollow Ligaments.
from the Protuberancies of the Huckle-bone, and have in their progress, the b
Vrethra inter^ected. Near the Os Pubis, being ^oyned together they make a
Pendulous Body terminated with the Nut, which is called c Penis, the Yard.

In those Ligaments we must observe the internal substance which is like the
Pith Their internal Substance.
of Elder, being Spungy, blackish and bedewed with black Blood, that it may
increase and decrease in the Carnal Conjunction, for the erection of the Yard
depends upon these Ligamentss.

The Vrethra or Piss-Pipe, is a Channel of Spongy substance, that it may swel
The Urethra or Piss-Pipe.
and ^al with the foresaid Ligaments in the Carnal Conjunction; and therefore
it is no continuation of the neck of the bladder, but is only fastened
thereunto.

Observe diligently, the Obliquation, or Reflection of the Vrethra in the
Perinaeum, Its Obliquation in the Perineum. Impostumated hard to cure.
and how the situation of the Orifice of the bladder lies hid under the bones
of the Pubes.

In the Perinaeum, diverse Tumors are raised: but such as adhere to the Vrethra,
and impostumate, are dangerous, often degenerating into Fistulaes, because the
Vrethra will very hardly heal, and grow together. If it be eaten by a venomous
and pocky Ulcer, it is not easily cured, and restored, unless by an exact
Sudorifick Diet, or by fluxing with Mercurial Medicaments.

Balanus, f the Nut of the Yard, is an hollowed Kernel, wider in the middle,
than The Nut of the Yard.
the largeness of the external Orifice comes to. a T. 6. f. 5. M. b f. 2. C. c
f. 1. d. f. 5. L. d f. 5. L. e f. 5. M. f f. 7. A. g T. 13. f. 8. o o. T. 18.
f. 5. o. h T. 12. f. 1. n n. f. 4. ^ ^. i T. 6. f. 1. a a. f. 5. H H. k f. 5. K
K. l f. 1. b b. f. 5. II.
a T. 6. f. 5. K K. b f. 5. G G. c f. 1. c. d f. 7. B. e f. 5. G G. f f. 5 M.
f. 7. C. g f. 5. infra. M.


The Medicinal Consideration.
The Action of the whole Yard, viz. voluntary erection, and stifness, being
ordained Diseases of the whole Yard are, Priapismus,
for carnal Conjunction, if it be unvoluntary, and painful, it is a Disease
which is called Priapismus.

It is caused by an inflamed disposition of the Ligaments of the Yard, and also
of the Vrethra, or Piss-pipe, which is affected by reason of vicinity, and
communication in the same Action.

Weakness, and defect of Erection, is an imbecility of the whole Yard without
Want of Erection.
pain: It arises from a weakness, or a paralytick disposition of the Muscles,
or Nerves of the Yard.

Sometimes the whole Yard is bowed, and crooked to one side or another; or bended
Crookedness
upwards or downwards; which proceeds from a Convulsion of one of the Muscles,
or from a repletion, and induration of the Nervous Ligaments of the Yard.
Sometimes the Tumor called Ganglion, in the hollow Ligaments, is a cause of this
Contersion, or crookedness of the Yard: of which Infirmity, Hollerius in his
Comment upon the 63. Aphorism, of Book 5. and Caesar Arantius in Chap. 50. of
his Book of Tumors, have treated.

Furthermore, The whole Yard is subject to Inflammations, Tumors, and Ulcers.
Inflammation, Tumors, and Ulcers


The Yard is but one in Number, for two had been needless: if we find two, it
is Monstrous, and they are both useless; or one is but the rudiment of a Yard,
or some fleshy Excrescence.

The just, and fitting length of the Yard, ought to be six or eight fingers
breadth; Too long,
if it be longer, it is inconvenient, and hurts the Woman in Carnal Conjunction,
and must be shortened by a ring of wool put about it.

If we believe Galen, the extraordinary length of the Yard hinders Generation,
because the Seed loses its virtue in so long a passage; which I do not believe.

If the Yard be too short, it causes little, or no titillation, and is
unfruitful. Too short
Fallopius in his Book de Decoratione, teaches us how to make the Yard longer.
Marteal mentions one that had so large a Yard, that when it stood erected, he
could smell to it with his Nose.

The Foreskin has its Diseases; sometimes it is too short, and sometimes too Of
the Foreskin.
long, and is incommodious. The Jews have it cut off, for which cause they are
termed Apellae, that is, skin-less. If it cover the Nut of the Yard so close
that it cannot be put back, the Disease is termed Phymosis: If it be depressed
to the root Phymosis Paraphymosis,
of the Nut, and cannot be drawn upwards, it is termed Paraphymosis.

Both these Diseases, if they proceed from ^ervency of Carnal Conjunction,
whereby the Nut of the Yard remains swelled, if it be for a long time together,
fomented with extreme cold Water, its swelling will abate, and then the
Foreskin may freely be drawn up or down. An admirable Secret.

It is exulcerated with pocky Pustles; which being cured, if they leave any
hardness Exulcerated.
behind them, it is a suspicious Argument that the Venom of the Whores Pox,
does yet ^e lu^king in the body. Seeing the Foreskin is double, when it is
^ut, both the internal, and external Membrane, must be equally cu^.

The band of the Foreskin termed Fraenulum, if it be more thick than ordinary,
Thickness of the Fraenulum.
and goes unto the hole of the Nut, and makes the same crooked, it makes men
such as Galen calls Hypospadicos; so that they cannot engender, because they do
not cast their Seed directly into the Womb, unless it be cut.

The Nut is subject to diverse Tumors, and Ulcers, both internal and external.
In Ulcers of the Nut.
its middle, where it is hollowed, it is often exulcerated, by reason of a sharp
matter abiding there, and often putre^ying. But in the Whore-masters Pox, it is
full of De^ormation with warts.
Warts, and deformed; which warts may be eaten off, and eradicated with powder
of Savin; but they grow again, if the internal Cause be not removed, by
Medicines accommodated to cure the Pox.

The Vrethra, or Piss-pipe, which lies along under the two Ligaments of the The
Urethra* obstructed.
Yard, has its Diseases. It is obstructed by the stone, which is taken out by
Incision thereof. It is inflamed, by reason of its Spungy, and blackish
substance, like the hollow Ligament of the Yard. It oftentimes burns, and is
pained by reason of Inflamed.
the acrimony of the Urine; it is inflamed by the sharpness of a putrid Humor,
which passes through the same, as in the virulent Gonorrhaea, and then it
swells, and makes the Yard crooked, and stretches it with the Tentigo like a
Rope; which disease they term Gonorrhaea Chordata, the Corded, or
Rope-stretched running of the Reins.

It is ulcerated by the Acrimony of Quittor, and purulent Matter; and sometimes
Vlcerated.
the Ulcer being not well cured, there grows up a spungy superfluous flesh,
which is termed Carnositas; which must be diminished, or eaten away, with
Corrosive Candles; otherwise it swells so as to shut up that passage, and stop
the Urine, not without pain to the Patient.

To the Vrethra, and Cods, belongs that disposition which makes men termed
Hermaphrodites, when the Testicles are hidden within the Septum of the
Peritoneum, Hermaphrodites.
and the Cod is empty, or open in its middle part, by reason of the Vrethra
being there perforated, seeing the sides of the Cod are like the Lips of the
Womb, and the Yard is very small. These things have deceived unskilful Midwives,
and made them ^udg Children so born to be Females.

Sometime the Vrethra is perforated above the Cod, or near the Nut of the Yard,
which is then shut up, and solid, which hinders the right e^aculation of the
Seed, unless the Vrethra be opened, and a little pipe be put in, to make a
passage. But when the Parties grow into years, the heat of the body being
augmented, also by violent exercises, and by plucking the same oftentimes, the
Yard comes to be augmented, and the Stones which lay hid in the Groins, do fall
into the Cod, unless it be per^orated as aforesaid; or the Stones remain in the
Groyns, and often deceive Physicians, making them to think the Persons are
bursten.

Such Persons having been accounted Women, do at last become Men. Howbeit, A
woman is never changed into a man.
there never was any Woman turned into a Man, unless she abused her Clytoris,
being prolonged, or some superfluous Flesh have grown out of her Womb, which
may have the form and stifness of a Man's Yard, but is no way compounded as a
true Yard. And therefore Women are rather delighted with the mutual rubbing of
their bodies one against another, and by the lying of the one upon the other,
than by the vain titillation, and unprofitable intrusion of those Parts.

Chap. 32. Of the Groyns.
BEfore we proceed unto the Stones, we are to take notice of the Groyns; in
Things to be observed. Crural vessels. Process of Peritonaeum. Muscle Cremaster.
which are to be seen, the Crural T. 24. f. 4. A A.
Vein, and f. 5. A A.
Artery, with the T. 18. f. 5. K L M N.
Nerves descending into the Thigh, whereupon does rest the Production of the T.
2. f. 9. E E
Peritoneum, drawn through the holes of the oblique Tendons, and transverse
Muscles.

Over this is spread the Muscle T. 6. f. 2. D D.
Cremaster, being carried athwart through the Groyn into the Cod, and so unto
the Testicle, which it encloses with two Coats; the one whereof is called T. 6.
f. 2.
Erythrois, and the other f. 2. C C E E.
Elythrois.

Above the bending of the Groyn, you may see those Glandules, or Kernels, which
Kernels.
lie close to the process of the Peritoneum: below the Groyn, near the Vessels,
you may see other Glandules, or Kernels, bordering upon the Vessels.

Within the Process are contained, Vas T. 6. f. 1. A. f. 3. and 4. A A.
Spermaticum, the Spermatick Vessel, Spermatick Vessels.
which carries matter to make Seed of, unto the Testicle; and another f. 1. V
V. f. 3. C C E. f. 3. C C D. f. 5. C C.
Spermatick Vessel returning from above, and carrying the Seed from the
Testicle, to the Seed- f. 5. and 6. E E.
bladders. In the Groyn, within the Process of the Peritoneum, descends the Gut
T. 3. f. 4. H H.
Ileon, the inward Coat of the Peritoneum being relaxed.

If it descend into the Cod, the said Coat is broken, and the descent of the
Gut is Descent of the Gut Ileum.
to be observed through the holes of the Tendons, which are interchangably
disposed, lest in reducing the Gut by Chyrurgical Operation, it come to be
placed among the Combinations of Nerves; for the hole of the last Tendon ought
to be cut in sunder, that the Gut may be reduced into the Cavity of the Belly;
in which work, many of the very skilfullest Chyrurgeons have erred, to the loss
of their Patients Lives.

Note that among the Kernels above the Groyn, do arise the Whore-pock buboes
Buboes.
or Swellings: among the Glandules, or Kernels, below the Groyn, pestilential
swellings do arise; ordinary swellings do arise a little higher.

Here you shall consider whether it be safe to use that prick, or Thread of Gold
or Lead about the Production of the Peritoneum, that the process which in the
Rupture called Oscheocele, is broken, may be drawn together: or a Caustic to
produce an Eschar, may be applied above the Groyn, to produce a Callous, or
hard substance, which may stop the passage of the falling Gut. But care must be
taken that the Caustic pierce not to the Vessels which lie beneath, viz. The
Veins and Arteries, which being touched, the Patient dies for it.

The Seminal Vessels may be feared, and so a man become invisibly gelded,
because Insensible gelding.
the Stones wanting their nourishment, do consume, and lose their Vigor. But I
see on every side, great difficulties in these kind of Operations, which I judge
to be dangerous; and therefore I conceive the best way is, to let them alone.

Chap. 33. Of the Fundament.
AT the same time, when the Cod is dissected, in the Order of Anatomy, by
reason Order of Section.
of Neighbor-hood, the Fundament is to be dissected, and demonstrated.

The Fundament therefore, called Anus, and Podex, is the outermost end of the
Its Name.
T. 3. f. 7. M.
Intestinum rectum, or straight Gut, which is shut, and pursed together by a T.
3. f. 7. O.
round Muscle, called Sphincter.

It is twofold; the one is skinny, and narrow, the other is broader, and more
fleshy; which adheres to a transverse Ligament, which is placed between the
Protuberances of the Huckle-bone, and the extremity of the Coccyx, or
Crupperbone.

The Fundament has four Muscles, called Levatores; two of which are broad,
Muscles.
and two narrow: The broad do arise from the T. 3. f. 7. N N.
Os Sacrum, and Os Ilium, and are inserted into the larger Sphincter: As for
the other two, the former arises from the transverse Ligament, the hindermost
from the Crupper-bone, whereinto they are terminated.

These four Muscles do relieve, and raise up the Fundament when it pouches
Their use.
forwards, and is ready to fall out in the expelling of Excrements which are
more hard and sollid than ordinary. The Circular Muscles do shut, and contract
the Fundament, lest our Excrements should come away against our wills: for by
means of these Muscles, we may take our own time, and regulate this kind of
Evacution according to our own pleasures.

The Medicinal Consideration.
The Fundament is liable to very many Diseases. It is sometimes possessed with
Its diseases. Tenesmus. Falling out.
an hot distemper, with a troublesome, and almost intolerable itching, which
causes a continual desire of going to stool, which is called Tenesmus.

In the Expulsion of the Dung, sometimes the Fundament falls out, which is
reduced into its place with extreme trouble and difficulty.

Sometimes it is palsied, and the Excrements come away whether the Patient will
or Palsy.
no: and sometimes it is so straitened, that a man can hardly void his
Excrements.

Within, and without it swells, the mouths of the Veins being swollen and
knobbed, Hemorhoids.
which are called Haemorrhoides, both internal, and external.

Sometime it is inflamed, but it is more often impostumated; from whence proceeds
Inflammation.
an hollow Ulcer, termed Fistula Any.

It is made rough with Warts, which are called, Condylomata, or Mariscae. It
Warts. Clifts.
is exulcerated with small Clifts, which are called Rhagades. It may safely be
cut, according to Hippocrates, after any fashion, without hurting the
Sphincter. Finally, it is troubled with all kinds of Diseases.

Sometime it has a Scirrhous Tumor, which shuts up the passage of the
Excrements, Scirrhous tumor.
and causes a difficulty in pissing, by reason of the near neighborhood of the
Arse-Gut, and the Neck of the Bladder; which Parts do communicate their
Infirmities one to the other.

It is sometimes found closed up in newborn Infants, and it is cut open: but if
Closed up.
the Gut be found sollid, having no Cavity, there is no way but death.

Chap. 34. Of the Cod, and Stones.
WE are now come unto the T. 6. f. 1. x x.
Cod, which is the Case of the Stones. It consists The Cods, their Coats.
of two Skins, the outermost being f. 2. A A.
Cuticular, and grown with hair in such as are of ripe years; it has the
Epidermis, or Scarf-skin upon it. Under the hairy Skin, there is a fleshy
Membrane which called Dartos; it is a Continuation of the Membrana Carnosa of
the Belly, stretched down unto the Cod; by help whereof, the Cod is widened, or
contracted into wrinkles. For the Stones sake, it is by a Membranous Portion
divided into two Cavities, which receive the two Cavities.
Stones.

The Cod has Veins and Arteries from the Privy Parts, and Nerves from the Os
Vessels.
Sacrum.

A Stone, or Testicle, is a Glandulous, or Kernellish Body, ordained to make
The Stones, their Coats.
Seed. It is compounded of many parts, of which, the first are three proper
Membranes, for each Stone has two common ones, viz. the Cutis, and Dartos. The
first of the three proper Membranes, is called Erythroides, which has its
Original from an expansion, or widening of the Muscle Cremaster, which holds up
the Stone.

The Second is the f. 2 C C. E E.
Production of the Peritonaeum, which infolds the Testicle.

The Third immediately infolds the substance of the Testicle, and is called f.
2. F F.
Nervea, the Nervous Membrane.

The Membranes being taken away, the Substance of the Testicle comes in sight,
Substance.
which is f. 2. G.
glandulous, white, pretty firm; and upon the same, overthwart, is placed a
small body like a Silkworm, which is called T. 6. f. 2. I I. f. 3. and 4. B B.
Epididymis; to the one end Epididymis. Sperm Carrier.
whereof, there cleaves Vas Spermaticum f. 1. T T. f. 3. and 4. A A.
deferens, the carrying Spermatick Vessel, which enters into the substance of
the Testicle, and empties the Seminal matter thereinto: From the other end of
the Epididymis, arises the Vas f. 2. B B.
Ejaculatorium, Ejaculator.
the Ejaculatory Vessel, which in its beginning, is f. 3. D.
full of turnings and windings, as is the Body of the Epididymis, and firmly
cleaves unto the Testicle by its ends, being loose, and separate in its middle.

The Testicles are excluded from the Cavity of the Belly, being placed in the
Situation. Figure. Action.
Cods. They are about the bigness of a Pigeons, or young Pullets Egg. They are
of an Oval shape, and their work, is to elaborate the Seed.

The Medicinal Consideration.
The Natural Constitution of the Cod, and Stones, being explained, let us now
Diseases of the Cods.
examine the Preternatural disorder thereof. The Cod is apt to be swelled with
diverse fluxions, which flow either immediately into it, or into the Stones.

If the Gut fall into the Cod, or into the Call, it makes that kind of Rupture
which Oscheocele.
is called Oscheocele.

If water or wind flow from the Cavity of the belly, into the Cod, they make
those Ruptures which are termed Hydrocele, and Pneumatocele. Hydrocele.


If in the Spermatick Vessels, both Deferent, and Jaculatory, where they are
full Cirsocele.
of turnings and windings here the Stones, thick blood be inrercepted, it
breeds a tumor, which is called Circocele.

If Spongy flesh breed, and grow to the Membrane called Dartos, it is termed
Sarcocele.
Sarcocele.

If the Testicle adhere to the said spongy flesh, it has the same name.

If the Stone swel, and exceed its natural bulk, it causes a swelling in the
Cod.

If wind or water insinuate themselves into the Membranes of the Testicles,
they produce those Tumors which are called Hydrocele, and Pneumatocele
Testiculorum, Pneumatocele.
which are familiar to Children.

Moreover, The Cod is inflamed, overrmuch widened, or contracted; both
Inflammation.
which dispositions, are inconvenient, and hindersom to life and Generation.

The Laxity thereof, is termed Rhagosis; Howbeit, it is naturally more lax on
Rhagosis.
the left side, whether by reason of the weight of the le^t Testicle, or by
reason of the weakness, and coldness of the left side.

The Stones are faulty in point of Situation, while they lie out of sight in
the belly, Diseases of the Stones in Situation.
or when they are in the Groyns. By reason of the former Situation, in
questions of Divorce, men are pronounced impotent, though strong otherwise,
because the Stones are not in their Natural place.

By reason of il Conformation in the Womb, they are faulty in point of number,
Number.
when there is but one, or when there are three, as in those who are called
Triorches, who are by some thought to be very lecherous; which fault goes in
some Families from Father to Son, and therefore it is a Disease.

They are faulty in shape, when they are uneven, by reason of the swelling,
relaxation, Figure.
or divulsion of the Epididymis.

If there be a fault in the Color, there is a fault in the Substance, which
ought to Color.
be pretty sollid; when it is over-flaggy, and soft, it is faulty. If the
Stones exceed the greatness of an Hens Egg, they are never the better, because
they are liable to Greatness
fluxions: and being swollen, or altered in their temper, they cannot rightly
perform their Office: if they are small as Hazel Nuts, they have no power to
engender.

Now the Action of the Testicles is to elaborate the Seed by their inbred
virtue Their Action*
implanted in them to that end: wherefore they receive the seminal matter, and
when it is sufficiently prepared, that is to say when it is impregnated with
the Generative Spirit, they transmit the same into the Jaculatory Vessels, and
the Jaculatory Vessels carry it into the Seminary Bladders. e f. 2. D D.
c f. 1. V V. f. 3. E. f. 4. D D.
d f. 1. c c. f. 3. and 4. c c c.


Chap. 35. Of the Vessels which carry the true Seed, of the Seed-Bladders and
the Prostatae or Auriliaries.
IT remains now that we Speak of the Vessels which carry the Seed to the
Bladder, and of the T. 6. f. 5. F F. f. 6. G G.
Prostatae or Assistants. That same T. 6. f. 1. V V. f. 3. E. f. 4. D.
carrying Vessel which is Ejeculatory Vessels.
called Ejaculatorium, and takes its original from the Epididymis, is in its
Rise very full of f. 3. and 4. c c. f. 5. C.
windings and wrinckled.

Those Wrinkles being smoothed out do make the Vessel twice as long as before.
Why Wrinkled
Those Wrinkles are made to retain the most subtle Spirit of Generation, which
How the Seed is voided.
breaks forth violently in the act of Generation with a thin subtle and
spirituous matter, which is mixed with that same other Excrementitious Seminal
matter, which is contained in the little T. 6. f. 5. and 6. E E.
Seed-Bladders, so that they flow both together into the f. 5. K K.
Vrethra or Piss-Pipe.

And as in the Act of Generation that same most thin and pure Spirit leaps
forcibly with the matter out of the Testicls: so by help of the f. 1. a a. b b.
f. 5. H H. I I.
Muscles of the Yard, the Seminal matter which is contained in the littlie
Bladders is also cast forth.

For I make account that their is a threefold Seminal matter, one most pure,
Matter of the Seed threefold.
which is made and kept in the Stone; the other is Superfluous and
Excrementitious, yet of use for the forming of the Conception, which is thrust
away by the Stones and slides leasurly into the little Seed-Bladders: for it is
not probable that the most pure Seminal matter and the Spirit which is the
Auther of Generation, should be contained amids the Nastyness of the Dung and
Urine.

The third Seminal matter, is an Oily Substance, which leasurely dropping out,
does moisten the T. 6. f. 5. K K.
Vrethra or Piss-Pipe in Men and the T. 7. f. 2. y.
Sheath of the Womb in Women; also it comes away by it self when the Yard is
distended through lust, and in strong imaginations of the matters tending to
Generation and sometimes at the sight of a beautyful Woman.

It is a Question whether this Oily substance do flow out of the little
Seed-Bladders or from the T. 6. f. 6. f. 5. F F. f. 6. G. G.
Glandules of the Prostatae, which contein in them a Seminal matter, which is
sent forth through small pores beneath the Knob of the Vrethra.

The Matter which is contained in the little Bladders, is forcibly cast out by
way of Ejaculation or Squirting, through the holes which are near the foresaid
knobby wart of the Vrethra.

Before the little Bladders be removed, you shall observe, how they are covered
Whence the Texture of Veins among the Seed-Bladders.
round about and hidden under a Multitude of little Veins scattered round about
them. Whether they be Veins or Arteries, what they serve for is not yet
certainly known. Whether to supply matter to those Parts viz. The
Seed-bladders, that it may be thence transmitted to the Protastae to be further
Elaborated?

Touching this wonderful Intertexture of Vessels, we can as yet determine
nothing.

In the Prostatae and in the Seed-Bladders, is the seat of the venomous
Genorrhea: The seat of a Virulent Gonorrhea.
which if it be unseasonably stopped, the venom is communicated to the whole
body, or flows back into the stones and causes a Tumor in them: or if it
extend so far as the Perineum, unless it be naturly repelled, it causes an
Impostum and eats into the Vrethra or Piss-Pipe.

You shall do well to consider whether it be safe in a virulent Gonorrhea, to
open a Vein in the Arm, if the arder in these places be light and without a
Fever? In my what Vein to be opened in the Cure thereof.
opinion it is better to take blood from the Foot, because the Saphena takes
its rise near the Groin, and bestows two branches upon those Parts, and
therefore large bleeding in the Foot, when the Buboes break out, does
powerfully revel.

Few or none except Julianus Palmarius a Physician of Paris and Fallopius an
Italian, are for Blood-letting in the Arm in such Cases, for it is held unsafe,
for fear of the Whores-Pocks, by reflux of the venomous Humor into the Bowels
and habit of the Body.

The Medicinal Consideration.
The Diseases of those Seed-Vessels, Seed-Bladders and of the Auniliary
Glandules Diseases of these Parts are, Distempers.
or Prostatae, are, an hot or cold Distemper, which cause a corruption of the
Seminal matter, either from an internal or an external Cause.

Also the Laxity of those Parts causes an involentary shedding of the Seed,
which Laxite whence Gonorrhea.
is called a Simple or single Gonerrhea: or when it is with pain and
inflammation, being caused by infection of a Pocky Whore it is called Gonrrhaea
Virulenta, the venomous Gonerrheae.

The flux of Seed which happens to some in their sleep is called Oxynorrigmos,
it comes from the abundance of hot and Spirituous Seed.

The Oily subctance is exceeding needful, for in Men through want of the said
Humor, The Oily Substance how needful.
either the sharpness of Urine hurts the Vrethra or Piss-Pipe, or it cannot
freely pass, neither can the Seed be forcibly cast out, as Galen hints and I
have known in many; who were cured with a liberal moistening Diet, a Bath to
sit in, and Oil of sweet Almonds, Squirted into the Vrethra with a Syringe.
With the same Humor the Woman's sheath is moistened in such as are lustful, and
it drops away by it self without the Ejaculation of Seed.

The Action of the Yard, is not to transmit the Urine, but to Ejaculte or
Squirt Action hurt, whence Barrenness.
the Seed into the Womb of the Woman. If it cannot perform that Office it
causes Barrenness, which depends either upon the Yard, by reason of the
Ligaments which cannot be blown up so as to raise the Yard; or because of the
weakness or Palsy of the Muscles of the Yard: or upon the Stones being colder
then they ought to be, or being too Flaggy, or less or greater then is usual:
or upon the ill shapeing of the Spermatick Vessels, as in case the Arteries be
wanting; or upon the defect or faultines of the matter. If the Man be Sickly or
the Women have not her health, the Cause of Barrenness is attribted to an evil
disposition of the whole Body: which makes that fitting and convenient matter to
make Seed of, Cannot be from thence supplied to the genital Parts.

Neither is fruitfulness and Conception to be expected, unless the Man and
Woman be restored to perfect health; and unless the fault of the Genitals (if
there be any) be amended,

Chap. 36. Of the Genital Parts of a Woman, and first of the External.
THe Genital parts of a Woman are divided into the external and internal. The
External Genital Parts.
internal prepar Seed, or somewhat like seed, and aford place for the
Conception. The External Parts are visible and must be viewed before we come to
Section. Let us therefore stay a whil in the porch, before we pass into that
sacred Cave or Closet of the Womb.

That outward Part which is adorned with Hair is called Pubis the Share: that
Pubis. Cunnus I conceive the Term Cunnus derived from the Greck Connos a beard,
does properly signify the Hair about the Female Privity and not the Orifice it
self, but only by a Metonymy of the Adjunct for the Subject. Carunculae
Myrtiformes.
Passage which is shut with two Valves or folding Doors (whence the name Vulva)
is called in Latin T. 7. f. 5. F F.
Cunnus, in English the Cunny, or Watergate. The Valves are termed Labra
Cunni, the f. 5. B B.
Lips of the Cunny, or the Doors of the Watergate. These Lips being drawn
aside, the f. 5. C C.
Nymphae come in sight, which are pretty firm Membranous excrescences, broader
toward the top. At the top of the Nymphs we meet with a little fleshy Knob,
covered with a thin Skin, which is called f. 4. I I. K f. 5. A.
Clitoris. The Nymphae being drawn asunder, the Carunculae f. 5. D. E E.
Myrtiformes [that is small portions of flesh like Myrtle-berries] come to be
seen, whereof two are lateral, seated on each side, the third lies beneath
toward the Fundament, and the fourth is always placed at the extremity of the
Vrethra or Piss-pipe.

In Virgins, the Lips are, straiter then in other Females, and when their
Thighs are opened wide, they appear stretched or bent. The inferior Membrane of
the Nymphs is also in Virgins bent and stretched out; but in their defloration
and by frequent carnal conjunction, it is depressed: those Connexions are
wholly Obliterated in Women which have brougth forth Children.

And these Parts may be seen in those which are living. And if you shall thrust
Neck of the tromb.
your Finger into a Woman's T. 7. f. 2. Y.
sheath or Scabberd [that is the Neck of her Womb] you will feel it T. 7. f. 3.
E E.
Wrinkled, and if you carry your Finger higher, you will find the T. 7. f. 3. D.
in most Orifice of the Womb, for so fa^ a long Finger is able to reach. All
that space is called Collum T. 7. f. 2. Y. f. 3. E E.
Vteri, the Neck of the Womb or the Sheath of the Man's Yard, because it
receives the Yard like a sheath or Scabbard, in the Act of Generation.

In Virgins, after the Nymphs we meet with a Membrane or thin Skin drawn
before Hymen.
the Orifice, peirced through with a very little hole. This Membrane is called
T. 7. f. 7. A. f. T, 7. f. 5. B B
Hymen. If this be found, we find no Carunculae Myrtiformes, if this be not
found, those Myrtle formed small portions of flesh, are so swelled, that they
fill the whole Orifice or passage into the Womb, ^o that you can Scarce put in
your little Finger, without paining the party: so great is the narrowness of
this passage, by reason of the foresaid Caruncles or Myrtle-Shap'd fleshy
Excre^cences, being united together by certain Membranes.

It is to be observed, that those Myrtle-shap'd little bitts of flesh, are
wholly obliterated in Childbirth and not to be seen, until the external
Orifice of the Womb begin to contract it self again and to grow strait; which
argues that they are nothing but plaites or Fouldings-in of this Orifice; which
are unfolded and stretched or smoothed in the time of Travail, that the Child
may more freely come forth; even as the Neck of the Womb is very thick, that it
may be the more easily widened in the Birth. Hence I conjecture and conclude,
that these Carunculae may more fitly be termed Carnositates and Plicaturas
Orificii externi, certain fleshynesses and foldings of the external Orifice of
the Womb.

These things being thus observed, we must proceed to dissection, that the
structure Lips of the Womb.
of these Parts may be discovered. The f Lips of the Womb are made up of the
Cuticula or Scarf-Skin and the Skin on which the Hairs grow, and they have
underneath Fat and a fleshy Membrane which seems to be of the Nature of a
Muscle. It seems to be spread in that place, that it may serve to draw the Lips
together; but inasmuch as it reaches into the Clitoris, it does in some sort
resemble the Muscles of a Man's Yard, Yet those in the Clitoris are different
from the other.

Those who have their Privity plumpe and Pappy, and the Lips thereof thick, the
motion of their Muscles is very small and hard to be discerned.

The Nympha T. 7. f. 5. C C
in young Women is soft, but as they grow in Years and by frequent The Nympha
Copulation, it is hardened and becomes almost like a Gristle. It is a
production of the Skin of the Lips, or by Nature so made and there placed, to
direct the stream of the Urine.

T. 7. f. 4. I I. K. f. 5. A
Clitoris being the seat of Lasciviousness and Lust in Women that delight in
The Clitoris.
mutual confrictions, is termed Tontigo, or the Woman's Yard. It is made up of
two Nervous Ligaments, not at al hollow as those of the Man's Yard; they proceed
from the Tuberous or bunching Part of the Huckle-bone, and when they are come
so far as where the bones of the Pubes are joined together, they receive
another body placed between them, which is white, and being joined together
they make up the Clitoris, which imitates a Man's Yard, as the Breasts of Men
have a resemblance to Women's Dugs.

The Ligaments of the Clitoris have Muscles fastened unto them, as in Men
proceeding from the same place as those in Men, and they are covered with Skin,
and that Skin in the extremity or end thereof is folded back, like a Man's
Foreskin. Not without cause therefore is this Part called the Woman's Yard or
Prick.

The round T. 7. f. 2. S S. f. 3. and 4. F F.
Ligaments of the Womb do reach unto this Part: whence it comes to The Wombs
Ligaments.
pass that the Clitoris being rubbed with the hand, the ends of those Ligaments
are likewise chated and heated, and the Tickling is extended as far as the Womb
and Testicles, whence they arise and through which they have passage.

Those Ligaments of the Womb are somewhat hollow, as far as to the Groines,
whence it comes to pass that a virulent matter being ^^om the Genitals
expelled hither, does breed Pockie Buboes or Swellings, and other Tumors which
are not at al Malignant.

The Sheath is Compounded or made up of two Coats: the one is internal and
Membranous, the other is external and altogether fleshy, like a Muscle, that it
may open and contract it self, and in the Act of Generation Squeeze and Milk
the man's Yard. But the inner Coat is wrinkled, like the Roof of an Oxes Mouth.
a T. 7. f. 2. Y. f. 3. E E.


The Medicinal Consideration.
Having diligently surveyed these Parts, you shall now consider the Diseases
Common Diseases of these Parts. Closure
which are wont to happen upon them. And in the first place the external
Orifice or passage into the Womb, is sometimes naturally shut up, the Lips being
closed together. This often happness in Girls newly borne. But this closure is
more frequently found to be in the Nymphs; or instead of the Myrtle-shap'd
Carnosities, we meet with the Hymen fleshy and unboared. Sometime after hard
labor in Childbirth, these Parts being torn do grow to one another. This
natural growing together of those Parts in Children must be separated, and so
it must in Women when it comes by accident.

I have seen some women conceive notwithstanding this growing together, there
being a little hole left for the Seed to enter at, being eagerly attracted by
the hungry womb. When the time of their delivery was come, by reason of much
moisture flowing unto those Parts, this closure did of it self open. Maids and
women that are thus closed up, are termed in Greek Atretae imperforated
persons, such as are unboared or unbroached.

Sometimes the wideness and openness of these Parts is so great that it proves
Laxity.
loathsome and hurtful to Women, Namely such as have undergone hard Labor in
Childbirth; so that it is needful to straiten the same with Medicaments.

Sometimes in Women that have never had Children, by reason of over-frequent
carnal Conjunctions, these Parts are so opened and widened, that they seek to
Physicians, that they may recover their former straitness, and so bring their
Hogs to a better Market. Howbeit, Virginity lost cannot be repaired, it may be
couterfeited by Art, but it is not the Part of an honest Physician to teach
those Arts: it belongs only to Adulterers and Bawds, or such as get their
living by prostitution of the Bodies of young Women.

Furthermore, the Lips have their peculiar Diseases, they are Inflamed,
Swelled, Peculiar Diseases of the Lips.
Vlcerated from a common or extraordinary Cause viz. The Whores-Pocks. Also
they are subject on their inner side to Warts, Pushes termed Thymi, resembling
the Color of Flowers of Time, and certain small Tumors called Condylomata
resembling the Joints of a Man's Fingers. Of the Nymphs.


The Nymphoe in some Women, yea and in some nations do grow to such a filthy
greatness, that they hang without the Lips, and then they must be cut. They are
made ruff with Pustles or Pushes, but more often defiled and made ugly with the
foresaid Thymi, Warts and Ulcers springing from the Whoremasters Pocks. Of the
Clitoris


The Clitoris is sometimes exceeding long, resembling a Man's Yard: it is then
termed Cercosis, Caudatio, the Long-Taile Disease; so that some Women do abuse
that Part one with another when it is longer and thicker than ordinary. Such
are those which are termed Hermaphrodites or Rubsters: for it was never known,
neither is it possible, that a Woman should be turned or transformed into a Man.

But a Man being at his Birth reputed for a Woman, as aforesaid, by the coming
forth of his Genital Parts, may be turned into a Man, that is to say, be
acknowledged for such.

Sometimes within the Sheath there hangs a fleshy Excrescence which reaches Of
the Sheath.
as far as the Lips and farther, very deformed and troublesome, and somewhat
like a Man's Yard. It is rooted near the inner Orifice of the Womb, or it rises
from the sides of the sheath, far within. It must be cut up by the Roots, or
else it will grow again, being a great trouble to married Women, because it
hinders the entrance of a Man's Yard, in the carnal Embracement.

Near the Caruncles or Carnosities before mentioned, there appears within, a
Of the Caruncles.
Vein, two or three, which are pretty full, and drop Blood out like the
Haemorrhoides, and are sometimes exulcerated, and may degenerate into Malignant
Ulcers, unless they be well looked to.

Within the Sheath, in the upper Part, in the very Orifice of the Womb, a
Malignant An Ulcer.
Scirrhous Tumor is bred, which at last degenerates into a Cancerous Ulcer. A
sad and miserable Disease, if it arise through fault of the Womb and other
Parts of the Body. If the said Ulcer proceed from the Whoremasters-Pocks, as
oftentimes it falls out, it is curable, provided the foresaid Orifice be not
wholly eaten up, and that the Ulcer have not crept into the inner Parts of the
Womb. That may be perceived not only by the Instrument called Speculum
Matricis, with which we look into the Womb, but also by putting up of a bodies
Finger.

Chap. 37. Of the internal Parts of a Woman which serve for Generation.
THe external Parts being diligently viewed and accurately dissected, the Parts
The Way of showing these Parts.
of the Fundament come next to be cut up: and then the Symphysis or growing
together of the bones of the Pubis being discovered, the Gristle placed between
the bones, must be cut asunder with a very sharp Penknife, that the Thighs may
be more easily displayed, and that their may be room enough made to handle the
internal Parts.

The internal Parts may be divided into those which make up or belong unto the
Internal Parts twofold.
Body of the Womb, and those which prepare the Seminal matter. We must begin
with the latter.

The Vasa Spermatica deferentia, that is, the T. 7. f. 1. a b.
carrying Spermatick Vessels, Vasa Deferentia.
are made up, like those in Men, of the Spermatick T. 7. f. 2. I M.
Vein and the Spermatick T. 7. f. 2. K L.
Artery. They have the same Rise in Women as in Men. Herein only they differ,
that they are not so straightly united, nor with so many turnings, as to make a
broad T. 6. f. 3. and 4. A A. T. 7. f. 2. c c.
Parastata, which is not in Women,

They are divided into three Parts, whereof one is carried into the Stones; the
other to the Bottom of the Womb: and the third creeps along to the beginning of
the Sheath.

The Testicles in T. 7. f. 2. o o. f. 4 A C.
Women are otherwise framed than in Men: they have no Testicles.
Epididymis; have but one Coat; their substance is soft, made up of little
Bladders, wherein is contained a Wheyish substance, which is wont to spirt out
upon the face of the dissector, if he take not heed.

Such a structure of the Testices in women and such a conformation of their
Spermatick Vessels, made Aristotle to doubt and others of his followers,
whether the Female Sex were Prolisick and afforded Seed to the making of the
infant, as well as the Male, as Galen after Hippocrates, maintains they do.

From the Body of the Testicle the same Spermatick f. 2. d d. f. 4. b b.
Vessels preparatory are carried to the bottom of the f. 2. R. f. 4. E. f. 3. A.
womb, and to the f. 2. Q Q. f. 4. D D.
Horns or Trumpets of the womb, which Vessels are far different from those in
Men.

These things thus observed, let us take a View of the Body of the womb with
the Horns of the Womb. Its Ligaments.
external Parts thereof. Out of it there arises in its upper Part, the Horns
and four Ligaments, two broad and f. 2. P P.
Membranous, which are productions of the Peritonaeum. They are stretched out
in Virgins and women that have not bore Children, resembling the displaid wings
of Bats or Flitter-Mice. They hold the womb that it fall not down.

The other two Ligaments are round and somewhat f. 2. S S. f. 3. and 4. F F.
longish, which arise from the bottom of the womb near the Horns. In their
Rise they are hollow, and in their progress as far as the Ossa Pubis, we find
them hollowed.

When they are come as far as the Clitoris, they are cloven and spread forth in
the shape of a Goose-foot through all the fore part of the Thigh. I was the
first that made discovery of that same Cavity and of the formerly unknown use
of these Ligaments. According to the Opinion of the Ancient and latter
Anatomists, they keep the womb from ascending upwards: but without these
Ligaments, the womb cannot ascend, unless it should pluck away the Sheath and
the Privities, which are contiuations of the body of the womb.

The Horn T. 7. f. 2. Q Q. f. 4. D D.
of the womb being fistulous or hollowish, is observed in the lower Part
thereof to be torn and jagged, as if the Rats had gnawed it: it conteins
within it, a certain hard and round texture, which resembles the substance of
the Jaculatory Vessels in Men, and white Seed is there preserved and found.

Having observed these things, you shall proceed to the body of the womb; The
Wombs. Substance. Coat.
the Substance whereof is fleshy and Syungy, and as thick as a man's Finger. It
is Clothed with a Membranous Coat, whether it be proper or received from the
Peritonaeum.

The womb is of an hot and moist Complexion: it is Situated in the lower T. 7.
f. 1. d.
Part Temper. Situation.
of the Belly, beneath the Navel, just in the middle between the T. 7. f. 1. e.
Intestinum Rectum or Arse-Gut and the T. 7. f. 1. e
Piss-Bladder.

In Virgins until they have their Courses it is little and hard, after they
have had Greatness.
their Courses, it grows softer: in women which have had Children it is greater
and thicker.

It is shaped like a small Gourd, a Pear or a Cupping-Glass. Shape. Number.


It is one in number and no more, yet sometimes divided into two Cavities by a
Partition in the middle, which is the Cause that some women bring sorth two or
three Children at a Birth.

The Cavity of the T. 7. f, 3. B B.
Womb in Virgins and in those which have never conceived, Cavity.
is so small as to contain only a pease or a very little bean; In such as have
born Children, it is larger.

The Action of the womb is conception, or attracting the Seed, and reducing the
Action.
same into Act, by causing the same to ferment and proceed to formation. And
although this be that for which the Womb was ordained, yet it is by accident
the Sluice or Outlet of Superfluous Humors in the Body, which do either
continually flow unto this place, as in the Whites, or at certain seasons; as
the Menstruous Blood, which being more than the woman needs for her
Nourishment, is ordained to nourish the Child in the womb, and when it is born,
it drops out of the Dugs in the form of Milk.

The Medicinal Consideration.
By out knowledge of the Natural Constitution of the Genital Parts of women
Disorders of the.
we come more certainly to understand their departure from the said natural
Constitution by several sorts of Infirmities.

The Spermatick Vessels are liable to obstructions, whereby the usual Flux of
Spermatick Vessels. Stones.
Humors is stopped, which is very hurtful to women.

They swel together with the Stones, and become as big as a man's Fist; by a
collection of Humors resembling Tallow or suet.

This is known by a swelling in the bottom of the Belly at the sides.

The Trumpet or Horn of the Womb is widened and moved by Seed, which being
Trumpet.
there corrupted, seeks its passage out. But wonderful it is that the man's
Seed should come thither, and that as Histories report, a Child should be
conceived there. It Is very strange that a Child should be formed out of the
Cavity of the womb; and it favors the Opinion of Paracelsus and Amatus
Lusitanus, that a Child may be made in a Glass of a Man's Seed and menstrual
blood, placed in Horses Dung, unless both of them, the one being an Athiest the
other a Jew, were known to be Impostors.

The womb is the Root, Seed plot and foundation of very near al women's
Diseases, Womb it self.
being either bred in the womb, or occasioned thereby.

It it be troubled with an hot distemper and inflamed, it causes intolerable
burnings, Distemper.
the Fever Synochos and the burning Fever, very troublesome Itchings? and
finally it brings exulcerations, the Cancer and Gangraena.

If it be stung with servent Lust, it becomes enraged, causes Uterine fury and
Madness; will not let the Patients rest, but invites them to shake and agitate
their Loins, that they may be disburthened of their Seed; and at last, they
become shameless and ask men to lie with them.

Sometime it is drawn out of its place toward the sides, and is carried this
way and Motion depraved.
that way, as far as the Ligaments and Connexions of the Womb will give leave;
and it will rise directly to the Liver, Stomach and Midrif, that it may be
moistened and fanned; it Causes Choking and Stranglings, and raises terrible
and violent motions and Convulsions in the Body.

In a word, the Womb is a furious Live-wight in a Live-wight; punnishing Poor
women with many Sorrows.

Although Hippocrates has written and Fernelius confirmd the same, that the
womb like a Globe does roll it self in the Cavity of the Belly; yet are they
rather the Horns of the womb, which are receptacles of Seed Spirituous and hot
or putrified, which being swelled do move themselves this way and that way, til
they have shed their Seed into the Cavity of the Belly: which Seed being
dispersed, brings very cruel pains and stretches the Belly, until the force of
the Spirits be Evaporated: hence comes that same swelling of the Belly and
stifling about the Midrif.

Sometimes malignant Vapors ascending from the Womb by the Veins T. 7. f. 2. V V
X X.
and Arteries, Suffocation
unto the Lungs and Kernels of the Throat, may cause choking and stifling: and
the malignant vapor of the Seed being so pernicious, is violently darted into
the Brain, and al parts of the Body, from the Womb, as from a Beast that spits
poison.

The Womb is but little when empty; but when it is silled with evil Humors, it
swells above measure; and it has been seen to equal the Head of a newborn Child
Cancerous Scirrhus.
which is an incurable Infirmity, because it is a Cancerous Scirrhus, which is
the worse for being tampered with by Medicines.

Sometimes the Orifice of the Womb being closed, and firmly sealed up, Water
Dropsy
flows out of the Belly into the Cavity thereof, and coming to a quantity, it
brings the Dropsy of the Womb. Sometimes evil Humors are collected there, and
by the force of Nature, do afterward break forth. This often happens to
Virgins, and others, from the suppression of their Courses, the internal
Orifice being stopped, as I said before.

The Womb is watered with a twofold Humor, Seed, and Menstrual Blood; the
Whether seed suppressed hurts women?
suppression of both which, does many ways afflict Womankind, and the
evacuation thereof, does them much good in many respects. Howbeit, we do not
read in Hippocrates any where, that the retention of their Seed, is hurtful
unto Women: he writes indeed, that the Womb being dry, does ascend to the
superior parts to receive moisture (which Galen laughs at) and that it desires
to receive the Man's Seed to moisten it self; and that therefore marriagable
Virgins that are troubled with fits of the Mother, should be married, and have
the carnal society of Men. And therefore he makes the retention, or overgreat
flux of the Courses, the only general cause of Women's Diseases, and says that
Women cannot be in Health, unless they play the Women, that is, void their
Menstrual Blood. In case therefore, that a What must be observed in letting
blood to move the courses?
Woman, or a Virgin have her Courses stopped, whether or no may we hope by
bloodletting, three or four times repeated from the Arm or Foot, to draw the
blood unto the Womb? I remember the Story of a Woman in a Consumption, because
of the stoppage of her Courses, from whom Galen drew blood in a large quantity.

That we may know to resolve this Question, three things are to be noted; The
Matter, the Place, and the Expulsive Faculty. The Matter is Blood, which
remains 1 The sufficiency of matter.
over, and above what was necessary to nourish a woman for a months time, which
was ordained to conceive Child, and to nourish it being born: wherefore we must
consider, whether the woman abound with blood, so that she has what to spare,
and void forth; for if she want blood, by reason of some foregoing disease, or
because she eats little, we are not to expect that she should have her Courses.

The place through which it ought to flow, is the womb, with the Hypogastrick 2
Fitness of the place
and Spermatick Veins: for these Vessels do contain the superfluous blood,
until the due time appointed for this Purgation, and they send it forth either
by the Cavity of the womb, or by the Spermatick Vessels, into the neck thereof.
But if so be the Womb shall be dry, or hard, and the Spermatick Vessels and
Veins obstructed, we cannot hope to procure the Courses to flow, by often
blood-letting. And the Expulsive Faculty is not seated in the Genital Parts,
which receive this blood, 3 Strength of the faculty
but depends upon the general strength of Nature, which thrusts this
superfluous blood out of doors.

These three things ought therefore to concur, that a woman may have her
Courses, Matter, Place, and the Expulsive Faculty; and Medicaments ought to
have a Medicaments, and other means to accomplish the Cure
respect thereunto. A Vein is to be opened in the Foot, rather than in the Arm;
Cupping-glasses must be applied without Scarrification to the inner part of the
Thighs, above the Vessels: Convenient Purges must be given, with Apozemes that
move Urine, attenuate, and open the mouths of the Veins. Pills of Steel, Mirrh,
and Aloes, must sometimes be given, and Baths made to sit in: or a Vaporary must
be used sometimes of blood-warm Water alone, and sometimes boiled with Hysterical
and opening Herbs, the steam whereof, the Patient must receive into her Womb.
Also Fomentations must be applied to the Os Sacrum, and the lower part of the
Belly, and good Diet appointed, not heating, but attenuating and opening.

The Action of the Womb, is Conception; if it be abolished, the Patient is
barren: Symptoms in the Actions hurt. Sterilitie
Which barrenness, depends either upon the distemper of the womb, or upon the
il shape thereof, or the hardness of the inner Orifice, or the distortion
thereof, or from fault of the Stones, and Spermatick Vessels, in which somewhat
is wanting, either in point of structure, or of matter: and if a woman be
sickly, she cannot make good Seed fitting to cause a Conception, til she
recover the soundness of her health, and til the faults of her womb (if not
incurable) shall be amended.

But forasmuch as the Womb is ordained, not only for Conception, but to
evacuate Suppression of blood or seed.
the Superfluicy of Natural Humors in the Body, such as are, superfluous Seed,
and Menstrual blood: if they be totally, or in part suppressed, the woman
cannot be in Health, nor if they flow too much. Hence comes the Gonorrhoea
Overgreat flux thereof.
simplex [simple running of the Reins] or the Feminine Flux, either of blood,
or Humoral, when only Humors come away: which last, if it be malignant, and the
Humor be sharp, exulcerating, and of evil color, it is dangerous, and comes
sometimes from an outward, venomous, and contagious cause; and therefore women
ought discreetly to be questioned touching that matter, that they may be
brought to acknowledge their Disease, and not deceive the Physician under a
pretense that they have the ordinary whites, to their own hurt, unless they
acknowledge themselves faulty, or lay it upon their Husbands, whom it is better
to accuse, if they be in any measure suspected, than to call the woman's Chastity
in question.

Because we are treating of the Action of the Womb, which is Conception, I will
speak a little touching the same, and show, How a woman is disposed during
Conception: What is the fruit, or work of Conception, v.z. how the Infant comes
out of the womb, and how the woman is constituted in the time of her Travel,
and what happens unto her after her Travel, until she be well, and upon her Legs
again.

Touching other Diseases, whereunto ^he is subject, I will speak nothing,
because they differ not from such of the same kind as she is troubled with,
when she is not with Child.

Wherefore, as the Abolition, or taking away of the Action of the womb, is
Barrenness; Moles, Abortion, etc.
so the Action thereof being depraved, brings forth a Mole, or a fal^e
Conception, or an Efflux of the Seed, after eight days, or Abortion.

If the Conception be true, and legitimate, a Child is thereby begotten; for
the The Child Conception
Man's Seed being squirted into the T. 7. f. 2. Y.
Sheath, is sucked, and retained by the f. 2. K. f. 3. A A.
womb; and then the f. 3. D.
internal Orifice being shut by its heat, and inbred virtue, it stirs up the
forming Faculty of the Seed, and sets it on working: VVhereupon, of both Seeds
mingled, the Child is framed; which is begun by a certain point, or little
Right shaping
speck; which upon the third day is perceived to pant, in Eggs that a Hen sits
upon. Afterward, certain Skins are formed, within which, the foundations, or
first threads of the Vessels, and al parts, are drawn out of the Seed, and the
woof, or super-structure, is produced out of the Menstrual blood, which comes
upon it: and then the Placenta is made, being a Mass, or Lump of Flesh, termed
also the T. 8. f. 3. A A.
VVomb-Liver, The Placenta or womb-liver.
which being glued to the sides of the Womb, interposes it self between the f.
2. A B C D G.
Navel-strings of the Child, and the Vessels of the Mothers womb, which before
were joined together.

Now the Conformation of the Infant, is different in the parts thereof; but the
said difference, does more manifestly appear in the Vessels of the T. 9. f. 4.
D*
Heart, which are united by a double Anastomosis, or Union of the mouths of the
said Vessels, as I have described them, in my History of the Child in the Womb.

Some sickly Women, while they go with Child, have their health better than
Why some childing women are sickly, others not
ordinary; but the Child fares the worse for it, because it sucks up the
impurities of the Mothers blood. Others are worse at that time, because the
impurity of the mass of blood, is carried into diverse parts; and if it stick in
the Stomach, it causes either strange longings, or frequent vomiting; in some,
all the while they are big, in others, to the middle of the time of their
Belly-bearing.

If a Woman, during the whole time of her Conception, can make the Child partake
of her passions, it will partake both of her Health and Sickness.

Whether or no, may we let blood, or purge a sick woman that is with Child?
Whether a bigbellied woman may be let blood? Affir.
Blood may be taken away at any time, especially in the first months, in which
the Child being small, needs little blood to nourish it; but in other months
also, blood is taken away, if the greatness of the Disease require it, to save
both Mother and Child.

And if any ill happen after blood-letting in such a Case, it must be
attributed rather to the violence of the Disease, than to the blood-letting, or
any other Remedy applied.

But if a Woman with Child, be taken with the disease Cholera [a violent
purging Whether in the disease Cholera she may bleed? Neg.
upwards and downwards of corrupt Humors] when she is in her seventh or eighth
month; whether in such a case, is it safe to let her blood? If it be suspected
as hurtful in such women as are not with Child, lest their strength being by
much Evacuation weakened, should be more perished, and decayed, much less is it
to be allowed in such as are big-bellied, who have suffered plentiful, and
immoderate Evacuation out of their Veins; because it inclines the Patient to
miscarry, while it defrauds the Child of its nutriment, and impoverishes the
mother; so to go about to Cure a Woman with Child, is a dangerous, and unheard
of Practice. For if al Practitioners dis-allow the same in Men, and Women not
with Child, both Greeks, Arabians, and Latins, both Ancient and Modern; much
more is it to be dis-liked in a woman seven or eight months gone with Child. If
it be done in a small quantity, it is to no purpose: what can the taking away of
one little Porrenger of blood do, to resist the furious agitation of Humors,
and to extinguish a Fever, seeing the blood is wont to come very slowly away,
drop by drop, and the best first.

I say no more, lest I should seem with affectation to handle this Question,
which shall be more accurately discussed in another place. He that desires to be
acquainted with the Cure of VVomens Diseases, let him read Hippocrates his fifth
Book of that Subject.

It is worthy Observation, That the greater the Child grows in the Womb, the
Whether in bigbellied women, the womb grows thinner? Neg.
more does the Womb, and the Placenta, or VVomb-Cake, or VVomb-Liver increase;
so that near the time of Travel, it is as thick as a man's Thumb, contrary to
the Nature of other Bodies, which by how much the more they are distended, by
so much the thinner they grow. If the thickness of the Womb be less, either
those Women are lean, or have little blood, or had a flux of blood a little
before their Childbirth; and such do void little or no blood by way of the
Childbed Purgations.

Now the Child in the Womb, lies round like a Football, floats in Water,
being The posture, and acco^modation of the child in the womb.
compassed with two T. 8. f. 1. C C C C.
Membranes, the one called f. 2. E E.
Amnion, the other f. 2. F E. f* 3. B B.
Chorion, has the f. 3. A A.
Placenta, or VVomb-Liver fastened to the sides of the Womb, as a Mattress, or
Bed to rest upon, in which the Mothers womb is purified, and in which the
Unbilical, or Navel-Vessels are rooted, viz. f. 2. A.
a Vein and two f. 2. B B.
Arteries, which carry blood to the Liver and Heart.

The Vena Porta has blood proper thereunto; and the Cava has also blood of its
own, which must go unto the Heart to be circulated.

The Child in the womb, is nourished by the f. 2. D D.
Navel; it breaths a little, its Heart T. 9. f. 3. B. T. 11. f..
moves, and exercises its vital Faculty, it feels, and is moved, and has been
heard also to cry.

At last, when it finds it self perfect, whether in the seventh, or in the
ninth The Natural Birth.
month, which is the ordinary time for a Child to be born, being impatient to
be any longer there imprisoned, it breaks its bands, and prison doors, and
seeking to come out, makes its own way, with the Head T. 8. f. 1* D.
foremost; and such an Egress is termed a Natural, and right fashioned Birth.

Before that Nature begins to work, she moistens the ways before the Birth,
with a What precedes the same.
Clammy, and gluish Humor. The internal Orifice of the womb, and the whole
Sheath, which in the last months, do by little and little grow thick, are
moistened with the same clammy, glutinous Humor, that they may easily be
enlarged to such a widness as shall be necessary for the going out of the Infant.

That the Child be rightly born, it ought to come out with its Head first, and
its Face toward the Mothers Breech, the Membranes being first broken, and the
water run out: After the Child, the Secondine, or Afterbirth, must come forth,
viz. What follows
the Placenta Carnea, or Womb-Liver, whole, and untorn. When the Child is come
forth, the Navel is tied T. 9. f. 2. P.
a Thumbs breadth from the Skin, and after it is tied, it is cut of, leaving
only another Thumbs breadth.

The Infant being wiped and cleansed, with its Head gently pressed together, and
closed, is delivered unto the Nurse. The Midwife takes care of the Mother, who
is careful of her privy parts, being pained, and to recover her languishing
strength.

If the Birth prove hard and painful, a Fever is raised, and the privy Parts
are swelled, by laboring, and endeavoring in vain to bring forth the Child.
Sometimes Helps to further hard labor
her strength falls her, and other whiles Convulsions do arise. Then is blood
drawn from the Arm, and the Foor, and the Genital Parts are fomented with
Emollient, and laxative Fomentations, and are anointed within with opening
Oils, and fresh Butter. The Patient is put into a bath of lukewarm water, and
sharp Clysters are given, to provoke the womb to excretion: and the inferior
parts are provoked by Aperitive, and provoking Potions to open themselves.

Finally: when all will not do, and the woman has passed over two or three days
in these Torments, if she appear like to die, and ready to faint away, if
tokens of a Gangrene in the Privities do appear, although we are not sure that
the Infant is dead, it is drawn out with an Hook, that the Mothers life may be
saved; it is better that Drawing the Infant out by an Hook.
one die, than two, and the life of the Mother is to be preferred before the
life of the Child. The Mother ought not to die to save the Child, and therefore
the Caesarean Section [ripping the Child out of the Mothers Belly] ought not to
be practiced.

'Twas elegantly said by Tertullian in his Book de Anima, cap. 25. Necessaria
crudelitate trucidatur Infans ma^ricida ni moriturus; that is, It is a
necessary kind of Cruelty, to kill that Child, which otherwise would kill its
own Mother.

When the Infant has broke prison, and escaped, if the Placenta, or
Afterbirth do not follow, the Midwife must thrust her hand into the Cavity of
the womb, and pull it ^way gently, lest the bottom of the womb be drawn down.

If in a woman dead presently after her Delivery, you view the privy Parts, you
shall observe the Caruncles obliterated and defaced, the Nymphs much
diminished* so that only some Rudiments of them, are to be seen, and the inmost
Orifice so wide, that it will receive a man's four fingers bended together.

The widening of those Parts to let out the Infant, and the straitening of them
again, Admirable power of Nature. Childbed Purgations what they are
a while after, is an admirable work of Nature.

The widness and thickness of the womb, are diminished by little and little, by
the coming away of the Loches, or Childbed Purgations, which is nothing but
that blood squeezed out, which had been shut up between the Spongy sides of the
womb. But if the largeness of the womb be not diminished, nor the blood
evacuated, it putre^ies, and causes an Inflammation, and the womb continues
stretched, and bard, as is the Child were yet within it, and at length a
Gangrene arises, which brings unavoidable death after it.

But if the whole Placenta be not drawn forth, it is no necessary cause of
Death; and the place from whence it was pulled by force, for a while appears
rough and uneven, til the whole womb be dried, and reduced unto its natural
Figure: al which ought diligently to be observed, especially in Childbed women
that are sick.

The largeness and hardness of the Body of the womb continuing with a Fever,
is Childbed Purgations retained, how to be evacuated
a very dangerous, and doubtful Disease; and a great Question it is toward the
Cure, whether we should open a Vein in the Arm, or in the Foot. Fernelius
confidently lets blood in the Arm: Pereda a Spaniard, tells us, That we should
not regard from whence the blood comes, but into what part it is collected, and
bids us open the Vein which is next that part.

Cortesius in his Miscellanies, has sifted this Question, and favors the
Opinion of Fernelius: howbeit, more profitable it is, and more secure, to take
blood out of the Foot liberally, respect being had to the Patients strength,
not neglecting cooling Clysters, Epithems, Fomentations, and Pessaries, made to
provoke the womb to cast forth that putrified, and death-causing blood; and the
rather to avoid the Calumny, and prating of il-tongu'd Gossips, by whom
Remedies are defamed, which have been the means to save many peoples lives.

The Infant has no Diseases proper to it self, saving Teeth-breeding, Small Pox,
Diseases proper to Infants*
and Meazles. Hippocrates under the name of Tooth-breeding, comprehends al
Childrens Diseases, because chiefly when they breed their Teeth, Infants are so
sick that many times they are taken away by death.

Many Diseases are raised by the pain of the Childrens Tooth-breeding. There
Teeth-sickness
are two times in which the Tooth-sickness does vex, and endanger the lives of
Children, viz. When the Teeth first sprout, and when they break out of the Gums.

The Meazles, and small Pox, are new Diseases, unknown to the Ancient
Physicians, Meazles. Small pox
which are thought to be contracted, and bred in the Mothers womb, by the
Mothers corrupt, and Menstrual blood; the fault whereof, Nature is wont to
purge out, and scum away by those Eruptions. I say no more, lest I should seem
to go beyond the bounds of an Anatomical Discourse. Neither is it my Design to
deliver an exact Pathology, or Description of Diseases; but only to hint at
such Diseases as are known by knowing the Natural Constitution of the parts of
the whole Body.

Chap. 37. Of the Pains of the Loins.
THere is nothing which we more frequently meet with in Hippocrates, and in the
Practice of Physic, than Pains of the Loins, whether they be primary, or
secondary; that is to say, Attendants of other Diseases; which are oftentimes
neglected by Physicians as Symptomatical, unless they be very stubborn, and
solitary without a Fever. The Causes of which pains, are not accurately enough
declared, neither is their Cure sufficiently explained by all Practitioners.

This knot I shall endeavor to unty, and illustrate. The parts therefore of the
A muster of such parts as are in the loins
lower Belly, being demonstrated, and the Guts taken away, we shall see the
Loins T. 10. f. 1. T. 14. all the Tabl.
covered with Muscles, both within and without, and fleshy T. 10. f. 7. H H.
portions of the Midrif reaching down to the Os Sacrum, and the Trunk of the
Vena T. 12. f. 1. c.
Cava descendent, also the T. 12. f. 4. C.
Aorta, and the two T. 5. f. 5. B C.
T. 5. f. 5 B C.
Kidneys. And if you shall call to mind the cleaving of the Mesentery to the
Loins, and shall observe the Lumbary, or Loyn T. 12. f. 1. a a.
T. 12. f. 1. a a.
Veins, produced from the Trunk of the Vena Cava, and the Arteries proceeding
from the T. 12. f. 4. C.
T. 12. f. 4. a a.
Aorta, both conveyed into the holes of the Vertebra's as far as the marrow
of the Back. Al these things being diligently viewed, and considered, will give
great light to our Consultation.

Galen complains in his Commentary upon Text 7. of the Second Book of
Pro^heticks; and upon Text 8. of the Third Book of the same Work, of the
Obscurity of the pains of the Loins, because of the Ignorance of those Parts
which compound and work upon the Loins; yet some causes he assigns of those
pains, and Ludovicus Duretus that same sublime Interpreter of Hippocrates has
added others, but they have not assigned all. I will therefore do my endeavor
to clear this point.

And in the first place, it is fit to take notice, that this pain is by the
Greeks called The Name with its Elymology.
in one word Osphualgia: the Latins term it Lumbago, and he that is made weak
by pain in his Loins, is called Elumbis vel Elumbatus, disloined or unloined.
In the French it is termed Erne as it were a Rene from the Kidney, which lies in
the Loins; and when the pain arises from a Convulsion of the Fibers, the
common people say their Kidneys are torn in sunder.

If this pain of the Loins be eased with Clysters, the Humors being emptied
which were shut up in the Guts or Mesentery, the Common People say, that their
Reins or Kidneys are well dis-burthened.

Now that our enquiry touching pains of the Loins may be clear and Methodical,
The Authors Method.
it is necessary in the first place to distinguish the Parts constituting the
Loins, which are pained, and the bordering Parts which as efficient Causes do
give occasion to those pains, not neglecting the more remote Parts. Then we
shall enquire into the common internal and external Causes of those pains, and
to sum up al in a word, we shall consider the Parts which send the Humor, and
the Parts which receive the same.

The Parts therefore which make up the Loins and are the subject of the pains,
Parts which constitute the Loins. and Are the subjects of Pains.
are these. The T. 1. f. 2. B B.
Skin with the f. 2. D D.
fleshy Membrane, the T. 10. and 14. etc.
Muscles which are spread upon the five T. 2. f. 1.
Vertebraes, both without and within with the f. 5. and 6
Os Sacrum. Within the f. 2. a.
Cavities of the Vertebraes, the Marrow of the back with its Membranes, and a
numerous company of T. 18. f. 5. 11. 14.
branches of Nerves, and the Membranous Ligaments, which knit the Vertebra's
one unto another. Also we must observe how the f. 5. A.
Marrow of the back is in the Loins parted into an innumerable company of f. 5.
o.
threads, like an Horse-Tail, and that the whole Backbone is moved in the
Loins, by an Articulation of the first Vertebra of the Loins, with the last
Vertebra of the Back.

They are deceived who think that by the word Loins Hippocrates understands
only the Parts included viz. The T. 18. f. 5. II. o. T. 3. f. 8 o. p. etc.
Nerves, the T. 10. f. 2. T. 14.
Muscles of the Loins, the Spinal T. 18. f. 5. A.
Marrow with its Membranes, and the T. 5. f. 1. B C. f. 2. C D.
Kidneys: for besides al these Hippocrates comprehends under the term Loins,
the f. 1. D. f. 2. F.
great Vein and f. 1. E. f. 2. G.
Artery, and the f. 1. H I. f. 2. L L. N N.
Spermatick Vessels, and the f. 2. H I. a a. b b. etc.
Vessels of the Kidneys, the f. 7. F F. T. 12. f. 1. and 4. z z etc.
Bladder, the T. 7. f. 1. X X V V.
Womb, the T. 4. f. 6. II.
Hemorrhoides and the thick T. 3. f. 4. I K M.
Guts. But I would fain see the places which severally demonstrate those Parts.

Now the neighboring Parts, which are able to hurt the Loins, by reason of
their Parts bordering upon the Loins which are The special Causes of their
Pains.
nearness, or heavyness, or by disburthening their Humors into them, are the
Mesentery f. L A A. etc.
which is knit unto the Loins, the lower Part of the f. 4. K.
Gut Colon, the two T. 5. f. 1. B C. f. 2. C D.
Kidnys which touch upon and cleave unto the Loins, by their f. 2. A A.
fatty Membrane, the Trunks of f. 1. D. f. 2. F.
Vena Cava and f. 1. E. f. 2. G.
Aorta which are spread along in the Loins, and the Vessels springing out of
them, which are propagated into the Muscles of the Loins and the Backbone. Of
which sort are the Veins and Arteries of the T. 12. f. 1. and 4. a a a.
Loins, al^o the Haemorrhoid T. 4. f. 6. I I.
Veins, which pass down al a long the Loins into the Fundament; as also the T.
6. f. 1. 2.. etc.
Spermatick Vessels which swel with Spermatick Humor, which in their progress
do send branches unto the Loins. In Women, the T. 7. f 1. d f. 2. R T etc.
Womb with its f. 2. Q Q. S S.
Ligaments and f. 2. o o. f. 4. A A.
Testicles may hurt the Loins, but especialy in a Woman with Child, by reason
of the weight of the Womb and Child. The Veins and Arteries of the Iliac T. 12.
f. 1. and 4. D D.
branches, which are spread abroad through the Os Sacrum, may vex the Loins.

The remote Parts which hurt the Loins, are, the T. 4. f. 1. A B.
Liver by the Vena f. 1. F F f. 6. the whole
Porta, Remote Parts
and f. 1. G H.
Mesentery, and the T. 17. and 18.
Head whils it disburthens it self of its Superfluities into the T. 18. f. 5.
A.
Marrow of the Back according to Hippocrates in his Book de Glandulis. The
Humor descends through the Cavity of the Spinal Marrow, as far as the Loins,
and it cannot easily go farther, by reason that the Marrow of the Back is their
divided into a f. 5. o.
Million of Threads.

We must also observe the common Causes of the Pains, which are frequently
Common Causes of Pains.
found in Pains of the Loins, as internal Rheumatismes or Fluxes of Humors,
and external by the Veins, or an Humor between the Skin, whith flows from the
Head betwixt the Muscles and Fleshy Membane,

Oftentimes the btanches of the Vena Cava and Aorta do carry a Patt of boiling
and Superfluous Blood, out of the greater Channels into the Loins, which they
Disease either in the Muscly Parts, or in the Membranous Parts, or in the
marrow of the Back; which is the Cause that a Palsy follows the Colic, or an
Arthritis degenerates into the Colic and the Colic is changed into the
Sciatica. Also, outward Impostumes of the Kidneys, and passions of the Gut
Colon being either distended or exulcerated, are Communicated to the Loins.
within and without in the Loins may arise Tumors, Impostumes, and Ulcers, yea,
and the Loins are distorted by flux of Rheum, or some swelling. Their Fibers
are distended by the Cramp. Many times pains of the Loins are stirred up by
external Causes, as External Causes.
a fall on the Back, or a Blow with a thick Stick, or some other massy thing.

These things being premised and well understood, it is easy to explain very
obscure Certain places in Hippocrates expounded.
places in Hippocrates, touching pains of the Loins, which you shall find in
the Commentaries of Duretus upon the Coick Prognostics of Hippocrates, and
others collected together in the Commentaries of Marinellus upon Hippocrates,
in the word Lumbi.

There are two kinds of Loine Symptoms: for some are in the Loins, and others
spring from the Loins: both of them are by Hippocrates judged to be very
stubborn and hard to deal with,

In his Coicks he has pronounced absolutely and without exception, Such as have
pains in their Loins are in a very bad condition. And in the same Book,
Diseases which arise from pain of the Back, are hard to cure. And how will you
understand those places, unles by a clear knowledge of the the Parts sending and
Parts receiving, as I declared before.

Certain it is, if in the beginning of Diseases their be pain in the Loins,
with heavyness and a Fever, Blood very hot or in great plenty is contained
within the greater Vessels, which being more inflamed, if not timely prevented,
may be carried into the Head or into the Lungs, from whence grievous Diseases
may follow. In other places he does particularly explain the Causes of Lung
pains.

If I should recite those places, I should fill twenty Leaves and upwards,
wherefore I will take in my Sails and dispatch al in a word. Pains of the
Loins in acute Malignant Danger of these pains in Fevers.
Fevers or other Fevers in the beginning are dangerous* for they signify a
great Tumult in the Blood, and irritation of Humor within the greater Vessels,
which is much to be feared if a speedy course be not taken to prevent what may
follow, by a plentyful blood letting, especially in the Feet, to hinder the
recourse of the blood to the upper Parts of the Chest or Head, where it is wont
to produce diverse terrible and deadly Symptoms.

We ought therefore to be very fearful of pains in the Loins which persevere
in Fevers, although Blood have been often let, because in the Region of the
Belly, Humors lie extreme deep, which may take their course suddenly to some of
the nobler Parts, if they be not diligently Purged forth.

And therefore to cure such like pains of the Loins, Hippocrates was went to
Their Cure.
open the Veins of the Ham or Foot: which is confirmed by him, in his Coicks:
the pains of the Loins proceed from abundance of blood there, and
blood-lettings that are caused by pains of the Loins are large and plentyful.
These things declare the necessity of blood-letting, when the Loins are pained
with a Fever.

Purging must not be omitted that the Vault of the lower Belly being loaded
with Excrements may be emptied and cleansed; out of Aphor. 20. Book 4. Though
Hippocrates has written that such as complain of pains in their Loins, are
loo^e^ bellyed than ordinary; that saying does not take away the necessity of
Purging in these cases.

Bleeding at the Hemorrhoid Veins is good both for the Kidneis and for pains of
the Loins; and therefore the Hemorrhoids are to be provoked.

A lasting pain of the Loins without Heat or any Inflammatory disposition,
unless it can be discussed with Fomentations, after purging and blood-letting
often repeated, the Humor must be drawn out with Cupping-Glasses and
Scarification, and by Application of Vesicatories, or making Issues on each
side of the Backbone; also with a Bath of fresh water qualified with Herbs, or
by sitting in natural Baths, or having their water Pumped from on high upon the
Parts affected. For the pains of the Loins are more vehement and stubborn if
the serous matter be contained within the Muscles as far as the Vertebras: and
they are yet worse and harder to be cured, if they come to the Marrow of the
Back.

But those Symptoms which are thought to arise from the Loins, do not arise
from the Parts which constitute or make up the Loins, but from the neighboring
Parts, which being spread upon the Loins, do cause pain, and transfer their
Humors into other Parts, by a quick or slow motion, by the Veins and Arteries,
such as are Vena Cava and Aorta, the Haemorrhoid Veins and the Mesaraicks. Out
of Galen.

The End of the Second Book:
THE THIRD BOOK OF THE ANATOMY AND PATHOLOGY OF John Riolanus, THE KINGS
PROFESSOR OF PHYSIC.
Chap. 1. Of the Chest.
LET us proceed unto the Parts of the Chest. Now the Chest Its* Bounds
is the Mansion House of the Vital Parts It is bounded, and circumscribed
below, by the T. 10. f. 2. 11, 12, etc.
bastard Ribs, and f. 1. I I. f. 6, 7, etc.
Midrif; above by the f. 1. f. T. 12. f. 1. B B.
Claviculae, and the whole Circumference, and bulk thereof is made up of all the
T. 10. f. 1, 2, 3, etc.
Ribs, the Vertebra's of the f. 3.
Back, and the f. 2. A A.
Breast Bone. And because the Neck comptehends the beginnings of certain Parts
which belong unto the Chest, it is referred thereunto, rather than to the the
Head, though it be the prop and Pillar thereof.

That the Chest may be well shaped, it ought to be of an Oval Figure, and not
Shape.
flat before, which is termed Pectus Tabellatum, a Table-shap'd Breast, and is
a token that the Party so Breasted, will fall into a Consumption.

The Chest is Compounded of diverse Parts, which are divided into external and
Parts.
internal, that is to say into Parts containing, and Parts contained. The
containing Parts are common and proper. The Common are five. The Scarf-Skin,
the Skin, the fatty Membrane, the fleshy Membrane, and the Membrane common to
the Muscles, which were explained in our Anatomy of the lower Belly.

The Membrane of Fat and the fleshy Membrane have one thing proper and peculiar
in the Chest, that they receive the Paps in Men and Women. In Men there are
only the marks of Paps or Dugs, in Women they are Parts made not only for a
^eminine ornament, but to nourish the Infant, of which we are now to treat
before we pass any further.

Chap. 2. Of the Dugs of Women.
THe Dugs are made up of a company of Kernels very like the Kernels of
Prune-Stones, Their Substance
clustered together, and disposed confusedly in heaps upon a Membrane proper
to themselves, in the midst of which there lies one Kernel greater than the
rest, under the Teat.

The Dugs are placed upon the Breast, not to defend the Heart not to adorn and
Situation*
beautify the Woman, but that the Infant may be more conveniently nourished,
while the Mother embracing it in her Arms lays it to the Dug, and the Child
T^^kling her Nipple with its ^ucking provoks her the more to love it, and to
express her Love by frequent Kisses.

The largeness of the Dugs is different, according as the Woman is of a more or
less Magnitude*
fleshy and la^civious constitution of Body: for the lustful heat of the Womb
does puff up and swel a Woman's Dugs. In a Marriagable Virgin they become more
large, if she enjoy carnal Embracements with more than ordinary pleasure and
content,

Nature, our bountyful Mother, has given a Woman two Dugs, that she may nurse
Number.
two Children; or if one breast be sore, the other may serve the turn for a
time. And for this Cause they communicate Vessels one with another.

The shape of the Dugs is not flat but bunching out, that they might contein
the Shape
greater Quantity of Milk. At the end of the Dugs, are the Teats, out of which
drops the Milk, which the Infant sucks.

The Teat or Nipple is made of the Skin drawn together and boared with little
The Teats.
holes. It is wrinkled on the outside that the Infant may more easily lay hold
upon it, and keep it in its Mouth.

Round obout the Teat there goes a Ring or Circle of different Colors in Women,
The Circle about the Teats.
in respect of their Age and of their being with Child or not with Child etc.
In Virgins it is red, in such as are devirginated it is Black and Blew. In
Women with Child it is larger than ordinary; and if they go with a Boy it is
Black and Blew or red; if they go with a Girl, it is of a whiteish Color.

The Medicinal Consideration.
The largness of the Chest is commended as sound and healthful; but a narrow
Misshapen Chest.
Chest is blamed because it occasions shortness of Breath, because the Lungs
are ill housed wanting Room to display themselves. The shape of the Chest ought
diligently to be considered by a Physician when he sees any troubled with
shortness of Breath. In healthy Persons, that the Chest may be perfectly
shaped, it is requisite that it be round in the forepart and not sharp, and
that it be straight before and behind; if it prove crooked, there is a fault in
the Backbone, of which we shall speak in our Doctrine of bones.

Terence blames the affected Care of Mothers who straightened the Chests of their
young Daughters, that they might become Slender and small in the wast. [Such are
^ghtly termed Wasp-wasted We^ches, because they seem divided in the middle*
like a Waspe or Be.]

A misshapen Chest by reason of the Crookedness of the Backbone is more
frequently By Crookedness of the Backbone.
seen in Women than in Men, because they are the weaker Vessels. These
Crookednesses we endeavor to correct with a firm Pair of Bodies, made either
of hard Leather, or of strong Linen with Whale-bones sowed between, or of very
thin Plates of Iron. Also the Backbone is daily by contrary motious bowed the
other way.

Some are born thus Misshapen, and they are incurable, let the Rectifiers of
Crookedness do what they c^*

Many times Rhewmes fall upon the Muscles of the Back*bone, which draw the
Vertebraes awry, whence proceeds a misshapen B^-bone and consequently a
Crooked Chest, because their shape depends upon the shape of the Backbone.

To the evil shaping of the Chest appertains the falling down of the Breast, or
the By falling of the Breast.
bowing in of the Sword-like Gristle, which hurts the Stomach and provokes
vomiting, and also shortness of Breath by hurting the Midrif; therefore this
Gristle ought speedily to be lifted up and restored to its place. Baptista
Codron^^us and Ludov^cus Septalius have treated of this Disease.

The Diseases of the Cavity of the Chest are Empyema, or a collection of
quittor Empyema. Dropsy.
within the said Cavity, and the Dropsy of the Breast: all which Diseases
require a perforation to be made between the fourth and fifth Rib of the Chest
on that side in which the Humor is contained.

Sometimes winds do so violently distend the Lungs, that the Patient is in
danger of Choking, unless the Chest be opened by the Perforation before said,
which is often practiced at Paris to the great benefit of the Patients and
easing of the Chest; although no watery Humors come forth, but only wind, which
Issues violently, with a noise. Those whose Chests are distended with wind, are
by Hippocrates termed Pneumatiai.

The Dugs are to be considered at diverse seasons, in a Virgin Marriagable, in a
Condition of the Dugs.
Married Woman, in a woman with Child, and in one that lies in Child*bed and
gives Suck: because in these several times they are subject to several
Diseases. In ripe Virgins fully Marrigable, the Dugs are firm and solid. They
become more soft and In a marriagable Virgin.
swelling, when they are transported with a burning desire of carnal
Embracements: and by how much the higher they swel without pain, and the fuller
Orb that they make, strow^ing and Kis^ing one another, the greater is their
desire after bodily Pleasure, and it may be guessed that they have tasted the
Sweetness of Mans-Flesh.

If when the Dugs are pressed, Milk drop forth, it is a sign of the Parties
being with In a married Woman.
Child, though Hippocrates accounts it but an uncertain Sign. The Dugs of a
Married woman which were raised with the Ardency of fleshly lust, do sink and
fa^ by little and little. Women that have large strouting Dugs are termed in
Latin Mammosae Mulieres, and they are of an ho^ Con plexion, lustful and
lovers of Wine and good Liquor. If they happen to be of a cold Complexion, the
swel^ing of their Dugs, comes from an Wheyish Humor which they suck in like
Spunges. So says Hippocrates.

Large and ponderous Dugs, do hinder Breathing, by burthening the Chest. So the
swelled Breaths of Ancient Virgins and married women, are liable to the same
Diseases. For either by reason of a Flux of Humors or of some bruise, they are
Inflammation of the Dugs. Impostum.
inflamed and impostumate: sometime they become Scirrhous and Knobbed as it were
with the King's Evil, by reason of the Kernels; and then a Kernel or two, if
they be movable, ought to be taken clean away, by cutting the Skin before they
Scirrhus.
cleave to the Fat, the Disease increasing and creeping on to infect other
Kernels: Hence comes an incurable Cancer; Because the Dugs are full of Kernels
and spungy, Cancer.
and therefore ordained by Nature to receive superfluous Humors. So that such
Women as have them dried and shrunken up, are unhealthy and much troubled with
spitting.

The Dugs of a Woman with Child, some time after her Conception, do swel by In
a woman with child. Distention by blood.
little and little, by reason of the flowing back of the Menstrual blood, and
they drop a mil^y Whey: but in Child bed women, they become yet bigger, by
reason of a greater afflux of blood, than the Dugs are able to contain. From
this distention springs a Fever, on the third day after they are delivered,
which lasts a day or two, or longer; unless the Milk be forced back, or some
Child suck the Dugs.

This Milk is called in Latin, Colostrum, and many are afraid to nourish the
Child therewith. Yet Spigelius has proved, That this first Milk is no bad milk,
and that a Mother ought not to refuse to nourish her Child therewith.

If in a Woman with Child, the Dugs are liable to Inflammation, Tumors, and
Ulcers; In a woman that lies in.
much more are they so in a Childbed Woman, and one that gives suck, by reason
of the curdling of her Milk. Dioscorides writes, That the swelling of the Dugs
is brought down, by the application of bruised Hemlock, which Experience shows
to be true. Howbeit, Dodonaeus approves not of this Medicine, by reason of the
malignant, and venomous Nature of this Herb, which being applied unto the Dugs,
may wrong the Heart.

Hippocrates in his Epidemicks, has this Saying: If the Nipples of Women's Dugs,
and that which is red in them, be pale, their Womb is diseased.

There is a great League, and fellow-feeling, between the Dugs, and the Womb,
Consent of the wom^ and dugs* how caused?
by reason of two Veins, viz. The Vena T. 2. f. 9. d. T. 12. f. 1. C C.
* Mammaria, or Dug-Vein; and the T. 2. f. 9. e. T. 12. f. 1. E E.
Epigastrica: and also by the Venae f. 1. l l o o.
Thoracicae, or Breast-Veins, which are Branches of the Vena f. 1. A B. etc.
Cava, which in the bottom of the Belly, affords the Hypogastrick f. 1. x x.
Vein unto the Womb.

The Ancient Chyrurgeons were wont to cut off Cancerous Dugs with the Incision
Knife; but because it lucks not well, women are not willing to undergo so cruel
a Remedy, neither do our Chyrurgeons practice it.

Chap. 3. Of the External Parts of the Chest.
THe proper Containing Parts are boney, musculous, or membranous. The Proper
containing parts.
boney Parts are of four sorts, viz. Twelve T. 10. f. 2. 1, 2, 3, etc.
Ribs, two Claviculae, or f. 1. f. T. 21. f. 1. B B.
Channel-bones, the Sternum, or T. 10. f. 2. A A.
Breast Bone, and the twelve Vertebrae, or T. 10. f. 3.
turning Joints of the Backbone, of which we have spoken in ou^ Osteologia, or
History of the Bones.

The Musculous parts, are either external, or internal, at least placed between
the bones. The External musculous parts, are divided into Muscles proper to the
Chest, or such as are referred to other parts; such as the Musculus T. 10. f.
1. A B.
Pectorali^, or Breast-Muscle; Serratus f. 1. E.
minor anti^^s, or the smaller fore-side Saw-Muscle; and the greater Saw f. 1.
C D.
Muscle, or Serratus major; the rest belong unto the Chest, of which we shall
speak in our Myologia, or History of the Muscles.

The Internal musculous Parts are, the Intercostal Muscles, both f. 1. H H.
internal, and f. ^. G G.
external; which are placed in the spaces between the Ribs, as their name
imports.

Chap* 4. Of the Pleura, Mediastinum, and Pericardium.
THat continued membranous Part which incloses all the internal parts of the The
Pleur^* what it i^.
Chest, and bestows Membranes upon every one of them, like the Peritoneum, is
termed f. 5. A A.
Pleura; which being every where f. 5. C C.
stretched out under all the Ribs, is firmly joined to the bony Parts, and to
the Midrif. Because of its thickness, it is Its thickness
accounted double; but it cannot be demonstrated to be so, without tearing.

In Diseases of the Chest, when it swells, its doubleness is easily separated.
Being on either side reflexed unto the Back, and rising up unto the
Breast Bone, it is f. 4. B B.
reduplicated, and makes the f. 4. A A.
Mediastinum, and leaves within it self a certain void The Mediastinum, what it
is?
space, full of threads, which also comprehends the Heart, and the Pericardium:
it is noths^g else, save a Production, or a doubling and folding of the
Mediastinum.

This Cavity of the Mediastinum, is diligently to be observed, as that which
helps Its Cavity.
to form the voice as an Echo to beat back the sound: it does likewise
separate the bulk of the Chest into two Cavities, and divide the Lungs one from
another.

The Mediastinum is fastened unto the Claves, and the Midrif, by reason of the
Pericardium, which is circularly knit unto the T. 10. f. 6. F F. f. 7. G G.
Circulus Nerveus, and the Breastbone; and by this Artifice, the Mediastinum,
by help of the Pericardium, does hold the heart suspended, and becomes the band
of the Midrif it self. Now the T. 11. f. 1. A. f. 2. A.
Pericardium is the Bag, or Case of the Heart, which contains a watery Humor
The Pericardium, what it is?
to moisten the Heart, from which it is round about so far distant, as is
requisite that the Heart may freely move it self. If the Pericardium, or
Heart-case has no proper Coat of its own, yet it does at least borrow one from
the Mediastinum, which compasses it about. By reason of the near conjunction
of the one unto the other, the membranous substance is no thicker, than the
Membrane of the Mediastinum in other places.

The Medicinal Consideration.
Because Contraries compared together, are the better understood, having seen
Diseases of the Costal muscles, i^
the Natural Constitution of these Parts, let us now take a view of their
Preternatural Dispositions, or Diseases.

The Muscles, as well those that are spread upon the Ribs, as those which are
placed between the said Ribs, which are subject to diverse Diseases, caused
either by the Flux of Humors* from other parts, or by Humors collected in, and
about the said Muscles.

They undergo diverse Tumors, Inflammations, Impostumes, Rheumatick pains,
springing from a serous, or wheyish Humor; al which do produce sharp pains in
Pains of the ^^des. How known from the Pleurisy.
the sides, with a Fever, and sometimes with a dry Cough, which imitate the
Pleurisy; wherefore the difference must diligently be marked, lest we apply
the same Remedies to these pains of the sides, which are proper to a Pleurisy.

Hippocrates has observed this Difference; and after him Duretus, the Ghost of
Hippocrates, and his Faithful Interpreter: For every Pleurisy is a pain of the
side; but every pain of the side, is not a Pleurisy, or at most, but a bastard
Pleurisy.

But some will say, both Diseases require the same Cure in respect of
blood-letting, because the passage is easy for the Humors to go from the
external parts, unto the internal. I do not deny that blood is to be taken
away, but not so much, and so often, as in a true Pleurisy. And therefore
Hippocrates in a pain of the side, was wont first to make use of Fomentations,
that he might try whether the pain was in the side, or in the Membrane called
Pleura; for a simple pain of the side is eased by How they differ in
Fomentations, but the Pleurisy is thereby enraged the more, in which there is
a continual Fever, an In^^amation, a Cough, and a pricking pain of the side.

And therefore the pains of the side differ in Situation, and in matter;
because Situation,
one is ^eated in the Membrane T. 10. f. 5. A A.
Pleurd, and the f. 1. G G. H H.
Intercostal Muscles; another in the grea^^^ Muscles, which are spread upon the
Ribs, such as are the T. 10. f. 1. A B.
Pectoral Muscle the f. 1. C D.
Serratus major, and T. 10. f. 1. E.
minor, the T. 14. f. 1. C C D D.
Latissimus, and the Muscles of the T. 14. f. 1, 2, etc.
Back.

They differ also in Matter, because wind, or wheyish Humors, or blood does
Matter.
insinuate it self into the greater external Muscles, and is carried likewise,
or slips down from the Brain, by the Veins termed T. 12. f. 1. l l. o o.
Thoracicae, or Chest-Veins: But the Humor which does possess the Intercostal
Muscles, is brought by the small Branches of the Vena T. 12. f. 1. a a a etc.
Azygos, or Vein without a Fellow, and does produce the true Pleuresie.

It is not necessary that the Humor be contained within the Membrane Pleura,
because it is not capable, nor apt to receive the Flux when the pain begins;
but the Humor being shed abroad into the space which is between the Muscles,
and the Pleura, it becomes partaker of the pain, which is more sharp in the
Pleura it self, by reason of its Nervous, or Sinewy Nature, than it is in the
Musculous Flesh.

The Action of the Chest, is motion, ordained for Respiration; which motion, is
governed by Muscles and Nerves which are subject to the Palsy and Convulsion.
To the Convulsion of the Muscles of the Chest, does belong the stoppage of the
breath, difficult breathing, and Hippocrates his double-stroak'd fetching in of
the wind.

The Membrane Pleura being inflamed with a continual Fever, a pricking pain in
Whether there may be a Peripneumonia, or no?
the side, and a Cough, makes a Pleurisy, which some late Physicians do think,
never lasts long, without a transmission of the Humor into the Lungs, which
often cleave to the Pleura, yea, and that the Humor passes over by a Metastasis
into the Lungs* and causes a Peripneumonia, or Inflammation of the Lungs.

Zecchius was the first that broached this Doctrine in his Counsels, building
upon the Authority of Hippocrates; others did in their writings, confirm it by
reasons, as Vincentius Baronius, in his Book de Pleuropneumonia. And this
Combination of two Diseases of the Chest in one, they term Pleuropneumonia,
that is, the Side-and-Lung-sickness; which thing I gave an hint of, before
them, in my Anthropography, or Description of Man's Body, in the Chapter which
treats of the Lungs. That place of Hippocrates, is worthy consideration, which
many have undertaken to explain: I for my part do thus interpret the same.

Oft-times the Lungs in one, or both the sides, do cleave unto the Membrane
which How it is caused, according to our Author.
covers the Ribs: or if they do not cleave thereunto when the side is first
inflamed; the Membrane Pleura being soaked, and made softer by the afflux of
Humors, does sweat out a clammy wheyish Humor; so that the Lungs when breath is
drawn in, filling the whole Chest, do at length stick unto the said membrane
Pleura, and there cleaving is made the faster by the heat of the Fever.
Neither does the motion of the Lungs hinder that same cleaving too aforesaid,
because when the pain is increased, the Patient breaths short for fear of
augmenting the same, and so the Lungs are moved very little: whereupon the
Lungs are fastened to the part pained, and then the Pleurisy turns into a
Peripneumonia, or Inflammation of the Lungs, or both these Diseases are joined
together; and therefore there follows an easy Expectoration, first of a bloody
Humor, by reason of a light Exulceration both of the Pleura, and of the
membrane of the Lungs, and then of the rest of the matter, which comes partly
out of the side, partly from the Excrement of the Lungs Nutriment, or from the
impurity of the mass of blood, passing by its circular motion through the
Lungs: whence it is, that so great a quantity of a Choleric and Phlegmatic
Humor flows, which is spit up with Coughing.

But if the Lungs do not cleave to the side, the blood-watry Humor being shed
into the Cavity of the Chest, and scarce ever drawn back again, there is bred
an Empyema; which if it be not voided of it self, it must be let out by opening
the side; which Operation sometimes lucks well.

So that according to the Doctrine of Hippocrates, whom Herophilus (as Caelius
The difference of a Pleurisy, and Peripneumonia.
Aurelianus relates) and Cornelius Celsus do follow, there is a true Pleurisy,
if there be joined thereunto, an Inflammation of one side of the Lungs; if both
sides be pained, it is a true Peripneumonia, or Universal Inflammation of the
Lungs, because the whole Lungs are affected both in the right, and left side;
and continually beating upon the Ribs, they are apt to infect them with the
blood-watry Humor wherewith they abound. Wherefore the Pleurisy, and the
Inflammation of the Lungs, are Diseases of a brotherly Kindred, which help one
another to destroy the Patient, or to comfort him, according as the
Constitution of the Lungs is weak or strong; and as they are assisted with
Remedies, especially, liberal blood-letting.

Neither can the matter causing the Pleurisy, be transferred, or propagated by
any other ways into the Lungs by any Metastasis, or Epigenesis. Howbeit, we
see in dead bodies, the diseased Pleura ten times thicker than ordinary, which
argues that the seat of the Disease was there. I deny not but that it may be
communicated to the Lungs, and that the Pleurisy may degenerate into a
Peripneumonia, or Inflammation of the Lungs, after the manner aforesaid.

Touching blood-letting, there has been for an hundred and fifty years, an
eager On which side the blood is to be taken away in a Pleurisy?
contention between the Modern Physicians of France, Italy, and Germany, from
what part blood is to be drawn in a true Pleurisy, whether on the same side
that is pained, or on the other side. At last, the Opinion of Hippocrates
confirmed with the Authority of Galen, has prevailed, and got Victory over the
Doctrine of the Arabian Physicians. The Physicians of Paris, and al true
Artists, do follow Hippocrates; for they let blood on the Arm, of the same side
which is pained. After three or four times letting blood in the Arm, for
Revulsion sake, a Vein may be opened in the Foot; but the diseased side must be
first disburdened.

In blood-letting, we choose our Vein, because the Patient is sooner eased by
opening Out of what Vein?
the T. 24. f. 1. C C.
Basilica Vena, if we consider the Rectitude of the Vessels by the Fibers: for
this Vein is a continuation of the T. 12. f. 1. B B.
Axillary Trunk, which produces the f. 1. l l. o o.
Chest-Vein, which glides through the external parts of the Chest, and is
joined to the Extremities of the Solitary Vein called Azygos. This was formerly
declared by Gordonius, a Physician of Montpelier. Ludovicus Duretus has
confirmed the same with Histories, in his Commentaries upon the Practice of
Hollerius.

The Mediastinum is subject to diverse Diseases. Its Membranes are inflamed as
Diseases of the Mediastinum. Inflammation, Impostume,
in the Pleurisy, because of the near Neighbor-hood of the Heart, and the
communion of substance with the Pericardium. The Quittor therein collected,
makes an Impostume, which is drawn out by perforation of the Breast Bone, or by
an Instrument fitted for that purpose. Winds also are sometimes shut up within
the Cavity Wind,
of these parts, which do vex, and torment the Chest, and pierce it through as
it were.

The Pericardium may also be inflamed, with much pain, and no little danger,
because Pericardium Inflamed,
it is near the Heart; which therefore is subject to frequent Swounings; and
then the pulse is quicker, the Fever stronger, the thirst more vehement than
in the Pleurisy, or in the Inflammation of the Lungs.

Oftentimes abundance of moisture is collected therein, which causes
Suffocation, Full of Humor
and over-whelms the Heart. If thou can not draw away the said moisture with
such Medicines as purge wheyish Humors; what if you should boar an hole in the
breast bone, a Thumbs breadth distant from the Sword-like Gristle? because the
Pericardium is there fastened, that the heart may hang pendulous. A doubtful
Cure, is better than certain Desperation: it is better to try a doubtful Remedy
than none at all, where there is no hope of help, save in some extraordinary
providence of God.

If there be no water at al in the Pericardium, the Heart pines away by little
and Deficient of Humor. Worms.
little, as it has been observed in many Patients.

Certain it is, that Worms are bred in the Pericardium, which feed upon the
Heart, and are destroyed by the use of Scordium. Petrus Salius Diversus has
treated of this Disease. Neither is it any absurdity, that worms should be
sound within the Ventricles of the Heart; howbeit they are bred in the Vena
Cava, and come from thence into the Heart.

Seeing the Heart hangs upon the Breast Bone, it will not be unprofitable to
apply Topic Medicaments, and Fomentations, whether hot or cold, made to
strengthen the Heart, unto this part, according as the Disease wherewith the
heart is troubled, shall require. d f. 1. a a a.


Chap. 5. Of the Midrif, or Diaphragma.
THe Method of* Dissection has brought us to the a Midrif, the principal
Instrument Midrifs
of free Breathing, which separates the Chest from the Belly like a Partition
wall, being tied to all the bastard Ribs, to two of the true Ribs, and to the
Situation.
Sword-like Gristle; and being on this manner oblickly stretched round about,
it sends forth two b fleshy Productions somewhat longish, even to the utmost
Vertebra's of the Loins.

It is made up of Flesh, and a c Sinewy membrane, which is placed in* the
Center Substance.
thereof, the rest of its compass being fleshy, and of the Nature of d muscle.
On that part which is toward the belly, it is covered with a membrane of the
Peritoneum: on the other side, toward the Chest, it is compassed with the
Pleura.

The Sinewy Circle is placed in the midst, to strengthen that part, that it may
bear the point of the Heart beating thereupon, and that it may bear up the
Liver: for the Liver hangs fastened to the Diaphragma, which is drawn upwards
within the Chest, by help of the Mediastinum: for the Figure of the Diaphragma,
or midrif, Shape.
toward the belly, is hollow, within the Chest, it is bunching out.

It receives T. 10. f. 6. C C.
Veins, and T. 10. f. 6. B B.
Arteries, termed Phrenicae, from the Cava, and Aorta. Vessels
It has two notable T. 10. f. 7. A B.
Nerves, which taking their Rise between the fourth and fi^t Vertebra's of the
Neck, are inserted into the Sinewy Center of the Diaphragma.

Seeing the midrif is a muscle of a peculiar Nature by it self, so that there
is not Motion.
such another in the whole Body, it has a perpetual motion like the Hea^^* if
not so fast an one: for it is dilated and contracted; sometimes slowly, and
softly; other whiles swiftly, and violently. Sometimes it is moved alone with
slow and soft breathing, but more often with the Lungs, when the body is
stirred with exercise; but in violent Respiration, it is compelled to follow
the motion of the Chest.

Hippocrates calls the midrif, the Fan of the Belly, because by its motion of
dilatation and contraction, descending and ascending, it fans both those
Cavities.

Seeing therefore there are two parts of Respiration; Inspiration, and
Expiration, How it moves in Respiration.
it is worth our Enquiry in which part the midrif is moved. By motion I
understand contraction.

In the Inspiration, or drawing in the wind, while it is brought unto a right
line, that is to say, of hollow, is made straight, then the midrif is
contracted. In the Expiration, or letting go of our breath, it is slackened,
raises it self upwards, and of straight or even, becomes hollow. When it is
moved alone, it directs our free Respiration, which is done by an insensible,
and invisible motion of the Chest, while the whole body does rest in peace;
otherwise, in violent fetching the breath, it follows the motion of the Chest,
which is elevated, and depressed (as we see after running) not only by the
Intercostal muscles, but also by the greater muscles stretched out upon the
Chest, and by the muscles of the Abdomen. In which case the midrif is haled,
and forced to follow the violent motion of the Chest.

The Medicinal Consideration.
The Midrife is sometimes Diseased of it self, sometimes by accident as
Sympathising Its Diseases are. Distemper.
with the Diseases of other Parts,

Of it self it is troubled with an hot or cold Distemper, also with
Inflammations and Impostumes. And it communicates its disorders to other Parts
neighboring thereupon, and to the Brain, and upon this Account it is wont to
cause a Phrenzy.

Fernelius saw hard Tumors fixed in the Root of the Midrif, which wasted Tumors.
away the Patients by a slow Consumption, without any Phrenzy or other Dotage.

When the Midrife is Inflamed, an acute Fever does begin to show it self:
under Inflammation.
the short Ribs toward the Midrif a palpitation or panting is felt, the
Hypochondria are drawn together by reason of the Membrane of the Peritonaeum:
the Breathing is unequal, sometimes swift, sometimes slow, sometimes great and
sometimes little, and at length Convulsions happen.

The Midrif being wounded causes the Patient to die laughing, if we believe
Hippocrates, Wounds.
Pliny and other later Physicians.

Wounds inflicted upon the fleshy Part of the Midrif are not so dangerous and
deadly, as those in the sinewy or Nervous Part, and therefore Ulysses (in
Homer) intending to give the Cyclops a deadly wound, chose the place where the
Liver is fastened unto the Midrif, as Galen has observed.

In an universal Palsy of the whole Body the Midrif is affected, which is known
by dificulty of breathing,

Chap. 6. Of the Lungs or Lights.
THe Lungs or Lights are the Instruments of breathing and framing the Voice:
Their
to which end they are framed of a substance light, soft, Spungy, whitish
Substance.
without, and reddish within, interwoven with many Vessels which are spread
through the whole substance thereof; such as are the Bronchia Vessels.
or a Pip^^ of the Wezand, and the Pipes of the Vena b Arteriosa and of the
Arteria c Venosa, which go so in company, that the Bronchia or Wind-Pipes are
interposed Situation.
between the Veins and Arteries.

The d Lungs are Situate within the Chest, and do with the Heart fill up Both
the Cavities thereof, while they are dilated to fetch in breath; but they leave
the Chest Empty, while they are contracted to expel the sooty or superfluous
Motion.
breath.

These interchangable motions of the Lungs are perpetual and never cease from
Division.
the beginning of our Life until we Breath our last.

Nature has Distinguished the Lungs into two Parts, placed in the several
Cavities of the Chest, and she has divided each Part into sundry Lobes, Laps,
or Scollops, for the facility of motion and for their preservation, for by this
means they do more easily spread abroad (as it were) their wings; and one Lap
or Scollop being hurt or Shape.
corrupted, the other may remain whole and sound.

If you take a diligent view of the Lungs after they are taken out of the
Chest, you shall see that each Part of each Cavity does in its shape represent
the form of an Oxes Hoof, for it is cloven and unequal or bunching out in the
external Part, and hollow Membrane.
in that Part on which it touches the Back.

It is girt about with a very thin ^ Membrane, which is manifestly porous and
full of little holes, that being pressed and overburthened in suffocations, it
may disburthen it self into the Cavity of the Chest, and also suck in again
such Excrementitious moisture, as shall there at any time abound.

This Bowel alone is nourished after another fashion than the rest of the Body,
Peculiar manner of nourishment.
for it borrows its blood from the Heart, from whence it has Vessels and not
from the Vena Cava. And therefore those Physicians are shamefully over seen who
in Diseases of the Lungs, are wont to say that they are oppressed by an afflux
of blood, shed thereinto by an innumerable company of Veins.

They cannot receive Humors from the Head unless with coughing, so that where
there is no cough, the Lungs are affected only by that blood which comes from
the Heart.

The Medicinal Consideration.
The Lungs are extremely necessary for the maintenance of Life, For we live
Excellency of the Lungs.
so long as we Breath, and no longer: Nor is it enough merely to breath we must
breath easily, or it will go ill with our Heart and our whole body. For in
Diseases, difficult breathing is of great moment, and was more regarded by
Hippocrates than the pulse: And Galen composed three admirable Books of
Difficult Breathing, according to the Doctrine of Hippocrates, howbeit they are
obscure and not to be understood save by skilful Physicians and Anatomists.

I will give you a little taste of them, after that I have laid open the Diseases
of the Lungs.

Because the substance of the Lungs is soft and Spungy above that of the other
Why the Lungs are so subject to Fluxions.
Bowels, therefore it is more subject to Fluxions than the rest which flow
either from the Brain, or from the Bowels, by way of the Heart.

They lie in the middle space between the Head and the Midrif, not only between
the Hammer and the Anvil, as the Proverb is, but between two Hammers, wherewith
they are beat upon and hurt on both sides: whil the Head distills upon the
Lungs, and the Liver affords impure or over plentyful Blood unto the Heart,
whichthe Heart spues and casts back into the Lungs, whereby they are infected
and overwhelmed.

Which infection of the Lungs springs not from the Heart, but from the
distempered and ill disposed Bowels, which suggest unto the Heart very impure
blood, whose vitiousness the Heart is not able to correct, save after many
Circulations.

In the mean whil the Lungs are greivously offended by the foresaid blood
passing The chief Diseases of the Lungs.
through the substance thereof, for they are subservient unto the Heart as it
were in the Nature of an Emunctory Emissary or Common-shore, whiles the filth
of the Heart flows unto the Lungs with the Blood, whereupon the Lungs are
subject to sundry Diseases.

For they are troubled with an hot or cold distemper, with a Choleric and
Distemper. Inflammation. Consumtion.
Phlegmatic Tumor, and a frequent Inflammation called Peripneumonia, or at
least with an inflammatory disposition; also with Impostumes and Ulcers, which
bring the Consumption: for from spitting of Blood comes spitting of quitter,
and from thence the Consumption.

Also they are subject to a certain kind of Push or rising which in the end
Push. Vomica.
turns into a secret mischievous Impostum termed Vomica, of which few escape.

If the Quitter be derived from the Lungs into the Heart, unless it pass
readily into the Aorta, it suddenly choakes or stifles the Patient. If it be
carried into the right ventricle, it Causes the greater danger, because it
cannot be so easily Purged out.

Furthermore the Lungs are obstructed in the Asthma either perpetual or coming
Asthma
by fits, which causes difficulty of breathing, which as it is more or less, is
distinguished with different names. The lesser is termed Dyspnea; the greater,
Its Kinds.
when the Patien cannot breath save standing or sitting upright, is termed
Orthopnaea.

Oftentimes the Patient is vexed also with a cough, which is sometimes moderate
Cough
and sometimes vehement, with great wheezing and ready to choke the Patient,
which Springs from a cruel feirce Catarrh or sudden and plentyful Defluxion.
Whereupon by reason of the extreme troublesomness of the Cough which shaken the
Lungs, there arises that disposition termed Spadon Vasorum, or a dilatation of
the Vessels, being a dangerous and formidable ^ort of A^e^risma.

In the Peripneumonia or Inflammation of the Lungs, there is no small dispute
Whether Bloodletting is good in these Cases?
about Blood-letting, for it is written that Blood must be drawn from the
common Veins. Now there is none of those Veins which are usually opened, that
communicates with the Veins of the Lungs; neither are there any branches
distributed from the Vena Cava into the Lungs: which has by Galen in many
places been disputed against Erasistratus.

The motion likewise of Nature shows the same: for whereas in Diseases of the
Bowels and in burning Fevers the Crisis is wont to happen by bleeding at the
Note; in a Peripneumonia there is no such Crisis, because the Veins of the Nose
from whence blood is wont to Issue, have no Communion with the Lungs.

If it be true that Blood naturally does pass from the right Ventricle of the
Heart unto the Lungs, that it may be brought into the left Ventricle, and from
thence into the Aorta: and if the Circulation of the Blood be acknowledged, who
sees not that in Diseases of the Lungs, the blood flows thither in greater
quantity than ordinary, and oppresses the Lungs, unless it be first liberally
taken away, and afterward Affermed.
at several times, a little at a time be let out, to ease the said Lungs: which
was the advice of Hippocrates, who when the Lungs were swelled, did take blood
from al Parts of the Body, from the Head, Nose, Tongue, Arms, Feet; that the
quantity thereof might be diminished, and the Course thereof drawn from the
Lungs.

He himself in Diseases of the Lungs, bids us draw blood, til the Body were
Blood-less, and in one that had a Consumption, when he saw that the corruption
of the Blood infected and corrupted the Lungs, he took away blood in so great a
quantity, that the Patients body remained quite empty of the same, in a manner.

Supposing that the Blood circulates, the Lungs are easily emptied by
Phlebotomy. If the Circulation be denied, I cannot see how blood may be from
thence drawn back; for if it should flow back by the Vena T. 11. f. 2. E E G.
Arteriosa into the T. 11. f. 3. D D.
right Ventricle, the T. 11. f. 4. B B B.
Sigma shaped Valves do hinder it, and the T. 11. f. 3. C C C.
three forked little Valves, do hinder the recourse thereof, from the right
Ventricle of the Heart into the Vena Cava. And therefore when the Veins of the
Arms and Feet are opened, blood is drawn from the Lungs by reason of the
Circulation thereof; and consequently the Opinion of Fernelius comes to
nothing, namely that in Diseases of the Lungs, blood should be taken rather
from the right Arm than the left; because the blood cannot return into the Vena
Cava, save by breaking two doors and Bolts, placed in the Heart.

Ulcers of the Lungs do often happen by reason of a fierce cough, caused by
very Some Causes of Consumption of the Lungs.
sharp Serosities, or by spitting of Blood: which if it come from an opening
of the mouths of the Veins by reason of Abundance of blood, it is not so
much to be feared, as when it proceeds from eating asunder the Coats of the
Veins, by the acrimony of Humors.

Nature in this case, out of Pity, that our life might be preserved, ha^
distinguished Why the Lungs are distinguished into Lobes or Laps.
the Lungs into diverse pipes and sundry Lobes, Laps or Scollups that the
infection might not spread over the whole Body of the Lungs, which is usual in all continued or evenly united bodies. And therefore we see many that have
Ulcers in their Lungs do live long, if they have but an indifferent Care of
themselves.

If the Circulation of the blood be allowed, so that it passes often through
the A twofold Circulation of the Blood.
Lungs, and not through the Septum Medium or Partition-Wal of the Heart, we
must maintain a two fold Circulation of the blood: the one is performed by the
Heart and Lungs, whiles the blood spirting from the right Ventricle of the
Heart is carried through the Lungs that it may come unto the left Ventricle of
the Heart, (for it is squirted out of the Heart and returns thither again) the
other is a longer Circulation, by which the blood flowing from the left
Ventricle of the Heart, compasses the whole body by the Arteries and Veins,
that it may return into the right Ventricle of the Heart. He that approves of
one of these Circulations, cannot deny the other.

The Lungs as it were do hang upon and are fi^mly fastened to the claves and the
Brest-bone, for they do not depend or hang by the Aspera Arteria, for so in a
violent Cough and when the Lungs are overburdened, the Wesand or Windpipe and
Parts fastened thereunto would be torn in pieces. Howbeit the Lungs and Heart
being inflamed (according to Hippocrates) if the Lungs fall to one side, the
Patient faints away, lies Cold and senceless and dies within the third or
fourth day. If the Heart be not inflamed, the Patient lives longer, and some
escape.

Seeing the Substance of the Lungs ought to be light and soft to Facilitate
respiration; Why Old People are short Breathed.
and in old, People it becomes dry and hard, either through the dryness of
their temper, or by being filled with Phlegm: this is the reason of that
shortness of Breath we see in Old Men, which ushers them to their Grave.

Chap. 7. Of Respiration, or fetching of Breath.
THe proper action of the Lungs is breathing: which we must consider how it
Necessity of Respiration.
ought to be in bodies that are in health, that we may discern faults thereof,
when it is depraved. In our whole Practice, especially if you regard acute
Diseases, their is no Disease or Symptom so usual as difficulty in breathing.
It is well for the Patient, if in all Diseases, especially acute ones, he breath
easily, because life is inseparable from Respiration, according to Galen in his
6. Book of the Parts Diseased. And if with all the Patient Sleeps kindly and
sweetly, and feels no pain in the noble Parts of his body, it is to be hoped
the Disease will end well, because Hippocrates never knew any one die, in whom
these three conditions were found.

Now Respiration or breathing is twofold, free, or forced, free is that whereby
the Its twofold.
Air is gently drawn in and Issued out, without any remarkable motion of the
Chest. And this depends only upon the Midrif, the Ribbs and whole Chest never
moving: Free, and Forced.
unless hapily the lower bastard Ribs are gently stirred; and this kind of
breathing is truly natural.

The second sort of breathing, which is forced and violent: is partly natural,
partly against Nature. Natural, when it depends upon our own power, so that we
can make it quicker or slower, as when we puf out our wind with a long blast,
and when we hold our breath. It is against Nature, when it depends not upon o^r
will, but upon the violence of the Disease. In this kind of Respiration the whole
Chest is moved by all the Muscles, and the Midrif, to avoid the oppression and
suffocation of the Lungs and Heart, which desire Air to cool them, and that
their smoaky Sooty Vapors may be expelled.

There are two parts of Natural Respiration; Inspiration, and Expiration.
Inspiration is caused by drawing in the Air, and the dilatation of the ^hest by
the Parts of Natural respiration Inspiration Expiration
Ascent thereof: Expiration, is a breathing out of fuliginous, or sooty Vapors,
the Chest being drawn together by the descent thereof. Between these two
motions, is interposed a twofold Pau^e, or Rest, viz. The space between the
drawing in, and blowing out of the breath; and the like space between the
blowing out of the breath, and the drawing it in again, as in the Pul^e there
is a twofold Rest, termed Perisystole.

In Respiration, or breathing, Galen writes that three Organs are to be
considered: Its three Organs.
The Principal Mover, viz. the Heart; The Secondary Movers, namely, the
Muscles; and the Things moved, viz. the Chest and Lungs. The Organs by which
the motion is performed, are the Animal Spirits, and the Nerves.

Now that unnatural, and disordered breathing, may be discerned, we must
principally Wherein Natural Respiration consists.
learn to know, wherein the Natural manner of ^erching breath, does consist,
viz. In the moderation, and equability of Inspiration, and Ex^piration, and of
those things whereby Respiration is performed.

Now these are four; Motion, Rest, that which is moved, and that which by the
motion, is drawn in, and carried forth. That Respiration will therefore be
moderate, wherein we shall observe a Mediocrity of motion and Rest, and of the
distention of the Chest, and of the matter it self, which is drawn in, and
breathed out, and wherein Persons in Health appear no ways changed from what
they were wo^t to be.

And this Natural Respiration ought to be the Rule of the contrary, which is
not Differences of unnatural Respiration.
natural, viz. of the hurt Respiration, and of that which is in moderate. Now
Respiration is hurt as many wa^es as there are parts which make up Natural.
Respiration, viz. Motion, Rest, Swiftness, or Slowness. So that he hurts of
Respiration, are these following, namely, Defections from Natural Motion;
Rarity, and Frequency of the Rest; Greatness, and ^ma^ne^s of Inspiration and
Expiration; Plenty, and penury of the matter drawn in, or breathed out, with
cold, or heat.

Wherefore al difficulty of breathing, consists in Magnitude, or Paucity;
Frequence, or Rarity; Swiftness, or Slowness; and consequently, Respiration is
said to be faulty, when it is too great, or too little; too slow, or two swift;
too frequent, or too rare; too hot, or too cold.

Also these Defections, as well in excess, as defect, are to be considered,
either in both parts of Respiration, or in one alone; also some are little
without, and great within; others great without, and little within: and some
ar^ great, swift and frequent; others con^rarily, are little, seldom, and slow;
and some are doubled, both in drawing, and rendering back the breath. These are
the Compound Differences of Respiration hurt.

If Respiration fail, the Question is, Whether Perspiration can supply the
defect Whether Perspiration may supply the use of Respiration?
thereof? Galen ^aies it may, and he describes Perspiration, to be an
eva^uation of Spirit, or Air, by the Arteries which are dispersed into the
Habit of the Body, by receiving in of Air, and expelling fuliginous Vapors. For
Hippocrates has written that the whole body is perspirable, within and without.
And the Author of Transpiration, or Perspiration, is counted to be the Heart,
the Instruments are the Arteries; the Pores of the Skin, are the Passages by
which the Transpiration is made.

But I very much doubt, whether Perspiration can supply the Office of
Respiration for a time, the Heart not being moved, because I cannot persuade my
self, that the Air can pass so far as the Heart, by the small Arteries, unless
they did gape very wide, seeing it would meet with the Arterial blood, to stop
its course. The Arteries may indeed expel the sooty vapors of their blood, but
it is hard for them to draw the A^r in again.

And if Perspiration be hindered by suppression of the smoaky vapors, then
putrid Fevers are wont to arise; as Galen has observed in Book 11. of his
Method. In which case, blood letting is good for Ventilation, and must be
repeated, if need be.

Unnatural Respiration, is sometimes necessary in those that have their Health,
to Unnatural Respiration sometimes (...) in healthy persons.
expel smoaky vapors by forcible blowing out of the breath; or to expel the
Excrements of the Bell^, or to force out a Child by holding the breath.
^x^^fflation, or forcible puffing out of the breath, answers to Expiration; and
holding of the breath is a long Inspiration, as much as the party is able to
endure, for some necessary use; and it is performed (which is strange) by one
very small muscle, which shuts the Arythenois, and the Glottis.

Chap. 8. Of the Heart.
THe Heart is the Principal, and most Noble Bowel of the whole Body, the
Nobility of the Heart.
Fountain of Life-giving Nectar; by the Influx whereof, the virality, or lively
force of al ^he parts, is recreated, and cherished; It is the first that lives,
and the last that dies: by the benefit whereof, all the parts of the body do
live, and subsist.

And therefore it is, that Nature has framed this principal Part with admirable
Workmanship, both without and within, of a T. 11. f. ^ B.
fleshy substance, strong, and thick, Its Substance
interwoven with all sorts of Fibers, and because it is the Seat of Native Heat,
lest it should become dry, and parched up, she h^s ^o^stened it with fat placed
round about, and wa^ered the same by cu^cumfusion of a whey^sh Liquor.

It is situate in the middle of the Chest, hanging by the T. 11. f. 4. A A. *
Mediastinum, and ^. 11. f. 1. A. *
Pericardium. Its Scit^ation.
For those two parts do join in this Office, as has been said in our Chapter
of the Mediastinum.

The Heart is alwa^es of the same greatness; in some strong men it is more small
Bigness
and solid, than ordinary: in feeb^er Persons i^ is greater, and of a looser
substance, as ^n some men, and frequently in women.

It is shaped like a Pineapple: having a broad bottom, and growing pointed
toward Shape
the top. The broad end is called the Basis, or b^ttom, which receives four
Vessels; the Vena T. 11. f. 1 C. *
Cava, running through the Breast, and opened near the Heart, Vessels.
and fastened thereunto; the Vena f. 2. E E. G.
Arteriosa; the f. 1. M. f. 2. C.
Ao^^a; and the Arteria f. 2. H H.
Venosa.

In the Basis we find little Cases, or Covers placed by the Vessels, which
carry blood into ^he Heart: They are called (...) Cordis the f. ^. C C. *
Ears of the Heart, Ears.
and are hollow. In grown persons, the right Ear is larger than the left: but
in the child in the womb, and al Infants, the left Ear is larger than the right.

The other end of the Heart is termed the Conus, or poin^ed end. There appear
Veins and Arteries f. 2. by B.
creeping upon the surface of the Heart, which seem ordained to repair the Fat
as it spends.

Before we proceed to the inner Structure of the Heart, we are to consider how
it Action, viz. the pulse.
is moved: For its Action is Motion, or Puliation; because look what blood it
receives in, it drives the same out by pulsation.

There are therefore two parts of the Hearts motion; Systole, and Diastole; or
Systole. Diastole.
Contraction, and Dilatation: when it takes in blood, it is dilated or widened;
when it expels the same, it is contracted, or drawn together: between both
which motions, there intercedes a pause, or resting time, which is termed
Peri-Systole. How these motions are caused, is a doubtful Question.

Rejecting the various Opinions of others, I will tell you how I conceive this
moti^ion Cause of the pulse, according to our Author.
is performed. It is probable, that the Heart being widened, cannot receive the
blood, unless its dilatation be made by drawing back the Basis thereof to the
Cone; that the Vessels may shed their blood, and the heart draw the same to it
self. In the Systole the heart is contracted, and the blood received, is thrust
out; and then the Heart becomes narrower, and longer than it was before. And
because it is shut up in the Pericardium, or Heart-case, which is fastened
circular-wise to the Sinewy Center of the Midrif, with its Cone, or pointed
end, it smites the Nervy Center of the Midrif, and with its Basis, or broad
end, and the Aorta sticking out, it smites the Breast at the same instant, when
it is extended, and prolonged.

This perpetual motion of the Heart, though it depend in respect of its
production, How necessary the circulation of the blood is to continue the
motion of the Heart.
upon the inbred faculty thereof, yet can it not always continue, save by the
coming in of blood, out of which, the Heart frames the vital Spirit: and in
case at every pulse the Heart receive one drop of blood, or two, which it casts
into the Aorta, and that in an hours space, the Heart pulses two thousand
times, it must needs be, that a great quantity of blood, or all the blood in the
Vessels, should pass through the Heart within the space of twelve or fifteen
hours.

Now this quantity may come to fifteen, or twenty pounds of blood, which is as
much as is contained in the Vessels, and therefore it must needs be that in the
space of twenty four hours, the whole mass of Blood is twice or thrice passed
through the Heart, according as the motion of the Heart is quicker, or slower.

And that this Circular Motion of the blood, might be performed with the
greater Whether the blood do pass from the right Ventricle of the Heart unto
the Lungs.
commodity, and facility, William Harvey, an English man, the Kings Physician,
the Author and Inventor of this motion of the blood; and Joannes Walaeus, a
Professor of Leyden, and most eager Defender, and Protector thereof, will have
the blood to be carried through the Lungs, from the right, unto the left
Ventricle of the Heart, not allowing that it should pass through the Septum, or
Partition wall between the Ventricles of the Heart; and that the whole mass of
Blood, in an hour, or two hours space, is circulated through the Heart, and the
whole Body: which I do not allow of, and I have els-where laid down my reasons
of the impossibility, and inconveniency of such a motion. The Heart is the
Original of Vena Cava.


When I had observed that the Trunk of the Vena Cava was separated from the
Liver, running continually from the Jugulum, to the Os Sacrum, without any
interruption, and that it passed not through the Liver, as we may see with our
Eyes, and perceive also by thrusting a small stick thereinto; I came to be of
Opinion, that The Liver of Vena Porta. They have different blood in them.
the Vena Cava did spring from the Heart, as the Vena Porta takes its rise from
the Liver; and that two sorts of blood were contained in those Veins, though
both of those sorts are labored, and wrought in the Liver: the one of these
sorts of blood being sent into the Porta, the other by a branch rooted in the
Liver, twice as small as the Trunk of Vena Cava, carried unto the Heart. What
kind of blood is circulated?


The blood which is contained in the Vena Porta, is not circulated, although it
have a flux, and reflux within its own Channels, and communicate with the
Caeliacal Arteries, which are joined one to another by mutual Anastomoses.

Within those Vessels, the blood may pass to and fro reciprocally; but it does
not run out according to the longitude of the body; neither is it in such a
sense circulated. In what Vessels?


And therefore the Circulation which is made in the Heart, does borrow its
matter from the Liver by the Vena Cava. The Circulatory Vessels, are the Aorta,
and Cava; neither do their branches receive that Circulation, because the blood
being shed into all the parts of the second and third Region, does remain there
to nourish the said parts; neither does it flow back unto the greater Vessels,
unless it be revelled by force, when there is great want of blood in the larger
Vessels, or when it is stimulated into some violent motion, and so flows unto
the greater Circulatory Vessels. After what manner?


And so the blood which is brought from the Liver unto the right Ventricle of
the Heart, does pass through the Partition wall of the two Ventricles, into the
left Ventricle.

I confess that in a violent Circulation the blood is carried through the Lungs
unto How the circulation is performed?
the left ventricle of the Heart, where it is forcibly ejected into the Aorta,
that it may afterward be carried into the greater Veins of the Limbs, which
communicate by mutual Anastomoses with the Arteries; and then from the Veins it
flows up into the right Ventricle of the Heart, and so there is made a perfect
Circulation, by the continual flux and reflux of the blood.

So that the blood in the Veins, does naturally, and perpetually ascend, or
return unto the Heart, the blood of the Arteries naturally, and continually
descends, or departs from the Heart.

Howbeit, if the smaller Veins of the Arms and Legs, shall be emptied of blood,
the blood of the Veins may descend to succeed in the place of that which is
taken away, as I have clearly demonstrated against Harvey, and Walaeus.

No man can deny the mutual Anastomoses of the Veins and Arteries, seeing that
Galen has said it, and demonstrated the same by Experiments, and our daily
Experience confirms the same.

Hippocrates himself, in his third Book of the Joints, takes notice of this
communion of the Veins and Arteries, in a Discourse by it self. How necessary
the circulation of the blood is.


You see how necessary it is for the blood to circulate, that the motion of the
Heart may not cease; and how this Circulation may be performed without
confusion, and perturbation of the Humors, and without destroying the Ancient
Art of Healing.

And therefore the Circular motion of the blood is necessary, to continue the
motion of the heart; as in Mils, the Water must perpetually fall upon the Wheel
to make it turn about; also to warm again, and restore the strength of the
blood, The Vtility thereof.
which is decayed by the loss of Spirits dispersed up and down the body;
whereas in the Heart, it is refurnished with new Spirits: and that the Heart
being the Fountain of Native Heat, may be moistened with a perpetual Dew, lest
by little and little, it should parch, and wither away, for want of that dewy
moisture, or Lifegiving Nectar.

By the Circulation of the blood in the Heart, the Causes of Life and Death,
are more easily declared, than by the Humidum Primigenium, or Original Moisture
bred in the Heart when the Child is formed; which is so little that it is soon
consumed, and the perpetual motion of the Heart continuing day and night
without ceasing, would at length wear away the Substance of the Heart, unless
by a perpetual flowing in of the circulated blood, it were moistened, and
repaired. Whether the Heart and Arteries are moved at the same time?


Howbeit, we must hold that the Heart and Arteries do move by Course, one after
another, not being moved at the same instant with the same kind of motion; but
taking their turns, and performing their work interchangably; for when the
Heart sends out the blood, the Arteries receive it, and transmit it into the
Veins; not that which is expelled the same instant, but that which is nearest
the Veins.

This being granted, these parts must of necessity be moved one after another,
and the swelling motion of the Artery when it rises under our Finger, is
dilatation, or widening, and not contraction; although it seem very like the
pulse which the Heart makes, when it contracts it self.

Having explained the Circulation of the Blood, we must now open the Heart, The
right Ventricle of the Heart.
which you shall see divided into two Ventricles by the Septum Medianum, or T.
11. f.. D D.
Middle Partition: The one is termed the f.. C C. f. 3. D D. f. 4. C C.
Right Ventricle, being the wider and softer: The other the f.. B. f. 5. C C.
f. 6. D D.
Left, being harder, narrower, and compassed with a thicker wall, reaching as
far as the Cone, or Point of the Heart, which the Right does not. The Right
Ventricle receives the Vena f. 1. C. f.. E.
Cava, and the Vena f. 2. E E G. f. 4. A. T. 12. f. 3. all
Arteriosa. The Its Vessels.
Cava pours blood into the Heart; the Vena Arteriosa carries back all, or a
part thereof into the Lungs.

To the Orifices of the Cava, are adjoined certain three-pointed T. 11. f. 3. C
C C.
Valves, or Their Valves.
Shutters, which hinder the going back of the blood. The Orifice of the Vena
Arteriosa, is compassed with three Valves, or Shutters, shaped like an old*
fashioned f. 4. B B B.
Greek Sigma, which hinder the reflux of the blood.

The Left Ventricle receives two Arterial Vessels, the T. 11. f. 1. M. f. 2. C.
f. 5. A.
Aorta, and the Arteria f. 2. H H. f. 6. A. T. 1. e. f. 6. all
Venosa. Which latter, according to the Doctrine of some Anatomists, carries
The left Ventricle of the Heart. Its Vessels.
blood from the Lungs into the left Ventricle of the Heart, or carries Air
prepared in the Lungs, into the said Ventricle, and likewise carries back
fuliginous Vapors; howbeit, many do not allow the said use.

The Arteria Venosa has in its Orifice, only two T. 11. f. 6. C C.
three-pointed Valves, or Shutters. The Aorta carries back Arterial blood out
of the left Ventricle of the Their Valves
Heart, and its Orifice is stopped by three f. 5. B B B.
Sigma shaped Valves, or Shutters, which hinder the blood from returning back
again.

It is to be observed that these three-pointed Valves, or Shutters, are
membranous near their Vessels; but they depend upon fleshy Pillars, which
within the Heart are like unto Muscles, being fastened to the sides of the
partition wall, or Septum of the Heart, which remains unmovable, saving toward
the Basis, where it is softer, and gives way a little, when the Basis is drawn
back, in the Diastole, or Dilatation of the Heart.

The Septum f O D D.
medium, or Partition Wall of the Heart is porous, full of little holes, which
are sometimes manifestly discerned toward the Cone, or Point of the The Septum
Medium of the Heart. Whether the blood pass through it, or no?
Heart. It is more probable, according to the Doctrine of Galen, that the blood
does naturally pass through the said Septum. or partition wall, than through
the Lungs. Howbeit, I deny not, but that in the violent Agitation of the Heart
and Lungs, the blood is carried through the midst o^ the said Lungs.

The Med^cinal Consideration.
Having finished these Observations, I proceed unto the Diseases of the Heart.
The Heart (as Pliny says) cannot endure long Diseases, nor suffer lingering
torments. Usual Diseases of the Heart, art,
And Galen tells us, That Physicians have not been able to find out, or invent
Medicines able to cure an evil, and malignant distemper which has taken hold of
the substance of the Heart. Wherefore this part is diligently to be preserved,
which suffers not by its own fault, but by the Impurities of other parts
wherewith it is infected and corrupted.

Wherefore, if the Heart be supplied with pure, and good blood, and be not
infected by con^agion of the neighboring parts, he Lungs, and the Liver, it
flourishes Swouning
most cheerfully, and causes a very long life. But by our Intemperance we
suffer it not to continue in Health for the good of the whole Body. And
therefore it is exercised with diverse Diseases, by the loss of strength, that
is to say, of Spirits, or by their Dissipation; such as are Syncope, and
Leipothymia, or swouning and fainting Fainting.
away, which differ only in degrees: Syncope being greater than Leipothumia.

Oftentimes the Heart does counterfeit, and make show of a kind of Apoplexy,
but without snorting; neither does it leave a Palsy after it, or any
feebleneis of Body, or mind. If this Disease return often with violence, at
length it over-whelms and stifles the Heart, not only because the blood is
stopped from going forth, by reason of the fullness of the Vessels, but by the
Hearts being oppressed by some gross substance of the blood, forcibly crowded
into the Ventricies of the Heart, stopping the pulsative motion of the Heart
and Arteries, and causing sometime that the Patient cannot speak, and bringing
him finally to his Grave.

This Disease is as common among the Germans, as is the Apoplexy, by reason of
their full, and Champion-like habit of body, contracted by their daily
Feastings, and liberal drinking, especially at dinner, which lasts til within
Night, they in the mean time taking no care to abate their Plethorick habit by
liberal blood-letting. Nor is it any wonder, if from so great plenty of blood,
they fall into an Apoplexy, or the Heart-swoonings aforesaid. Hence depends the
Explication of the 42. Aphorism of the Second Book.

The motion of the Heart is depraved in the Palpitation, or Panting thereof,
and Palpitation
it is interrupted in Syncope, and Leipothymia.

The Ventricles, and Partition, are oftentimes obstructed, being filled with
little The Circulation intercepted by obstruction of the Ventricles, Or of
bits of Flesh or Fat, wherewith the Heart is choked, the Circular motion of
the blood being stopped. Sometimes they stick in the right Ear of the Heart:
whence follows Palpitation, or inequality, or Interception of the Pulse.

Worms are also bred in the Heart, of which Salius treats. There is a memorable
Story of a certain English man, whose Heart was eaten into by a Worm. You may
read the Story in Aurelius Severinus.

The Circulation of the blood is stopped, not only in the Heart, but also in
the The Velns.
Veins, when they are stopped with very thick blood, or with blood congealed
like the pith of an Elder stick, as I have often seen it after burning Fevers,
and as it has been observed by Fernelius.

The most frequent Diseases of the Heart are Fevers, wherewith it is inflamed,
A Fever.
and roasted as it were; so that the Original moisture thereof, becomes
exhaust, and dried up: for as Ludovicus Duretus says in his Commentary upon
Hippocrates his Coick Discourses. We lose more of our strength by a fever of
seven days continuance, than by the depraedation of our Natural Heat, in
seventy years time: a young man dies in seven days, consumed by a Fever, who
might have lived seventy years under the sole Regiment of his Natural Heat.
Differences of Fevers. In respect of the Cause, a Fever is, Spirital,


The History of Fevers belongs to this place, which I shall dispatch in few
words. The Hot Distemper of the Heart, is termed a Fever. The Differences of
Fevers are taken from their conjunct Cause, which is threefold; The Spirits,
the Humors in the Vessels, and the Humors fixed in the solid parts of the body.

From the Spirits, a Fever is termed Spirituosa, or Spirital; from the Humors
in the Vessels, it is termed Humoralis; and from the Humors fixed in the solid
parts, it is termed Hectica.

Though there be three sorts of Spirits, Natural, Vital, Animal; yet is it the
Vital Spirit alone, which being inflamed, causes the Spirital Fever. There are
four Humoral
Humors contained in the Vessels, whence comes four sorts of Humoral Fevers;
the Sanguine, the Choleric, the Phlegmatic, and the Melanchollick. But the
Hectic Fever is distinguished by three degreee: For the simple Hectic arites
Hectic,
from the fixed Humor, being only inflamed; the middle Hectic is when the said
Humor begins to wast; and the Hectica Marasmodes, when it is quite exhaust, and
consumed.

The Modi of Fevers, or their manner of afflicting, is twofold: for either
the In respect of the manner, Continual, Intermittent.
Fever is continual, or it intermits; it is putrid, or not putrid; malignant,
or well-affected. A continual Fever never ceases burning, til it go wholly
away. An intermitting Fever, leaves the Patient some space of time free from
burning.

The Cause of the Continualness of a Fever, is the plenty of Morbisick matter
and its nearness to the Heart, and the distance and paucity of the said matter
is the Cause of its Intermission. A Putrid Fever is caused by Putrefaction of
the Humors: Putrid, Imputrid Malignant,
An Imputrid Fever is caused only by the fervency of the Spirits and Humors
contained in the Vessels, or fixed in the solid Parts. A Malignant Fever is
caused by extreme Pucrefaction, or by diverse Symptoms greivously afflicting
the noble Parts: a Well-affected Fever, has none of al these. A great Fever
is the Non-malignant.
same with a Malignant, and a little Fever differs not from a Well affected.
Hence are all the differences of Fevers taken; a spirital Fever is continual
indeed, yet lasts but a Day, and is therefore termed Ephemera: a Sanguin Fever
is also continual and threefold, Increasing, standing at a stay, and
decreasing; Putrid or Imputrid: It is by some termed continens to distinguish
it srom the rest of the Humoral Fevers. Choleric, Melancholic and Phlegmatic
Fevers, are continual, when the Humors from whence they arise do Putrify in
the great Veins: when they Putrify in the little Veins, or out of the Veins,
they make Intermitting Fevers. An Hectic Fever is also continual, but slow
and lingering.

The Return of intermitting Fevers is termed their fit; the more than ordinary
The sit of a Fever. Its Exacerbation. Circuit Tertian Fever. Quartans
Quotidians
violence of continual Fevers it called their Exacerbation. The beginning of a
^i^ is called Invasio, the time of Remission and Exacerbation, of intermission
and accession, is termed Periodus or Circuitus, the Period or Circuit.

Now the Accessions or exacerbations of Fevers are various according to the
various motion of the Humor. They come every third day, by reason of the proper
motion of Choler, whence al bilious intermitting Fevers are called Tertians or
third day Agues; as the Quartans come every fourth day, because the
Melancholic Humor is moved upon that day; as Phlegm is moved every day, whence
quotidian Agues are Phlegmatic.

Quintan, Septan, Nonan, or sift, seventh and ninth day Agues, as they are
exceeding rare, so ate they not comprehended under any Rules of Art.

The Proper Symptoms of the beginnings of Ague-fits, do show the sort of Ague
what it is: so a shaking shows a Tertian Ague, A grinding cold fit that makes
a man think it would break his bones, argues a Quartan; and for the fit to
begin with a mere simple coldness, is the token of a Quotidian.

A double tertian comes every day, as the Quotidian does, but with extreme
shaking; whereas the Quotidian comes only with a coldness.

Confused and implicated Fevers, are made of those Fevers, which we have
Confused.
now explained. Confused or mixed Fevers, are made by mixiture of the Humors,
as a Bastard Tertian is made by a mixture of Choler and Phlegm. But Implicated
Implicated
Fevers are stirred up by Vicissitude of Humors put into Putrefaction or
Commotion, where upon there is observed in them, distinct sits one following
another, as in a double Tertian, and in a double and triple Quartan, and in a
Semitertian, which is nothing else but a complication of a continual Quotidian
and an Intermittent Tertian: and in the Fever called Triteophyaea, which lasts
thitty hours and longer.

Two Agues are observed to follow one another, so that the first being not
quite Erratick
finished, another which is worse succeeds and follows the same. But i^ these
sits are inordinat keeeping no certain Course, and returning upon several
days, they make such Agues as are termed Erraticae, wandering giddy Agues.

There are other differences of Fevers taken from the Symptoms, yet so as
they In respect of Symptoms.
may be reduced to these sorts I have spoken of: as the Fever Epiala,
Leipyria, Typhodis, Elodis, Pestilens, Causus, for they are al Humoral, and
distinguished by some remarkable Symptoms.

In the Fever Epiala there is a sense of heat and cold by reason of the
unequal Epiala Leipyria
motion of the Morbifick matter. In Leipyria, the outward Parts are cold, and
the inner Parts burn with Heat, because the Feverish Heat is drawn inwards.
Typhodis and Eleodis are, in which the Patient sweats much, without any ease
Typhodes.
thereby. A Pestilential Fever is no other than a putrid, but it Springs from
an extreme and remarkable putrefaction, and so deadly, that more die than
recover. Causus is a name signifying extreme Heat and burnning, such as is in a
continual Burning Fever.
Fever arising from Choler, so that a Choleric continiual Fever by way of
Eminency is so termed.

Cremnodes Febris the Fever so called, is said to proceed from an Inflammation
Symptomatical Fevers.
of the Lungs: but such Fevers as are caused by Inflammation of the Internal
Parts, are Symptomatical, neither are they properly termed Fevers. For here we
speak of a Fever only as it is an hot distemper of the Heart primarily
affected.

Chap. 9. Of the Vessels viz. Veins, Arteries and Nerves contained within the
Chest.
I Have a few things to speak of one Part of the Trunk of Vena Cava, for In the
Chest are Veins.
the whole Trunk has been sufficiently explained in our Chapter of the lower
Belly.

You shall observe that the Trunk piercing through the Midrif, does receive that
same T. 12. f. 1. r r. etc.
Hepatick branch which arises from the top of the Liver, and carries Blood
Hepatica
into the Cava, and from that same Oblique insertion, unto the opening of the
Trunk, in the right Ventricle of the heart, there is the distance of two
Fingers breadth.

From whence we may gather, that Blood is carried directly from the Liver to
the Heart, although it is mixed with other blood ascending by Circulation. That
same opening of the Vena Cava, and its cleaving to the right* Ventricle of the
heart, is contained and to be seen within the Pericardium: which when the Trunk
has passed through, it ascends unto the Claves.

And therefore you may know, that the blood ascending unto the heart by
Circulation, does also come as far as the Throat, and is derived into the upper
Limbs, with that blood which descends from the Head by the Veins.

You shall observe, that this Trunk does afford no branches to the heart except
the T. 12. f. 2.
Coronaria* but only to other parts of the Chest, and how blood shed out of
Coronaria
the left Ventricle of the heart into the Lungs, may be revelled by
Blood-letting, seeing it has two Doors to be broken open in the heart* before
it can come to the Trunk of Vena Cava, which hinder the flowing back of the
Blood from the Lungs.

You shall consider if the T. 11. f. 3. and 6. B.
Anastomosis of the Arteria Venosa with Vena Cava he remaining, by which the
foresaid Reflux may be made: or whether the blood of the Lungs, ought not to
return into the left Ventricle of the heart, that it may be made vital, and
then speedily to be cast into the Aorta, from thence to be forthwith delivered
over into the Veins.

Then you are to search for the Vena f. 1. D^t. 12. f. 1. a a a
Azygos or Vein without a fellow, which Azygos Its Valves
nourishes the Ribs. In it you shall observe two or four valves or shutters, not
feigned and imaginary, but true, interchangably disposed, which resist the
blood flowing in abundantly. I have many times showed those valves, and an
inferior branch of this Vein, ending into the Trunk of the Vena Cava, below the
Kidneys. For which cause it cannot drink up nor transmit purulent matter into
the Kidneys.

This branch serves to disburthen the Vena Cava above the Heart, if blood do
any time there abound, or be contained in any great quantity, within the little
branches or twigs of the Azygos, or solitary Vein.

Furthermore you shall search out the mutual Anastomoses of the twigs of the
Anastomoses.
Azygos o^ solitary Vein, with the twigs of the Chest Vein, under the lesser
sawfashioned Muscle, near the Arm-Pi^ts. Hence it comes that in the Pleurisy,
the pained side is better disbur^hened and the pain sooner eased, by opening
the Vena Basilica, than any other Vein.

After the Azygos or solitary Vein, out of the Trunk of the Cava ascending, the
Intercostals arise, on T. 12. f. 2. b b.
each side one, if the branches of Vena Azygos, do not reach Intercostals
unto the upper Ribs.

When the Trunk is come as far as the Claves it produces the Mammaria or
Dug-Vein, which is twofold; T. 12. f. 1. c c.
internal and external: they are both carried through Mammaria
the Longitude of the breast bone unto the Dugs. But the internal being the
greater, having transmitted a branch through an hole in the Breast Bone, into
the Dugs, Runs along unto the Right or straight Muscle, that it may Join it
self to the Epigastrica. Hippocrates was wont to open the external, in
Inflammation and pains of Parts belonging to the Chest: But now because of the
Obscurity of those Veins, that operation is not of use: instead whereof
Hors-leeches may be applied, or Cupping-Glasses with Scarrification.

In the parting of the Vena Cava you shall under it observe a great Kernel,
placed Thymus a Kernel so called.
in the Throat under the Claves like a Pillow, that it may gently bear up and
enfold the Subclavian branches. It is called Thymus. In young Animals it is
sost, as in Calves, and together with the great Kernel of the Pancreas or
Sweetbread, it is eaten as a dainty Dish.

By the swelling of this Kernel, Strangulations or a sense of Choking may
happen even to Men, but in Women subject to the Mother it is more frequently
swelled, and Choaks them if they be not releived by Blood-letting. Some do
reckon up three small Veins which are termed Thymica, Capsularis and T. 12. f.
4. C. etc.
Mediastina: whereas notwithstanding the Capsularis and Mediastina, are one and
the same Mediastina
Vein.

From the T. 12. f. 5.
Ramus Subclavius, four notable branches do arise. The first is cal-Anterior
Cervicalis.
T. 12. f. 4. A.
Cervicalis the foremost Neck-Vein, which being drawn out upon the Musculi
Mastoides, ascends unto the Chin and Waters the fore Parts of the Neck.

After this follows the T. 12. f. 4. C.
Internal Jugular, being larger than the external, which Internal Jugular.
ascends unto the Neck under the Musculus Mastoides, and about the middle
thereof, it is divided into three Branches, one of which being greatest and
thickest, creeping along the Vertebra's goes under the Scul* making its
entrance at the hole which is near the Apophysis Styloidea, so as being applied
to the lateral Channels of the Meninx dura or Dura Matter, is poures out its
Blood and goes no farther.

The Second branch creeps through the sides of the Neck and is distributed
under the Jaw.

The third goes into the Tongue and produces the Ranulae or Veins under the
Tongue, the opening of which does wonderfully help in Diseases of the Brain.

A Finger-breadth distant from this Vein you have the Externa e Jugulatis,
External Jugular.
which creeping as^ant or sloaping under the Clavicula, it sends forth two
twigs, whereof the one passes Obliquely unto the Delta-shaped Muscle under the
Shoulder-point and is united unto the Vena Cephalica; the other arises to the
lateral Parts of the Head; where at the corners of the Jaw Bone it* is divided
into two, and is distributed into the Jaws and all the Parts which are subjected
unto the Jaw Bone.

The Other Portion, being carried behind the Ears, is distributed into the
Forehead and hinder Part of the Head, and upon the Temples with manifold
branches; and in these Parts, by reason of the Veins, Fernelius did conceive
that a serous Humor was heaped together, which flowing down upon the Parts
beneath, does breed Fluxions in the Habit of the Body: he conceived likewise
that an Issue made, or a caustic applied to the Cavity behind the Ear, did
more good, than if it had been made in the hinder part of the Head, because of
a branch of the Jugular Vein, rea^hing unto the Eye.

This external Jugular Vein being opened by a skilsul Surgeon in sleepy
Diseases, Whether and in what Case it may profitably be opened.
is very good, as many Histories do testify: but many will not allow of it, who
prefer two or three Hors-Leeches fastened according to the Longitude of the
Vein, as far as the corner of the lower Jaw, where it sticks out and is visible*

Howbeit you must observe, that the internal Jugular does in the Neck
communicate with the external; and there this external Vein being opened,
although it reach not unto the Brain* yet ^ay it disburthen this Part, seeing
the internal Jugular is hid, under the Muscu us Masto^d^us and cannot safely be
opened. And therefore that sa^e opening of the Jugulars which is so much spoken
of, is to be understood of the external Jugula^, and not of the internal.

And because the Arteries and Veins are always con^guous and coupled together,
A^ries. Cor^*
in the same ^e you shall lo^k for the sr^k of the a A^rta ascending. Spr^ging
out of the left Ventricle of the Heart, it does presently even in its Rise
produce the two b Corona^y or Crown Arteries, which do compa^s the Heart like a
Crown*

These you will not see exactly, unless you cut the Aorta and look into it
through the left Ventricle of the heart: if there be only one, you shall ^ind a
little Valve plac^d at the O^^fice thereof, as in the Coronary Vein.

The T^unk of the Aorta after a little progress, is without the Perica^dium
divided into Two Branches, the one whereof is termed c Ascenden^, the other d
Descendent.

The ascendent is triparted, three Arteries being brought from the same place;
that on the right side ascending to the Claves, makes the T. 12. f. 4. B.
Subolavia dexira; the Subclaviae
other two a^cend unto the left ^de; the first whereof, is called Ca^tis f. 4
a.
S^^st^a going upwards; the second is named f. 4. B.
Subclavia ^inist^a; and a T. 24. f. 2. A.
hile a^te^d Axillaris, Axillaris.
when it is come as far as the Armpits, and ^ends forth the T. 12. f. 4. dd.
Arte^^a. Cervicalis, ^^er the Shoulder-point.

The Right Subclavian Artery having over-past the Claves, does produce that
Artery which i^ termed Carotis f. 4. a.
Dex^ra, which near the corner of the lower Jawbone, is like the internal
J^guiar Vein, divided into two no able B^anches* the f. 4. c.
Internal, and f. 4. b.
External. They are termed Arteriae Carotides. Sleepy Arteries; Carotides.
because they being compressed, do make a man ^al into a ^eep sleep and take
away he Voice. Wh^h I have often demonstrated i^ Dogs, and how the ^ame is done
b^ ^ying a Nerve of the sixth Conjugation.

Ga^en. in his Book, of the Utility of Respiration, does conceive* and proves
by Whether the obstruction of the Carotides do cause deep Sleep?
making experiment in Live Creatures, that Animalls are no way offended by
^^ing o^ (...) the Jugular Arteries; and therefore he refers the Sleepy-Evil to
the Jugular Veins. I shall ^ather think, that in Apoplexies and Dead-sleeps the
Arteries are stopped, than the Veins.

Valverda does (...) that Columbus made public demonstration in a youth, that
deep sleep is caused by compression or constriction o^ the Caro^ick Arteries:
but he does not tell us how he did it.

That the a^cent of the Carotick Arteries and their penetration into the brain
by the holes of the Skul may be plainly perceived, you shall put in a very small
^rass Were that will be^d, with a knob at the end, into the several divisions of
this Artery; which may be done and showed, by the vulgar way of dissecting the
Brain, beginning from the upper Part, not from the lower Part after the manner
of Varoli^s, and in the Neck you shall put your Probe into the Catotick Artery.

The Tru^k of the Aorta being writhen toward the left side, and bent downwards
The Intercosta^s.
again, is born up by the Vertebraes of the back, and in its progress as far as
the Os Sacr^, ou^ of each side produces as many Arteries as there are
Vertebraes, neither is there ^ound any soliiary Artery to accompany the
solitary Vein, but there are such like petty Arteries which supply its place.

Within the Chest they may be termed a Intercoastal Arteries: beneath in the
Lumbal.
lower be^ly, b the Lumbal or Loyn Arteries: they insinuate themselves in^o the
spinal Marrow by the holes o^ the Vertebra's which may be proved by a memorable
example in Galen, in his fourth Book of the Parts affected.

One out of a vehement Inflammation of the Lungs, fell into a P^lsie of his upper
Limbs, and the upper intercostal Nerves being anointed, he was cu^ed.

I, and my most learned fellow Collegiate, Dr. Merlet, have seen a P^lsie
caused by Communion of the Arteries and spinal Marrow.
translation of the matter of a Pleurisy into the Marrow of the back, which
Pal^^ freed the Patient from the eminent danger he was in by reason of the
Pleurisy.

So Hippocrates, in his Coicks, observes, that a Convulsion takes away a
Fever, by translation of the Morbi^ick Matter into the Marrow of the Back. The
hinder c Neck Artery may do as much, which waters the Marrow of the Neck.

I know not how the Humor which causes an Apoplexy, ^alling through the fourth
Ventricle of the Brain upon that Marrow of the back, should bring the Palsy
into one side more than another: by that way before mentioned, viz. The
Cervical and Intercostal Arteries, the serous Humor may be derived into either
side.

By the same Reason, the serous matter may through the Celiack Artery return
back into the Aorta, and by the little Arteries pene^rating the Marrow of the
back, be derived into the Nerves of the inferior Limbs; and on the other side,
the matter of a true or bastard Sciatica, by the continuation of the thickest
Nerve, may return into the Marrow of the back, from whence it may be revelled
by the Aorta into the Mesentery.

In the Chest we are to take notice of eight remarkable Nerves or Sinnews. Two
Nerves.
of which are called Diaphragmatici, two are termed Recurrentes, two
Stomachici, and two Costales.

Diaphragmatici, the Midrif Nerves, taking their rise between the T. 10. f. 7.
A B.
fourth and Diaphragmatic
^i^t Vertebra's of the Neck, from that same thick Nerve of the Neck which goes
into the Arm; they de^cend between the ^oldings of the Mediastinum unto the
Nervous Center of the Diaphragme, or Midrif.

The Recurrent T. 3. f. 1. (...).
and Stomachic, are branches of a Nerve of the sixth Conjugation Recurrent.
or pair, whose Trunk you shall seek for in the Neck near the internal Jugular,
by the Apophysis Mastoides; where it is cle^t into two branches, the one of
which is dis^emmia^ed into the Superior Mu^cles of the Neck: the other being
placed between the internal Jugular and the Carotis descends unto the Claves,
where it is parted into two branche^, the Recurrent and the Stomachic.

The bending back of the left Recurrent Nerve is found about the place where
the Their bending Back where to be ^ound.
Aorta is bowed in, and that easily* before the Pericardium is opened.

You shall find the bending back of the right Nerve, about the right subclavian
Artery.

I have often seen Dogs live and run, after their Recurrent Nerves were cut,
and have my self made public demonstration thereof, but they could not bark a^
all; and when these Nerves are tied they deprive the Animal of voice, and being
united the voice returns: wherefore it is apparent, that these Nerve^ serve to
make the voice* because they return upwards, that they may be inserted into the
He^ds of the Muscles of the Laryn^^, Tongue, and Os Hyoide^, which arise from
the Inferior Parts.

You shall search for the Stomachic T. ^. f. ^. III. etc.
Nerves beneath the Heart, near the Vertebra's, Stomachic.
they ^^e hid within the folding of the Mediastinum, and from them you shall
perceive ten or twelve ^wigs drawn into the T. 3. f. 8. h h.
Lungs; and of the small branches of the two Stomachick Nerve^ folded and (...)
together, is made that ^ame Nervorum Mir^^ilis Ple^us, wonderful contexture of
Nerves in the upper Orifice of the stomach.

Afterward the Stomachick Nerves creeping along the hinder Parts of the
Stomach, are near the Backbone between the two Kidney T. 3. f. 2. H.
Joined to the T. 3. f. 8. B B.
Costals, so as to make that T. 3. f. 8..
Contexture of Nerves, out of which al those Nerves are derived, which are
distributed into the Parts of the lower Belly.

All T. 3. f. 8. B B B.
Anatomists derive ^he Costal Nerve from the sixth pair, when as in the mean
Costal.
while, it ari^es from the same poin^ of the B^^^n from which the ^^xt pair
arises.

The costal Nerve, being come without the Scul, is strengthened as it were with
a Knot tied about it, and it descends undivided upon the Neck; and when it is
c^^^ to the three last Vertebra's of the Neck, it is de^ended by ano^^er Knot,
and grows thicker by addition of three small Nerves; and being slipped down
within the ^hest, in its progress near the Backbone, under the Membrane
Pleura, it is aug^ented by additions of other two small Nerves proceeding from
the Marrow of the Back.

Having peirced the Mid^i^^, it is Joined to the Stomachick Nerves, to make
that same Contexture of Nerves, ^^^emb^^ng a Net which is between the two
Kidneys.

The End of the Third Book.
THE FOURTH BOOK OF THE ANATOMY AND PATHOLOGY OF John Riolanus, THE KINGS
PROFESSOR OF PHYSIC.
Chap. 1. Of the Head.
THE H^ad being the Seat of the Soul, the Mans^on* House of Why the Head is
placed in the ^ig^est place?
the br^in is placed a lo^t in the hig^est part of the Body, as it were the
prime Castle, which co^m^^ds, and bears Rule over the whole ^^y. (...) says ^^^
^ea^ was th^^ pl^^^d on the top of the Body; because of the Eyes, which are the
^couts and Guides of the Body: Aristotle says i^ was for to cool the Heart, by
that coldne^s which ^he brain would shed down thereupon.

^A^ Head that is well ^ramed, ought to be of an indifferent Size; for a great,
and Its Size.
a little Head, are disallowed, and disprai^ed.

The Natural Figure of the Head is round, or spherical, son what longi^h,
bunching Shape.
out before and behind, with two Eminences, and a little flat, or compres^ed
toward the Temples.

The Head is divided into the hairy Part, and the ^mooth Part, so long as it is
Division.
whole, and unparted: The smooth part is termed the Face, and thereunto is the
Forehead appertaining. The hairy part retains the Name of the Head.

The Head is otherwise considered in the History of the Bones: for it is
divided into the T. 15. f. 3. A B C.
Skul, and the two Jaws, the f. 5, and 6.
upper, and the f. 3. L M N.
lower; and the Forehead appertains unto the Scull.

Again, The whole Head is divided into two direct parts, and two side parts. The
External parts of the Head.
direct are the f. 3. A.
fore part of the Head, which from the beginning of the Hair, arises four or
five fingers breadth toward the top or Crown of the Head.

After which, the space of two ^ingers, and as much after the Vertical point of
the Crown, where the Hairs turn, is termed f. 3. B C.
Vertex: the hinder part is called f. 4. C. f. 6. A A.
Occip^t; the lateral parts are called Tempora, f. 3. D. f. 6. B.
the Temples, or Times; because they discover the Times of a man's Age by their
hollowness, hoariness, or baldne^s.

The Head is compounded, and made up of many parts, of which, some a^e
external, The consti^^^ing parts.
others internal; ^ontaining, and contained.

The Containing, o^ Membranous, or Bony; the contained, or internal, are the
Brain, the Cerebellum, or petty brain, the four roots of the Spinal Marrow* and
such Particles as are included in their Cavities.

The first containing part we meet with, is the f. 1. A A.
hairy Skin, which has also its Epidermis, The hairy Skin. The fl^shy Membrane.
or Scarf-skin. Under the Skin, lies the Fleshy f. 1. B B.
Membrane, which is the Foundation, and Seed-plot of the Hairs: which if it be
Fleshy, it makes the hairy Skin movable, because it sticks close hereunto
without any fat coming between.

The Pericraneum follows, which does immediately compass the bony Skul. It
Pericranium
is produced from the thick Meninx, which in Children, goes through the
Su^ures, at what time they are not firmly closed, no^ joined Tooth within
Tooth. k f. 1. C C.


Besides the Pericranium, there is scraped from the Skul, as from other bones,
Periostium
the Periostium being a thin Skin, which immediately covers them. Wherefore the
Pericranium is not the Periosteon of the Skul* but is spread out upon the Skul
by a great Providence of Nature, that it might hold fast the Muscles which
arise Its use,
from the Skul, such as are the temporal Muscle, the strongest in the whole
Body, which with its companion, contracts, and lift^ up the Jaw, and bears
greater burdens in some bodies, than the other Muscles acting al together.

Also it strengthens, and closely comprehends the Muscles of the hinder part of
the He^d. Descending to the Eyes, and stretched out under the Eyelids, it
makes the Conjunctive Coat of the Eye.

These Membranes being separated, and plucked off, and the T. 15. f. 1. D D.
Skul having its The Skull*
Cap taken off, it presents it self to ou^ sight, being framed together of many
bones, which are ^oyned one to another, by looser, or faster Sutures, or Seams.

Sometimes there are no Sutures, or Seams to be seen, when the Skul is one
continued bone. But the History of the Skul appertains to that double
Osteology, or Bone-story; the one of which has been pr^mised unto this Work,
and the ot^^^ shall be demonstrated at the end hereof.

The Medicinal Consideration.
The Head being the Fountain, and Original of almost al Diseases, according to
General Diseases of the head
Hipyocrates, by reason of Fluxes of Rhewm, which flow from the Head into the
in^erior parts, even as low as the Feet, does condole, and has a fellow feeling
with all parts. Being placed on the top of the Trunk of the Body, like a
Cupping-glass* it attracts, and receives vapors which mount from the inferior
parts, according to Hippocrates in his fourth Book of Diseases: which vapors,
the brain being s^^^gy like a kernel, does drink, and sup in, according to the
said Hippocrates, in his Book of Glandules, or Kernels. The Vapors being
con^ealed into Water, do fall down, and return up again like a River that ebbs
and flows, according to Aristotle; which Hippocrates had taught before him,
having in that respect* termed the Brain, the Metropolis of a cold, and moist,
glutinous, and clammy Humor.

If the Shape of the Head be depraved, so that it be sharp pointed, or the
longitude Shape depraved.
thereof* be turned into latitude; such an Head cannot be ^ound and healthy:
and therefore either it is diseased, or the principal Faculties are weakened*
If in Children new born, ^uch a Figure be observed, it may ^e corrected by Art,
and with the Hand; as if it be great, and large, when the Child is a month or
two old, d^ying Medicines being applied, and Fo^^anels, or Issues made in the
Nape of the Neck, the overgreat moisture of the Brain may be dried up; and
consequently the Head will become less; which cannot be effected when the
Children are grown up. A narrow Head, cannot be by Art enlarged, many Age
whatsoever.

If the Sutures of the Skul are straiter tha^ ordinary, o^ ^f there be no
Sutures, Over lax, or loose, etc.
or they be wider than is ^i^, the Head is subject to Diseases, because the
smoaky Ex^^ements of the Brain, have nor a free passage.

If the Head be more loose and open than is ^it, it is the more exposed in the
Injuries of the ambient Air.

These Inconveniences may be remedied by help of Physic, or by wearing a Cap,
or by going bare-head, as occasion requires.

I proceed unto the Particular Diseases of the Parts containing. And first of
the Particular diseases.
hairy Skin, whose Action is the breeding of Hairs, the efficient cause wh^^eo^
is a temper moderately hot and dry, and an indifferent Constitution of the
Skin; and the internal cause is a sooty Excrement, which thrusting it self
for^^bly by the small Pores, gains the form of a thread. The hurting of this
Action, is a Symptom of the hairy Skin. The hurt thereof is three-^old, it is
diminished in the Disea^e termed Ophiasis, in which the Hairs fall off from the
hinder part of the Head along to the Ophiasis.
Forehead, making bald wreaths like those of Serpents; or it is abolished in
baldness, and the Alopecia, or Fox*fal of the hairs.

The Cause of the falling off of the Hair of the Head, is the hot and dry
distemper of the Skin, with a naughty and sharp Humor, eating away the roots of
the Hairs.

The Naughtiness of the Humor is known by the color of the Skin, and of the
blood, which comes out of the Skin being pricked.

Baldness is a deprivation of the Hair of the Head, by reason of an Hectical
dry Baldness
distemper, and hard Constitution of the Skin. A defect of Nutriment, and
profitable Humor, or of the ^uligi^ous Excrement, causes this distemper of the
Skin. Hence it is that Eu^uchs, because very moist, do never wax bald.

Gray-hairedness is a Symptom of the Hairy Scalp or Skin of the Head, by which
Gray Hairs
the Generation of Hairs is depraved, so that they grow white before the time.
The cause of both these kinds of baldness, as well that which comes
Symptomatically, as that caused by Age, is the cold and moist distemper of the
Skin, whereby the ^uligi^ous Excrement of the Skin is allaied and tempered.
When I say a cold distemper, I mean the weakness of the Natural Heat: whence it
comes to pa^s that by sickness and sorrow, many become gray-hair'd, because the
Natural Heat is by both diminished.

Ulcers of the Head are either light, and possess the Scarf-skin only, which
turns Daddruf
into little Scales, Scurf, or Dandruf, when the Head is combed: whence the
Greeks term it Pituriasis, the Latins Porrigo: such like Ulcers are either dry
and invisible; or they are visible, and manifestly to be seen: their Cause is
an hot and dry distemper of the Skin, with a sharp and thin Humor.

Ac^or, is a Disease of the Skin of the Head, compounded of a tumor, and an
Ulcer; Sor^ Head
the tumor is known by the inequality, the Ulcer by little holes, out of which
flows a clammy Humor; which made Pliny call the flowing Ulcers of the Head,
Ceiron, or the Honeycomb. But the Honeycomb, though a tumor, and Ulcer of the
Head, yet differs from the former, because it has greater holes, and the Humor
that comes out is mattery like Honey, or of the Consistency of Honey. Pl^ny
calls them Ulcers congealed together like an Honeycomb. The Cause of both these
Diseases, is an hot and dry distemper of the Skin, with a sharp and biting
Humor, which invites one to scratch: by scratching, the swelling is increased,
and at length Ulcerated, so that the holes break out: Vulgarly it is called
Tinea, the Moath, because the holes are like those of Moath-eaten Garments.

Hydrocephalos, or the Water-head, is a swelling of the Head, caused by a
Head-dro^sie.
whey^^h Humor, collected and shed abroad between the Skul, and the Pericram^^;
or between the Skul, and Dura Matter, or within the Ventricles of the Brain
fi^led with whe^^sh moisture, which runs over as it were on al sides.

In Infants it is caused by squeezing of the Child's Head at the time of Birth.
In those that are grown up, the cause hereof is a cold and moist distemper of
the Head and whole Body, or a translation of ^erous humors unto the Head, which
generally is swelled, and rai^ed to a vast compa^s, by the humor under the
Sk^n, or included within the Head.

P^^ir^asis, or the Louz^ Evil, is a Symptom of the hairy Scalpe, when instead
Louzie Evil.
of the ^hicker Excrements, or together with them, L^ce are bred in the top of
the Skin, or deep in the same.

The Cause hereof, is an hot and moist distemper of the Skin, with a putrified
humor not very sharp; which makes this Disease commonly subject to Children,
and old Phlegmatic Persons.

The Temple-Muscles are to be observed, which cover a great part of the Skul,
whose wounds or bruises, do cause a Convulsion, and contract, and straiten the
Jaw.

Chap. 2. Of the Brain.
THe Skul being duly sawed in sunder, and the covering removed, the T. 16. f.
1.
Brain The Brains.
appears, proportionated to the Skul which contained it; such as is the thing
containing, such is the contained. Or suppose the Brain gives Figure to the
bones when they are soft, then the Skul follows the quantity of the brain, be
it great or little. But in case the brain follow not the Natural figure and
magnitude of the Head, its conformation is faulty; and consequently sickly and
adverse to the internal Senses, both principal, and subservient, which it hurts
in their Actions.

The Brain is compounded of a f. 3. A A.
Substance soft, waxy, or pliable, whitish: Substance.
which because, like a Kernel, it drinks and sucks up humidities, it is
therefore by Hippocrates, termed the great Kernel.

It is divided into two parts. That which is three times as big as the other,
retains Division.
the common name of the f. 6. A A.
Brain: the lesser part placed in the hinder part of the Head, is termed f. 6.
D D.
Cerebellum, or the Petty-brain. Both these parts are covered Two Coats, viz. 1
Crassa-meninx. 2 The Tenuis meninx.
with common Coverings, termed Meninges. The first Coat, or Covering, is called
f. 1. A C. f. 2. B. f. 3. H. etc.
Crassa Meninx; the second f. 1. B B.
Tenuis Meninx. The Arabians termed these Membranes, Matres, or Mothers,
because they were persuaded, that the other Membranes of the Bo^y, were
propagated from these.

The first Meninx f. 1. A A. etc.
hard and thick, being united to the Sutures of the Head, suspends the whole
bulk of the brain; these Connexions must be viewed when the Skul is taken off.
In the thick Meninx are observed innumerable f. 1. a a.
Vessels, wherewith it is sprinkled and strewed: they are rather Arterial than
Venal, being produced from the Rere Mirabile, being drawn out from beneath
upwards, as far as the Channels of the Meninx, where they unload their blood;
and therefore it is the Membrane which is seen to beat and pant, rather than
the substance of the Brain.

Now the Pipes belonging to this Coat, are four; whereof two are lateral, which
The Pipes.
run along the sides of the Sutura Lambdoides, that they may receive the blood
from the internal Jugulars, and from the Neck Veins; or by them, according to
the Doctrine of Circulation, the blood may flow back unto the Heart.

From the Union of these two Channels, is formed a third, longwise, drawn out
directly as far as the Nostrils. In the Concourse of the three beneath, there
springs a fourth f. 5. e e.
Channel or Pipe, which goes into the Substance of the Brain, between the
Brain, and the Petty-Brain: it is not shut up in the ^oldings of the Dura
Matter, but there is a great Vein, so called by Galen, which descending into the
f. 3. D E
former Ventricles, makes the Plexus T. 17. f. 1. O O R R. T. 16. f. 3. F F. f.
5. f f.
Choroides, which is di^persed t^^ough all the Ventricles, Plexus Choroides.
Torcular
unto the Basis of the Brain.

The Channel which runs longwise, deserves rather the name of Torcular, than
the T. 17. f. 5. F.
fourth: because from thence, is the blood distributed into the lower parts, by
innumerable little Veins, through the turnings and windings of the brain.

These lateral Channels, neither do the Veins, nor the Arteries go into, and
pass through with their Coats, but are terminated at the entrance; and
therefore those Channels are rather Arterial, than Venal: for the Brain being
of its own Nature cold and soft, ought rather to be nourished with hot,
subtle, and Arterial blood, than with such as the Veins afford, being thick,
and hard to penetrate.

And in case the Vein, and A^terial blood were confused and mixed together in
these Channels, they would not pant or beat; and the Pulsation of the Channels
demonstrates, that it depends not upon the Body of the Ar^eries; for there are
no^e in that place, but upon the leaping of the blood, after the manner of
Arteries. a T. 16. f. 5. a, and b.
bf. 2. a a. f. 5. c c.


Now this Menbrane, namely, the Crassa Meninx, divides the Brain into two
parts, as far as the middle thereof, by the Corpus Callosum. This Partition is
termed T. 16. f. 3. A A. f. 5. E E.
Falx, and being doubled on both sides, it severs the Brain from the
Petty-Brain. Falx


The Tenuis f. 1. B B.
Meninx follows, which immediately incloses the brain, being Tenuis Meninx Why
the Brain is full of windings and turnings?
closely conveyed into the windings and turnings thereof; for the substance
of the brain, is f. 1. b b.
without, after a wonderful manner, full of deep turnings and windings, for the
lighter passage of the Arteries, which disperse the blood here and there; and
therefore Pelops, the Master of Galen, seeing those little Arteries dispersed
up and down the Brain, did believe that there was the beginning of the Veins.

The Tenuis Meninx is three times so long as the Crassa Meninx, because it
passes into the inner Parts of the Brain, and as a Veil it covers and
separates, and divides the whole Bulk of the Brain into three Parts. For near
upon the upper half of the Brain, which covers the Ventricles being placed upon
the Corpus Callosum, it is on both sides Circularly separated and lifted up as
high as the Roots of the Marrow of the Back, which do knit together that same
upper portion. So that the Brain is divided into three Parts; on each side one
over the Ventricles, and the third which includes the Ventricles, being
continued, and no ways disjoined.

A small quantity of the f. 2. B B. f. 3. B B.
Corpus Callosum being cut of, the Two f. 3. D D. E E. f. 4. C C. D D.
former and The two former Ventricles.
upper Ventricles appear, which in their lower Part toward the basis of the
Brain are larger, from whence they take their rise upward, being smaller at the
top.

They are separated by a Thin Membranous Partition, which is framed of the
Tenuis Meninx doubled together, and is called Speculum Lucidum, or the Bright
Septum lucidu^.
Mirror, because it is transparent. T. 16. f. 3. G.


The former Ventricles are perforated in the forepart toward Os Ethinoides,
that the serosities may flow down from the superior Part^ to that place.

Above the foremost Ventricles there is spread out a T. 16. f. 3. b b. f. 4. B.
Tripartite body, which is termed Corpus Psalloides, or the Welsh Harp,
sustained by three Pillars: whereof Fornix.
two are T. 17. f. 1. G G.
Lateral: turned back about those T. 16. f. 4. b b. c c. etc.
Eminencies which Galen calls the Chambers of the Optic Nerves:

The other foreward T. 17. f. 1. F.
Colomne, is placed between the two Ventricles. If you shall follow those two
lateral Columns, you will find them to be productions of the Optic Nerves,
which within the Ventricles do Join themselves one to another, as in the Basis
of the Brain; behind the Choana, they are again united; whence I conjecture
that the power of understanding and knowledge, is principally contained, in the
former Part of the Brain, and that from thence the Animal spirit is drawn*
which is administered unto the Eyes.

By the Concourse of the two Ventricles Between the two large Hillocks
aforesaid, and other subsequent Eminencies, is formed a Guttur or Channel,
which makes the third T. 16. f. 4. E.
Ventricle. In the Basis of which Channel there is seen an T. 17. f. 1. below
Q.
hole, The third Ventricle.
which penetrates into the Choana, to purge out Wheyish Phlegm into the throat,
near the Palate.

In the sides of this Channel, the Circumjacent Eminences do form, some the
Nates Testes: Anus.
T. 16. f. 4. b b.
Nates or Buttocks, others the Testes or T. 16. f. 4. c c. T. 17. f. 1. M M.
Stones. For so those Eminencies or bunchings out are termed, being
interchangably disposed, and from that Channel, the Hole which goes into the
fourth Ventricle, is termed Anus or the T. 17. f. 1. above Q. f. 2. F.
Arse-hole.

In the upper Part of this Channel is superincumbent that same Kernel which is
Conarium.
termed T. 16. f. 4. ^. T. 17. f. 1. L.
Conari^m the Pineapple Kernel, because it is shaped like a Pineapple. And over
this Channel and the fourth f. 2. N N.
Ventricle, is a thin Membrane stretched out, derived from the Tenuis Meninx,
upon which runs the T. 16. f. 3. F F. T. 17. f. 1. O O. R R.
Plexus Chor^ides, deffused through the foremost Ventricles.

In the entrance of the fourth Ventricle, there is placed a certain portion of
the Processu^ Vermiformis.
Brain more firm than ordinary which represents the tail of a River-Crab when
the shel is peeled off. It is called Scolicoides and Vermiformis T. 16. f. 6.
E. T. 17. f. 2. C C.
Processus, the Wormfashioned Production: is opens and shuts the passage into
the fourth Ventricle. This is placed in the Cerebellum or Petty Brain; which
contained within it self the two hinder most portions of the spinal Marrow, as
the Brain contained the other two foremost, which I have named with Galen the
beds of the Optic Nerves.

In that same f. 1. N N. f. 2. D D. G G. T. 18. f. 4. F.
fourth Ventricle, there appears a certain T. 17. f. 2. H. T. 18. f. 4. ^.
Chink like a Writing-Pen, The fourth Ventricle.
which is the Separation of the Marrow of the Back.

The Petty-Brain being pulled asunder, you shall see how it conteins within it
the fourth Ventricle, between the two aftermost Roots of the Marrow of the
back; and how being drier than the Brain, it gives Original to T. 18. f. 3.
seven or eight pair of Nerves, saving the Optic Nerve.

It is not full of windings above but beneath, according to the external form of
the brain it self. In like manner it is divided beneath into T. 18. f. 4. A A.
two Parts, being continued above.

If you shall gently draw upwards the foremost Part of the brain, as far as its
basis, Pelvis. Glandula Pituitaria.
you shall observe the T. 17. f. 1. S. T. V. T. 18. f. 1. B. f. 3. B B.
Optic Nerves, and the Nerves, serving for T. 18. f. 1. C C. f. 3. G G.
Motion, and then the T. 18. f. 3. D.
Choana or funnel dropping Wheyish moisture upon the c Glandula Pituitaria or
Flegm-Kernel, which fills up and possesses the Sella Equina or Horse-Saddle. In
the Choana or Funnel you shall see Four Pipes distilling Tubuli. Seven pair of
Nerves.
Wheyish moisture into the Palate and throat. Then you shall consider the order
of those seven pair of Nerves recorded in the following Verses.

The T. 18. f. 1. B B. f. 3. B B.
First Pair sees, the f. 1. C C. f. 3. G G
Second moves the Eyes;
f. 1. D D. f. 3. H. H.
Third and Fourth taste, f. 1. F F. f. 3. K K.
Fifth hears and makes us Wise.
The f. 1. G G. f. 3. L L. T. 3 f. 8 all
Sixth is large and wanders all about:
f. 3. M M.
Seventh Larynx moves a prating Tongue so stout.
Then you shall search under the Dura Meninx in the basis of the brain about the
Compass of the Sella Sphenoides, for the Rete Mirabile or wonderful f. 3. P P.
Net of Arteries Rete Mirabile.
interwoven one among another, being formed of the two f. 3. C C.
Carotides or sleep Arteries.

You shall observe in the Basis of the brain, that Wheyish Humors of blood is
powered forth, in extreme pains of the Head coming with Inflammation, which
while they seek to go forth by the Cavities of the Ears, they cause extreme
sharp pains, which bring the Patient into Madness and Sickness. Whether or no in
such a desperate Case, may we boar either side of the Hindermost Part of the
Head, to let out the superfluous putrid Humor, which corrupts the substance of
the Brain?

The T. 18. f. 1. F F. f. 3. K K.
Auditory Nerve is worthy of Consideration, which is inserted into the Cavity
of the Ear, and by a little Channel slides down into the Palate, and is
distributed into the inner Part of the Larynx: from whence comes that same
Concent that is between the Tongue and Teeth, the Larynx and the Lungs. g f. 1.
E E. f. 3. I I.


Observe Whether or no they be intersected Crose-wise, so as the right should
from its original be carried unto the left Part, and the left unto the right,
which I have never seen.

Whether the Nerves in their Rise have Arteries Joined in company with them?
Whether the Nerves are made up of many small threads? Whether the other Nerves
differ from the Optic Nerve.

I will not wholly pass over those four notable Questions: Whether the brain be
moved? Whether or no the brain does cool the Heart? Whether the Ventricles of
the brain are ordained only to contein Excrements? Whether or no the blood be
there Circulated and how?

As to the first Question, I say that the substance of the Brain is not moved
of it Whether the Brain have any Motion?
self, by Diastole and Sistole, after the manner of the Arteries, but only the
Crassa Meninx, which is sprinkled al over with Arteries, arising from the
wonderful Contexture of Arteries, unto the upper Channels of the said Crassa
Meninx: also the Channels do pant, and the brain is moved by elevation and
depression of the substance thereof, according as it is driven by the Animal
spirits.

The brain does cool the Heart, in as much as by Circulation, it sends back the
Whether it cools the heart?
blood unto the Heart being cooled in the Brain.

The foremost and uppermost Ventricles are Receptacles for spirits: the whey
may The use of the fore Ventricles.
indeed descend into the upper Ventricles, from the whole Mass of the brain,
but it presently falls down into the lower Ventricles, that from thence it may
flow through Os Ethmoides into the Nostr^s: if the Os Ethmoides or
Colauder-bone be obstructed, it distills by the Choana or Funnel, or by the
little holes over the Funnel, into the Palate and Jaws or Throat.

The Circulation of the blood is performed in the brain, with a slow pace. The
Whether or n^ and how th ulood is Circulated in th Brain.
blood rises out of the Net like-Contexture, by the Arteries of Dura Meninx,
unto the four Channels; afterward it descends by the Veins unto the Heart,
having been plundered of its spirits, which the brain drank up. And so the blood
being cooled, is said to cool the Heart. Of al which I shall treat more fully
in my Anthropographia, or large Description of the body of Man.

The Brain, being of its own Nature cold and moist, is nourished only with the
What Bloo^ the Brain nourish^ with*
purer and more spiritous arterial blood, which ascends by the Carotides and
passes speedily forth. And though the Spirits are tempered, they loose none of
their subtility, because they are not mingled with the Air. From the Plexus
Mirabilis, blood ascends by the Arteries which spring from the said Plexus unto
the Crown of the Head, where the blood Channels of the brain are Situate. From
whence it distills into the lower and side Parts of the brain, and also by that
same great Vein mentioned by Galen, which makes the Plexus Choroides, it is
distributed into the inferior Parts.

And therefore in bleedings of the Nose, the most pure blood does always come
What Blood comes away in the Nose bleeding.
away, whereas that which is taken away by opening the Veins of the Arms or
feet, seems always most impure.

Whereby you may know, that it is only the Arterial blood which nourishes the
brain and which comes away by the bleeding at Nose: and it was not without
Cause that Fernelius would have it stopped, after it had bleed a pound, to
cool the body and extinguish the Fever. And therefore refrigerating and
astringent Medicaments are to be applied, not only to the hinder Part of the
Neck, but also before upon th Carotick or sleepy Arteries.

You shall observe that the Air drawn in by the Nostrils, does not pass under,
nor Whether the Air goes which is drawa in at the Nostrils? Whether it is
mingled with the Spirits?
enter into the foremost Ventricles of the brain, because they are void of any
Insets, but being shed externally round about the Crassa Meninx, it cools the
Surface of the brain. Nor is it mingled with the Spirits, because they ought to
be most subtle, otherwise by permistion or mingling of the Air, they would
become more thick and would not run so swistly by the Nerves all the body over.

The same I conceive touching the Air received into the Lungs; that it is not
mixed with the vital Spirit but only cools the Lungs

Now that the brain may be demonstrated after that manner, which Varolius
describes The Manner of Dissecting the brain and the History of its Parts.
in a particular Book: You shall saw in sunder the Scul of a body newly dead,
round about near the Eyes, and the hollow of the hinder part of the Head, and
with a pair of Pinsers you shall take of the upper portion of the Socket of the
Eyes, that you may draw out the Eyes hanging at their Optic Nerves.

Afterward having pulled the Dura T. 16. f. 1. A A. f. 2. D D. etc. T. 17. f.
1. A A.
Meninx from the Scul round about with help of a Spatula, leave it at the Basis
of the Scul, where it sticks exceeding fast to the Bones. Then you shall take
out the Brain and as much of the Spinal Marrow as you can both at once, and let
some body hold the Brain turned upside down in both his hands whiles you shall
dissect it.

But you shall first search within the Dura Matter for those four bendings or T.
16. f. 5. a b c e.
Hollownesses, for the place of the f. 5. F.
Press, the great Vein described by Galen which makes the Plexus f. 5. f f.
Choroides, and that division of the brain which resembles a f. 2. A A. f. 5. E
E.
Sickle: Afterward returning to the Basis of the Brain, you shall observe the
Tenuis Meninx to be more easily plucked and separated in the lower than in the
upper Part: because the Petty-Brain in its Basis or Bottom is not so full of
turnings, away, and windings, as on the top. And therefore the thick Meninx
being first taken we meet with that same Rete Mirabite, or Miraculous T. 18. f.
3. P P P P.
Net, made of Multitudes of small Arteries, springing from the f. 3. C C.
Carotick Arteries and two other f. 3. O O.
ascending through the holes of the Vertebraes of the Neck; but it will be
torn, which cannot be prevented. Now each of the Carotick or Sleepy-Arteries
enters within the Scul divided into two, to Weave that same wonderful Net, and
creeping upwards, through the windings of the brain it is disseminated up and
down every way even as far as the Longitudinal Cavity of the Dura Meninx.

The Carotis is drawn obliquated and as it were crook backed, within that same
winding hole at the Basis of the Scul, and within its Cavity, contains certain
very small Bones, like those which are called Sesamoidea.

Neither has Nature placed these little bones only in these Arteries, but she
has likewise inserted them into other Arteries, where it was requisite, that
they should be kept open. b T. 17. f. 2. I I.


Then you shall observe that the Processus T. 18. f* 3. a a.
Mammillares or Teat-like Productions do not run out so far as Varolius has
described them.

Then you shall see the growing together of the T. 17. f. 1. T.
Optic f. 1. S S. V V.
Nerves near the Choana or Funnel. And therefore Masticatories may do good in
the Diseases thereof. Also you shall observe that the Veins of the Plexus f. 1.
O O R R.
Choroides descending to the Basis of the f. 1. P P.
Brain, are interwoven with exceeding small Kernels.

In that place the Plexus Choroides is more easily discerned, than upon the
foremost Ventricles.

Afterward, you shall contemplate four tuberous Eminencies: two T. 16* f. 4. c
c.
before, situate in the middle of the brain, and the other two f. 4. b b.
behind, which constitute the Cerebellum, or petty Brain. Those Eminencies, or
Risings, do receive four white and hard Roots of the Spinal Marrow, whereof the
foremost, longest, and hardest, are drawn along between the greater Eminences
of the Brain. The other two short ones, are carried within the petty brain;
which a thickened Portion of the Marrow of the said petry-brain, placed
athwart, as broad as a man's Thumb, does fasten together like a Swath-band, and
is by Varolius termed T. 18. f. 4. by C C C.
Ponticulus: or rather it is the pavement of the Channel from the third, into
the fourth Ventricle.

And the said Channel lies above those foremost Roots of the Spinal Marrow, and
is stretched out according to their longitude. Between the growing together of
the Optic Nerves, and the foremost Roots of the Spinal Marrow, there appears a
foursquate hole, which is taken for the f. 3. E.
Choana, or Funnel, serving to discharge the Excrements of the Ventricles of
the Brain.

When you have viewed al these things, you shall pass over unto the T. 16. f. 6.
D D. T. 17. f. 2. A A. T. 18. f. 4. A A.
Petty-brain, where you shall separate from the Spinal Marrow the Processus T.
16. f. 6. E. T. 17. f. 2. C C.
Vermiformis which lies between the two Tuberous Eminencies of the Petty-brain,
by taking away the Membrana Choroides; that so you may see the T. 17. f. 2. D
D. etc. T. 18. f. 4. F.
Chamber of the fourth Ventricle and the Cistern of the Animal Spirits.

Then you shall cut a sunder T. 18. f. 4. by C C C.
the little Bridge, or the Band of the Roots of the Spinal T. 18. f. 4. D D.
Marrow, that the T. 16. f. 3. D D. E E. f. 4. C C. D D. etc.
foremost and Superior Ventricles of the brain may appear, which you shall see
separated by a partition T. 16. f. 3. G.
as long as ones Finger, drawn from one End toward the Forehead, as far as
the Petty-brain: it cleaves to the T. 16. f. 3. b b. f. 4. B. T. 17. f. 1. F. G
G.
Arched Roof of the Ventricles, but beneath it is loose, and free from al
ties, that the passage of the Spirits might be free.

But you shall diligently note, that the Extremities of the said partition are
double forked: the hindermost bifurcation is longer than the foremost, and it
cleaves unto that same transverse Ligament, which connects the two Tuberosities
or bunchings out of the brain, and so being spread out like a beam it bears up
the Vaulted Arch of the Ventricles; the fore most bifurcation cleaves unto a
little transverse cord, which resembles the Optic Nerve in thickness and in
Color.

The same partition which is termed Septum T. 16. f. 3. G.
Lucidum, being pulled back, you shall manifestly descern the Vault of the
Ventricles, which is called Corpus Psalloides or Harp fashioned body; also you
shall see that the foremost Ventricles make but one continued Cavity. k T. 16.
f. 3. bb. f. 4. B. T. 17. f. 1. G G. F.


Mean while you shall observe, that the inferior Ventricles placed at the Basis
or bottom of the brain, are larger or at least equal unto the superior, and
that the continuity of the superior and inferior Ventricles is one and the
same: or rather that there are but two Ventricles which contain the whole
brain. For the T. 17. f. 2. D D. T. 18. f. 4. F.
fourth Ventricle lies concealed in the Petty-Brain, and is manifestly seen to
be wholly and only the^e.

Further you shall observe that all the T. 18. f. 13. etc.
Nerves even the Optic ones, do arise out of those same Roots of the Spinal
Marrow: and therefore all the Nerves in the body do arise out of the Spinal
Marrow, within or without the brain.

For if those Prominencies, which are termed by Galen the beds of the Optic
Nerves, are productions of the Roots of the Spinal Marrow within the brain: we
may with good reason aver, that the Optic nerves chemselves do spring from the
Spinal Marrow.

Finally you shall see that the moving Nerves that give motion to the Eyes, are
continued, and make one Cord as it were: and that the Optic Nerves being bowed
or turned back near the beds of the Optic Nerves, do ascend unto the foremost
Ventricles.

You shall likewise see that the Testes or Stones are T. 16. f. 4. c c.
portions of the Roots of the Spinal Marrow, growing out of the brain: and the
Nates or T. 16. f. 4. b b.
buttocks are portions of those Roots which are derived from the Petty-brain.

And if you shall compare this my description of the Parts which are to be seen
in the brain turned upside down, beginning from the basis, with that of
Varolius, you will find it larger and different from his. And he that will take
pains to do as much, after he has once or twice seen me demonstrate these
things, he will acknowledge the truth of them with admiration.

Now that in the brain the Diseases and Symptoms thereof, may be distinguished
as much as may be by their proper places, the whole bulk of the brain must be
divided into three Parts, viz. The T. 16 f. 1. b b.
brain properly so called, the Petty-brain T. 16. f. 6. D D. etc. T. 17. f. 2.
A A. etc.
and the f. 2. l l. T. 18. f. 4. D D.
Marrow of the back.

But I divide the brain, as it is the subject of dissection into three Regions,
the The Parts of the Supreme Region.
uppermost, the Middlemost, and the Lowest. In the uppermost you shall observe
the Turnings and Windings of the brain, the f. 2 A A. f. 5. E E.
Sickle, and the Corpus f. 2. B B. f. 3. B B
Callosum.

In the Middlemost which is beneath the f. 3. b b. f. 4. B. T. 17. f. 1. F G G.
Vault, you shall observe the Arched Of the Middle Region.
seeling of the said Vault, being the Roof which is placed over the Ventricles;
the Partition-Wal, born up by T. 16. f. 3. G.
three Pillars; three f. 3. D E. f 4. C D. etc. f. 4. E.
Ventricles with certain f. ^. b b c c etc.
Eminencies, which make up a Channel to the fourth Ventricle.

And then you shall observe the Plexus f. 5. and 6. f f. T. 17. f. 1. O O R R.
Choroides, the T. 16. f. 4. a. T. 17. f. 1. L.
Conarium, and the T. 16. f. 6. D D. T. 17. f. 2. A A. etc.
Petty-brain, and the f. 2. D D. G G. T. 18. f. 4. F.
fourth Ventricle therein concealed.

In the lowest Region, you shall mark the T. 18. f. 3. E.
Choana, or Funnel, the Glandula, Of the lowest Region.
or T. 18. f. 3. D. etc.
Kernel; the Mammillary, or Teat-like f. 3. a a.
Productions; the ^even f. 3. B G H ^ ^ L M. f. 1. B C D E F G.
Pair of Nerves; the f. 3. P P P P.
Re^e Mirable, or wonderful Net; and the Roots of the Spinal f. 4. D D. etc.
Marrow.

And forasmuch as Casparus Hofmannus, in his Book against Montanus, and in his
Institutions, calls those Men Fools and Blockheads, who ^uppose that the
Ventricles of the Brain, are the Shops, or Workhouses where the Spirits are
made; and so confidently, and arrogantly avers it to be impossible, that he
accounts it a great Crime or Madness to think otherwise: I shall briefly examine
his, by him supposed invincible Arguments, because no man has yet had the
Courage to contradict them: only I shall in the first place demonstrate the
contrary to be true.

The Animal Spirit is made of the Vital, which is continually brought in great
The place where the Animal Spirits are made according to our Auth^r.
quantity, by the Carotick Arteries to the Basis of the Brain, where the
branches meeting, and being woven together, do make the Rete Mirabile, from
which innumerable branches are derived into the Crassa Meninx; that the blood
may a^cend on every hand to those blood-channels of the Dura Matter, which I
co^ceive does alone palpitate, or pant; and I have seen in Fractures of the
Skul, that when that Membrane is broken, the brain remains immovable.

Seeing therefore the foremost Ventricles are opened in the Basis of Brain, and
equal in their widness to the upper Cavities of the said Ventricles, and are
close unto the Rete Mirabile, from it the Ventricles draw their Spirits, or the
Spirits exhaling from that Texture, whose Arter^es are exceeding tender and
thin, they are brought along into the ^oremost Ventricles; and soon after, by
the third Ventricle which serves instead of a Channel or passage, they are
forthwith carried by a straight course into the fourth Ventricle, the Cistern,
or Conduit Head of Spirits; that from thence they may be distribu^ed into the
inferior Nerves, and into the Cavity of the Spinal Marrow.

But the seven Pair of Nerves are propagated from those four Eminencies; of
which the two greater do form, and enclose the sides of the foremost
Ventricles; the other two make the sides of the fourth Ventricle, whose Roof,
and fore, and after parts, are made up by the double Apophysis Scolicoides.

Those four Eminencies are Spongy, and receive Spirits, which run directly into
the Nerves of the Spinal Marrow by the ^ourth Ventricle.

And no man can deny that the Nerves of ^he brain are the offsprings of those
four Eminencies: and so this Proposition is to be interpreted. All Nerves of
the Body and Brain, do spring from the Spinal Marrow, either within, or without
the brain.

I deny not that the Spirits are diffused through the whole substance of the
brain, and not wholly contained in the Ventricles: but I aver that the
Ventricles are the true Shops, or Work-Hou^es of ^he Animal Spirit, which is
distributed unto the seven Couple of Nerves, and to the Spinal Marrow.

That this is ab^u^d and impossible, Hofm^n does thus seek to prove:

1. Arg.
There is the Spirit made, where the Action is performed.

I Answer, many Actions are performed in parts, in which no Spirits are bred:
The Arguments of Ho^man to the contrary, answered.
and I deny that in the Body of the Brain, al Actions are performed. Again,
there needs no other elaboration than their passage through the brain: for as
the blood of the Veins, passing through the Hearts Ventricles, is in a moment
made Vital; so the Vital Spirits running through the middle of the Brain, as
far as the Ventricle, do become Animal.

For if it were needful that the Animal Spirit should be elaborated in the
Substance of the Brain, it would lose much of its ^ubtilty, because the brain
is cold and moist.

2d Arg. of Hofman. If the Spirit be to act, it must needs be under the command
of the Soul in the Vessels; for after that it is entered into the Sea of the
Ve^tricles, what is there to compel the same to return into the stra^t passages
of the Ne^ves?
I ^n^wer: If the Spirit be diff^^ed into the whole substance of the brain,
being really soft as Wax, how can it return into the Nerves, seeing there are
no Vessels running through the ^ubstance of the brain? Those bloody marks
wherewith it is sprin^^ed, are poin^s of blood dropping down from above, out of
the Arteries which runs between the winding substance of the brain. The great
Providence of Nature, because the blood could not pie^ce, nor pass through the
midst of the Substance of the brain, has carried the same through the Channels
of the Dura Matter, as far as the ^^ood passages, whence ^^ slides into the
^^ferior parts, and by the Press, o^ that great Vein which Consti^utes the
Plexus Choroides, it ^^ows into the Ven^ricles.

More probable it were to assign the Seat, and Shop of the Animal Spirits in
the Plexus Choroides, which is diffu^ed through all the Cavities of the brain,
as far as the ba^^s thereof. But show me (friend Hofman) the way by which the
Animal Spirits made of the Vital, may be diffused into the substance of the
brain, so as to flow back into the Nerves.

3d Arg. The Ventricles are surrounded within, with the Pia Matter, which
^inders the ingress and regres^ of the Spirits.
I Answer: If the Ventricles have for their Covering, the thin Meninx, the
passage is thereby the sa^er into the foremost Ventricles, without any loss at
all. I have already demonstrated in an Entrance in the basis of the brain,
being the way into the fourth Ventricle; there is no need of a reg^ess for
Arterial blood, which ascends upwards by the Crassa Meninx, distilling into the
brain, does on al sides afford Spirits to the whole brain; neither can the blood
penetrate without Spirits.

4. Arg. Hofmans strongest Argument is this: Seeing the two superior
Ventricles, open into the third, and that into the Funnel, and it into the
Palate, who will be Su^ety, that the Spirits will not ma^e their escape this
way?
I Answer: This danger is easily shunned by the continual flux and pulse, or
driving of the Spirits to the Ci^^ern; and that same hole is exceeding small,
and so deep, even to the O^ Sphen^^des, that it can equal the length of a man's
^^^ger.

You who believe that the blood passes from the Right Ventricle of the Heart,
through the Lungs, that it may return into the Left, are you not afraid lest we
should lose our vital Spirits, when we blow ou^ breath out in Respiration?

5. Arg. The Ventricles are not continued with the Nerves, but with the whole
Body.
I Answer: If the Nerves proceed from those same Eminencies, which are Roots o^
the Spinal Marrow, between the Brain, and the Petty-brain, and they are
principal portions of the Brain; do not the Nerves arise from the brain it
self? But you your self have often times written, that the Nerves arise within
the brain, from the ^oots of the Spi^al Marrow.

6. Arg. The Ventricles have now another Office, which cannot stand with that
of the Spirits.
I Answer: That I deny any such Office. For the Choana, or Funnel, can p^^ge
away any wheyish Excrements which shall be in the Ventricles; but the greatest
part, flowing down by the external windings of the brain unto the basis, falls
partly into the Os Ethmoides, or Colander*bone, partly it descends to the basis
of the brain; and if not by the Choana, yet by other holes near abouts, it is
purged into the Pa^^ate.

But because Hofmans Spirits fail him in ^andling this Qu^stion (can you
forbear laughing) for they are his own words, we shall also leave him to enjoy
his self-love, with a great flock of bleating Animals (so he says) which
follows his absurd Opinion, provided that he be the Bel-weather. Let him no
more triumph before the Victory, nor let him be so secure and undaunted, as not
to fear Hercules himself.

That same new Tenent of Hofman, disturbs the whole Doctrine of Diseases of the
Hofmans Tenent disturbs the ^^actice of Physic.
Brain* and that I may declare so much, I will choose out only two Diseases,
which have their Seat in the Ventricles, viz. The Epilepsie, and Apoplexy.

The Apoplexy he makes to be in the whole Substance of the brain, not in the
Ventricles: The Epilepsie, he will have to be caused only by vapors ascending
into the Head, and di^^^^ed through the whole substance of the brain. He allows
of no Epilepsie from a primary affection of the Head, but only by Sympathy from
other parts.

He assigns the Seat of the Apoplexy to be in the whole substance of the brain
obstructed, and avers that it is caused only by blood shed forth of the Veins;
and makes the Cause thereof to be the obstruction of the Press introduced by
Nymmanus. But if the Torcular, or Press is obstructed, which is the fourth
Channel carrying blood into the Plexus Choroides, the passage of the blood and
Spirits is intercepted. But according to Hofman in an Apoplexy, only blood is
found shed out of the veins within the Ventricles, and therefore the To^cular
was not obstructed.

It is a certain, and undoubted thing* confirmed by many Experiments, that in
the Apoplexy, the Ventricles of the brain are obstructed, or there is an
obstruction in the Choana, or Funnel. But especially the hole of the fourth
ventricle which is shut with the Apophysis Scolicoides, is stopped by thick and
clammy Phlegm sticking there; which if it be not discussed, or removed, being
evacuated through the Funnel, it cause^ death.

If the Matter be serous, and pass into the Spinal Marrow, it causes the Palsy
instead of the Apoplexy; and so a greater Di^ease is cured by a lesser, the
matter being translated from one place to another. But if blood happen to be
shed into the ventricles, present death follows.

But if ^o be the Apoplexy should be produced by blood alone, as Hofman will
have it; how could blood which was shed into the ventricles, pass into the
Nerves without putre^action, and how could it enter into the Cavities of the
Nerves?

In these two Diseases he has be^rayed his own Ignorance, although he could
find no such difficulty in the falling sickness, as Cra^o acknowledged, whose
Wish was this: Would to God I could see before I die, the Essence of this
Disease, together with the Cure thereof rightly explained.

The Medicinal Consideration.
The brain is exercised with many kinds of Diseases, with an hot, cold, moist
Distemper; Principal dis^^ses of the Brain. Distemper.
with diverse Humors, Phlegmatic, Choleric, Melanchollick, Sanguine, and
Wheyish; which either do mo^est the Membranes of the brain, especially the
Crassa Meninx, or are diffused into the Channels thereof, and being there
stopped of their course, they cause most acu^e pains: or they slide into the
exterior windings of the ^rain, and by little and little, they distill into the
substance of the brain, and the ventricles thereof; or into the hinder part of
the Head, or the Petty-brain; or they descend into the lowest parts of the
brain.

If the Humor ascend by the Carotick Arteries unto the brain, it may produce
the same Diseases; now al Diseases that are caused by consent, or sympathy,
without matter, only by evaporation, are not so dangerous, as if they were bred
within the brain, so as that the morbi^ick Matter should be therein contained.

The brain, besides similar Diseases in Distemper, and Laxity, suffers also
Diseases Obstruction of the Cavities.
in Conformation, when as, according to the motion of the Moon, its bulk is
increased, or diminished; in the Disorder of its Passages, when the Channels of
the Dura Meninx are obstructed, especially the fourth, which is called
Tor^ular, or the Press: which being obstructed, is thought to cause the
Apoplexy, the passage of the Spirits to and ^ro being intercepted. Which I do
not believe, because the Spirits are shed abroad into the inferior Vessels from
that admi^able Net of A^^e^^es, called Rete mirabile, and that same Cavity
being stopped, only the Plexus Choroides, being defrauded of its blood, is hurt.

The Ventricles are also obstructed, especially the fourth, which being
s^opped, Of the Ventricles.
present death follows, by reason of the stoppage of that continual influx of
Spirits, which ought to be into the inferior parts, and the Marrow of the back.

The Choana may likewise be obstructed, which intercepts the Efflux of serous
Of the Choana* ^^ ^u^^^^*
and Flegma^ick Humors, whereby flowing back into the brain, they may cause the
Episep^^e, or Apoplexy, and induce diverse deadly Diseases.

If the anterior, or foremost ventricles, are perforated into the Nostrils, the
obstructions of those passages, will be very ^u^^ful to the brain.

A fault of evil Conformation, cannot be amended exactly: by strengthening, and
drying the brain, both the forementioned may be helped.

The brain is Inflamed, not only the Meninges, or Coats, but sometimes also in
the Siriasis.
proper substance thereof; whence comes the Phrenzy, and Siriasis, or Dog day
madness; but not any Paraphrenitis.

Siriasis is termed from the Dog Star; for in the Dog-Daies chiefly, it
afflicts Frenzy.
both Boys, and elder persons; and therefore it comes rather from an ex^ernal
Cause, as long abiding in the Sun, etc. than from any internal Cause: as a
Phrenzy comes only from an internal Cause, whether it be Primary, or Secondary,
by consent of other parts in a burning Fever.

The brain may likewise swel, by reason of a Commotion thereof from some
internal Tumors.
Cause, it is called Ecplexis. Stupidity of the Head after a blow, is a bad
sign, according to Hippocrates. At length these Diseases bring a Sphacelism in
the brain, causing putrefaction, corruption, and mortisication.

Again, it is subject to a wa^ry Tumor, either in its Circumference, or within
the Ventricles. If in its Circumference it is termed Hydrocephalos, or the
Water-Head; and at length the wheyish Humor slipping by little and little,
within the Ventricles, causes the sleepy Disease, and after it the Apoplexy.

And these I take to be Diseases of the brain; however Fernelius has written,
that all the Disorders of the Head, which have been observed by Experience, are
symp^omes, and not Diseases.

But he elegantly, according to his wonted fashion, does divide the Symptoms
Symptoms of the bra^n. Or Membranes.
into three Ranks, with reference to the parts affected. Some possess the
Membranes; some the Substance of the Brain; and some the hollow Passages.

In the Pericranium, and Meninges, Pains are caused. In the Substance of the
Brain, which is the Seat of the Animal chief Faculties, are contained the
Symptoms of Fancy and Reason depraved, such as are, Dotage, Melancholy,
Ecstasies, Lyncanthropy, Madness. Also the Symptoms of Memory abolished, such
as are Forgetfulness, Foolishness, Doltishness, and blockishness. Symptoms
consisting *Or in the Cavities, and passages.
in the Cavities, and passages, are very many, appertaining to Sense and
Motion; and to sleeping and waking, as dead sleep, sleeping Trance. Symp^omes
of Motion are, Walking in ones sleep; to be taken stiff, as it were blasted, or
Planet-struck; the Nightmare, Convulsion, Falling Sickness, Unquietness, and
tumbling, S^ivering, Shaking, Trembling, Palsies, Feebleness of the Limbs, and
Apoplexy.

Symptoms in the undue proportion of what should be voided forth, do belong
Symptoms of the Membranes Pain.
to the passages and Cavities, as a Ca^arrh, Rbeumatismus, Bleeding at Nose.
All these Symptoms ^foresaid, I will now declare particularly.

The Headache, either occupies the Pericranium, or the Meninges; if the
Pericranium, the pain is outward; if the Meninges, the pain is inward. Each of
these pains reaches unto the Eyes; because the internal Membranes do produce
the Coats of the Eye, called Cornea, and Wea; and the Pericranium produces the
Coat Conjunctiva.

The kind of the Pain shows the Nature of the Disease. A sharp and biting pain
does argue a Choleric Distemper of the Head: a heavy pressing pain, shows a
Phlegmatic Distemper: a panting, or pulsing pain, argues somewhat of an
Inflammation: A pricking pain shows an Erosion, or gnawing, caused by a sharp
Humor, or a Worm which is rare. A stretching pain, argues abundance of Humor,
or of windy Spirits, which distend the Membranes.

Now the Pain is either in the whole Head, or in the half, or in some one
particle thereof. If it infest the whole Head, it is called Cephalalgia: if half
the Head, Hemicrania, because the brain is divided into two parts: If the pain
possess one part, as if a Nail were driven in there, the Arabians call it
Clavus, and Ovum; the Nail, or Egg. If the pain of the Head, be of long
Continuance, it is termed Cephalaea; which together with the Hemicrania, is
periodical; but the Cephalalgia is a continual universal Headache.

A continual Pain of the Head joined with a continual Fever, and signs of
malignity, is exceeding dangerous, according to Hippocrates in the Second of
his Prognostics.

Pains of the Head are, Primary, and Proper; or Secundary, and by Sympathy from
other parts: These are not so dangerous as the former.

The Principal Actions of the Brain, Imagination, Ratiocination, and Memory,
Symptoms of the Substance of the brain.
are diminished, depraved, and abolished. Depravation of the Fantasy and
Reason, is Raving; the Imminution thereof is Foolishness.

There is a threefold Hurt of the Memory; but the Abolition thereof has only
found a name, being called Oblivion.

The Cause of Foolishness, is every great distemper of the brain, which is
known Foolishness.
by its Causes, as by signs; or some ill shaping of the Head, which is easily
discerned.

Dotage, or Raving, consists in absurd Thoughts, Words, or Deeds. The Sayings
Dotage.
of such as rave, are estranged from Truth and Reason, or not to the point in
hand; their Deeds are either unusual, or undecent; their Thoughts are absurd,
ridiculous, and Chymerical.

The manner of Raving, ought to be distinguished to know the differences of the
Melancholy.
Melancholy which causes the same; for a Delirium, or raving with depravation
of the Fancy, is termed Melancholy, which consists in a false Opinion
touching things past, present, and to come; which being manifold, it is defined
by vain fear, anxiety, or sorrow.

Again, Melancholy is either Primary, or Secondary: The Primary has its
Original in the brain; the Secondary springs from the Hypochondriacal parts,
whence it is termed Hypochondriaca Melancholia, which is either Humoral, or
Flatulent: the former is the worse of the two, and brings at last Madness, and
Out-ragiousness.

The Melancholy Ecstasie, is an excess of Melancholy, which is threefold: An
Ecstasie.
Ecstasie simply so called; an Ecstasie with silence; an Ecstasie with a
Frenzy: they are caused by black Choler, according to the diverse degrees of its
Adustion:

Foolishness with laughter is better and safer, than with seriousness and
fierceness. Raving without a Fever, is so much the better by how much the
Parts under the short Ribs, or the Brain, are less heated.

The Resting, and binding up of the Senses, is Natural Sleep: The breaking off,
or hindrance of sleep, is Watching: Either of which being out of measure, is
hurtful. Coma, or Dead sleep.
If Sleep be profound, it is called Coma, or Carus, Dead-sleep. If this Symptom
be mixed of Sleep and Watching, so that the Patient seems to incline to sleep,
with his Eyes shut, but is not able to sleep; it is termed Coma-Vigilans, the
Drowzy Watch. But if one that has a sleeping Disease upon him, every time he is
awakened, does rave, and talk idly, the Disease is called Typhomania.

And if a man lie stiff with his Eyes open, and when he comes to himself,
remembers The Nightmare.
what was done about him, it is termed Incubus, the Mare; which is wont to
happen in the right to such as lie upon their backs, or have glutted themselves
with feasting; and it seems that they are choked, by some Devil lying upon
them, or by some Theif that has laid hold upon them to Rob and Murder them.

The abolition of al sense and motion saving Respiration, is called Catalepsis
or Catalepsis.
Catoche: whereby a Man is Frozen as it were in that posture he was in when the
fit seized upon him. It springs from a Cold distemper of the Brain with Phlegm.

Carus is a deep Sleep, which comes upon Fevers and wounds of the temporal
Carus.
Muscles, or from an hot and moist distemper, or from much evaporation with
serosities, moistening the substance of the brain.

A Lethargy is an Imminution of sense and Motion and also of the Memory of A
Lethargy.
necessary things. It Springs from a Primary hot and moist distemper of the
brain, joined with a putrid Humor which provoks a Fever and cherishes and
keeps it up a long time. There is also Dotage adjoined. Touching this Disease
there is a saying of Hyppocrates in his Coicks Page 75. Which explaines all the
Symptoms thereof. The existence or particular Nature of the Lethargy and Coma,
consists in a looseness, as that of the Catalepsis in a Tension or bending.
Those that are in a Lethargick Sleep, at last become Apoplectick.

An Apoplexy does often times primarily and unexpectedly invade a Man, and
sometimes An Apoplexy.
it follows some other Sleepy disease. It is an Abolition of sense and motion
with respiration hurt, which at last brings snoring and suffocation, by reason
thick Phlegm flowing out of the Funnel and obstructing the Larynx or Wesand.

It is Caused by a Repletion of the Ventricles of the brain, either with a
pituitous or Wheyish Humor, or with blood, some small Artery of the Rete
Mirabile being broken in the Basis of the Brain, or blood being carried aloft
in a Plethorick body by the fourth Channel, rushes into the Ventricles.

If it be Simple and mere Whey, by strength of Nature out of the anterior
Ventricles, it slips into the fourth Ventricle, and from thence into the Spinal
Marrow and so Causes a Palsy.

If it be a Phlegmatic Humor stopped in the fourth Ventricle, or in the third,
it cannot be discussed, and the brain is overwhelmed thereby.

If the blood be shed out of the vessels, it suddenly suffocates.

In the Carus or other Sleepy Disease, only the foremost Ventricles of the
brain, are overwhelmed with Serosities, so that there is yet freedom for the
spirits to pass into all Parts of the body.

But in an Apoplexy, all the ventricles of the brain, but especially the
fourth, are obstructed, and unless the matter be discussed into the spinal
Marrow Death fallows unavoidably.

Fernelius avouches that an Apoplexy is bred by an Obstructiou of that Rete
Mirabile, the afflux of Arterial blood out of the Heart into the brain, being
thereby intercepted. Therefore they are termed Carotides, because being
obstructed they cause Carum or the Sleepy-Evil.

In the Apoplexy and Sleepy Diseases, besides general Medicines, as
blood-letting Cure of the Apoplexy, Carus and sucid like Diseases.
liberally twice or thrice repeted out of the Arm and foot; strong Purgation of
watery Humors, Cupping-Glasses fixed unto the shoulders and the hinder Part of
the Head, Topical Remedies, are not be neglected, which draw and Evacuate near
the Part affected; such as is the opening of the Veins under the Tongue and of
the external Jugular Vein, and likewise of the Temporal Artery: great
Vesicatories applied toward the top of the shoulders to the Cephalic Vein,
strong Medicines to provoke Sneezing, a Seton in the Neck, the string being
often drawn about and anointed with Oil of Vitriol, that it may bite the more
and attract: opening the Veins of the Nose after the manner used by the
Ancients, with a split Toothed Quil thrust up as far as the bottom of the
Colander: a sharp injection into the Nostrils Nostrils by a syring, and within
the furrows placed between the spaces of Os Vomeris: drawing out of the
Phlegmatic clammy matter which sticks in the Throat and stops the Larynx, but
thrusting a feather far into the throat: to which intent a strong vomit is good
to cast forth any Humor that has flowed into the Windpipe: neither must we
omit extreme hard rubbings with salt, and continual stirring of the body, if it
be possible.

All which remedies are to be applied with all possible speed one upon the Neck
of another, in an Apoplexy, because there is danger in delay. In Sleepy
Diseases which proceed slowly, and are caused by matter falling down from the
Parts above, they are more slowly administered, and without Precipitation.

You shall observe also, that a great Part of these Humors is gathered together
in the turnings and windings which are outmost in the upper substance of the
brain, which do either putrify there, or slip into the ventricles of the
brain: and yet these windings of the brain are not considered.

The Palsy is an Abolition of sense and motion, not in the whole body, as in
the Apoplexy, but only in the greatest Part of the body, or in half The Palsy.
thereof, which is termed Hemiplegia, or in one Part, which is called
Paraplegia.

Fernelius observes, that sense is taken away, the motion remaining unhurt: and
sometimes motion is taken away and the sense remains, because of the difference
of the Nerves of the brain and the Spinal Marrow. In the Palsy, the Nerves of
the Spinal Marrow are obstructed, but those of the brain, not: and therefore
many Parts remain unhurt, especially the internal.

Sometimes the Palsy happens without obstruction of the Nerves, because the
sostning and Humectation of the Nerves, brings a kind of Palsy.

In an imperfect Palsy when motion and sense are only dulled, the Disease is
Stupor.
termed Stupor or Nothrotis, which arises from a moist distemper of the brain.
A Stupidity or dullness of sense and motion in a Fever, is wont to foretell a
sleepy Disease to follow. When it comes alone without Fever, it foretells a
Palsy or an Apoplexy.

Vertigo, is a depravation of sense and motion, which makes the Patient think
Vertigo.
that al things turn round: it springs from a windy Humor, which being agitated
within the foremost Ventricles of the Brain, causes the foresaid Apprehension
of all things turning about. If it Causes a darkness before the Patients Eyes,
it is called Vertigo Tenebricosa or Scotodinos. It arises from the Brain or
from vapors ascending from the inferior Parts. That is worst which arises
primarily from the brain, and it is a forerunner of the Falling Sickness.

The convulsion is a violent pulling back of the Muscles toward their Head or
Convulsion.
beginning. It is threefold, Emprosthotonos, when the body is bent foreward;
Opisthotonos, when the body is drawn backward: and Tetanos when both sides
remain stif, by reason of an equal bowing or stretching of the Muscles on both
sides.

The Cause of a Convulsion, is either an obstruction of the Nerves, or their
being pricked by a sharp Humor, or a dry distemper, which dries the Nerves, and
so makes them stif as a dried Lurstring; this is incurable. In one word, all
Convulsions are said to arise either from too much emptyness, or over fullness.

An Epilepsie or Falling Sickness, is a Convulsion of the whole body, coming by
Falling Sickness.
fits, and hurting the Mind and senses. It is caused by an obstruction of the
foremost Ventricles of the brain, caused by an Abundance of sharp Humors,
either, Choleric or Phlegmatic. Either it comes from the brain Primarily
affected, or from some other Part sending Malignant Humors to the brain. If it
proceed from the brain Primarily affected, it is the more dangerous: if by
fault of the Spleen or some other Bowel venemously infected: the coming of the
fits may be foreseen and prevented. The former comes in a moment, the latter by
degrees.

Fernelius, besides the Humor which is the common Cause, accounts the peculiar
Cause to be a venomous Air or vapor, which is exceeding hurtful to the brain;
and therefore he conceives, it must be cured with specificks and appropriate
Remedies, as well as those vulgar ones.

Trembling is a depravation of Motion through weakness. It is caused by the
Trembling.
weakness of the motive faculty and the bodies heavyness. So that look how much
the motive faculty endeavors to lift up the Member, so much does the heavyness
of the said Member not sufficiently illustrated with spirits, press it down
again. And therefore it arises, from obstruction of the Nerves, or from their
being overmuch softened, or from some external Cause, as by anointing with
Quicksilver, or other Application thereof. There is a certain mixture of the
Convulsion and tremblings, which is called Spasmo-Tromois.

Shivering and shaking, are motions of the body, which happen in Fevers, and
Shivering and Shaking.
they are forerunners of the fits of Agues, or of the Exacerbations of Fevers.
They happen also, to such as have ripe Impostumes, when the Impostum is ready
to break. And therefore Hippocrates observes a threefold Shaking-fit; the one
feverish, the other Ulcerous, and the last Symptomatical.

Unquietness, Anxiety, tumbling and tossing of the body this way and that way,
Tumbling and Tossing.
called by the Greeks Ass; is a depravation of motion, which proceeds from a
misaffection of the Stomach, by reason of a sharp Humor Nettling and Stinging
the Nerves of the body, or the Membranes of the Back-bones Marrow. Which makes
that the Sick cannot rest in one place or posture; but are forced every foot to
change place and tumble here and there, and to change the posture of their
Bodies.

Night-walking, ought to be reckoned among the Symptoms of motion depraved:
Walking in ones Sleep.
because it is not preformed by Judgment and Reason, but by force of a Disease,
namely of sharp Fumes which compel the Sick person or the healthy to rise up
and walk in their Sleep.

I proceed to the Irregularity of the Excrements. The proper excretion of the
Symptoms of things voided forth.
brain, is either an Exhalation of a thin Vapor by the seames of the Scul or
the pores of the Skin, or it is an Efflux of a thick Humor by the Nostrils and
Palate of the Mouth. The Disproportion of this Excretion consists either in
excess ot defect. That in defect has no Name, but it degenerates into a Cause
of Diseases of the brain, of which we have already spoken.

The disproportion in Excess is various, either when blood does immoderatly
Nose bleeding.
flow from the Nose, or by drops. Both which Symptoms are Malignant. The
former decaies the bodies strength, by reason of the loss of blood and Spirits,
the latter betokens a repletion of the Head, and a Vain endeavor of oppressed
Nature, And therefore drops of Blood coming from the Nose, is bad in a Vaporous
Fever. both as a Cause, and as a Sign.

The disproportion in Excretion of a serous and Phlegmatic Humor, is manyfold.
Catarrhs.
Their general Name is a Catarrh, which is a distillation of Humor from the
Head into the Inferior Parts, from which Parts it receives diverse Appellations.
If it fall into the Nostrils, it is called Coryza or Gravedo; if into the Throat
Branchos, Hoarsness; if into the Mouth and Palate Ptyelismos, or the Spawle.
And these three sorts of Catarrhs, are vulgarly comprehended under the Name of
Rheum.

A Catarrh falling upon the outward Parts of the body is named Rheumatismus
Rheumatismus
or Rheumaticus affectus, the Rheumatick Pains. If it fall upon the Joints it
resembles the Gout, save that it comes not by fits: wherefore an Eunuch may
suffer upon the Rheumatick pains, but not the true Gout. See Galens Comment
upon that Aphorism. Boys and Eunuchs are not troubled with the Gout.

Galen makes frequent mention of the Rheumatick Disease, which was common at
Rome, as it is with us in Paris: in his Second Book to Glauco: in his Book of
Blood-letting, against Erasistratus etc. This Disease he cured by liberal
Bloodletting. It is described by Hippocrates, in his Book of the internal
Diseases, under the Name of a Joynt-pain, which is wont to trouble young People
more than Aged.

The other differences of Catarhs with Reference to the diversity of Parts on
which they fall, are Vain. It suffices to know, that al Fluxions upon internal
Parts, are called likewise Rheums.

The Cause of a Catarrh or Flux of Rheum, is a cold and moist distemper, or an
hot distemper with an abundance of Humors working in the Vessels, or without.
Galen acknowledges both these Causes, in his Comment upon the 24. Aphor. Of the
third Book.

The latter Physicians, following the Doctrine of the Arabians will have the
Humor which Causes the Catarrh, to be bred in the Head, only without the
Vessels, by reason of Vapors ascending.

Fernelius contends that the Conjunct Cause of a Catarrh, is a serous matter,
collected under the Skin of the Head, without the Vessels: and that the
Antecedent Cause, is an Humor shut up in the Veins. If you desire to know more
of this subject, Read Fernelius, who will give you abundant satisfaction.

Chap. 3. Of the Eyes.
BEcause the Eye and the Ear may be demonstrated without meddling to The Eyes.
dissect the Face; I will dispatch these Parts, before I proceed unto the
Countenance.

The Eye, the Instrument of the Sight, is the principal Part of the face,
placed Scituations.
in the Forepart of the Head, to direct the Actions of the body, because al
actions are directed forwards, by reason of the Situation of the Hands. Seeing
it is an Parts.
Organical Part, made up of many Similar Parts; some of those Parts are
external and some internal. The external are the T. 19. f. 1.
Eyelids, which are the Coverings of the The Eyelids.
Eyes, wherewith they are covered, shut and opened. And therefore each Eyelid
is movable, howbeit the motion is more evident in the upper Eyelids, and is
performed by help of Muscles, of which we shall treat in our fifth Book
containing the History of Muscles. From whence the Reader may fetch what does
appertain to the present occasion.

The Eyelid is made up, of the Skin, a Membrane and muscles. The Membrane Its
Membrane.
stretched out under the Skin, it produced from the Pericranium, which
descending by the length of the Forehead unto the Eyes, is an underwofe for the
Eyebrows, withal makes the conjunctive Coat of the Eye, which being fixed to
the Brain of the Socket, detaines and binds the Eye in its Hole or Cavity.

The Extremities of all the Eyelids, are terminated with a Cartilaginous or
Tarsus.
Gristle edging, which is called f. 1. C C.
Tarsus, whereupon one by one in a row are fastened the f. 1. beneath B.
Hairs of the Eyelids; which are born with us, and look how long they are at
our Birth, the same length they keep, during our whole life.

They seldom falt of by reason of Sickness, unless in a Malignant Whores-Pocks,
Cilia.
which mows down and makes wast of all the Hairs of the Body. These Hairs of the
Eyelids are termed Cilia.

The angular Extremities of the Eyelids meeting together, are termed Anguli,
Corners.
the corners of the Eyes. The one is f. 1. by D.
greater, toward the Nose; the other is f. 1. E.
lesser, toward the Temples.

In the Eyelids by the greater Corners are observed two little f. 1. d d.
holes, which are Tear-Spouts.
termed Puncta Lachry malia, or the Tear-Spouts, because the superfluous
Humidities of the Eyes, or tears, do flow thither and Issue out of those Holes;
which Humidites to receive, the Glandula Lachrymalis or T. 19. f. 1. D.
Tear-Kernel is ordained, being thrust into the little perforated bone, that
the Humor might rather distill through this Hole into the Nostrils, than fall out
upon the external Parts.

The upper Eyelid has a Muscle that lifts it up termed therefore f. 1. A A.
Levator or Muscles.
the Lifter, which arises from the bottom of the Orbita or Socket and being
spread out upon the Muscle which lifts up the Eye, it is f. 1. B.
widened into an Eyelid, that when the Eye is lift up the Eyelid may therewith
be raised.

The Musculus latus, or broad Muscle is common to the two Eyelids; which being
Circularly derived from the bony brim of the Socket, is spread out through both
the Eyelids, that it may serve to shut them both: and because it reaches in
the upper Part as far as the Eye-brow it draws that likewise down, in a strong
and close shutting of the Eyelids. Unles any man will contend, that there is a
distinct Muscle for that use.

Now the Eye-brow is a Fleshy Hillock, adorned with Hairs, which serves for a
Eye-brow.
Penthouse to overshadow the Eyes; it is depressed by the Orbicular Muscle of
the Eyelids, and lifted up, by the frontal Muscle.

These things being observed, the Eyelids are cut away, and the Circular
adhesion Parts of the Eye. Fat
of the Conjunctive Coat unto the Eye; that the Eye may de viewed, which is
compact and made into a round bal or Globe of the fat which is placed f. 2. A
A.
round about the same, to stop up the chinks and to make it more movable; and
of six Muscles for motion; and of Coats, Humors, Veins, Arteries and Nerves.

Before the Fat be removed, the two Glandules or Kernels are to be considered
in Kernels.
their Situation, of which one is of the greatest moment, Viz. The Lachrymal
or f. 1. D.
Tear-Kernel; whose substance you shall observe to be Fleshy, soft and small; and
its Situation to be within a little bone, beneath the same.

Then you shall look out the other Kernel which is wholly unlik the former,
placed in the other f. 1. E.
Corner; which is flat, White, and like other Kernels.

The Fat being carefully taken away, the T. 19. f. 2. B B B.
six Muscles present themselves; in the investigation whereof, we must begin at
the f. 3. F. f. 4. F.
Trochleator, or the greater Oblique Muscle, Situate at the greater f. 1. by
D.
Corner; and there we must be careful to preserve the f. 3. G.
pulley, being a little strong Gristle fastened to the bone, beneath and close
by the Caruncula Lachrymalis or f. 1. D.
Tear-spout; through which Gristle (like a Rope through a Pulley) the round
Tendon of the Trochleator is drawn, and inserted into the upper Part of the Eye.

The other, Obliquus f. 3. and 4. E.
Minor, must be sought for in the inferior Part of the Socket, being rould back
under the Eye, it is terminated by the lesser f. 1. E.
Corner. The other four, are right Muscles, whereof one f. 3. 4, 5. A.
lifts up, and its opposite f. 3. 4, 5. B.
draws down; the remaining two draw toward the f. 3. 4, 5. C. D.
Sides. They al take their original from the Cavity of the Socket, by the hole
of the Optic Nerve, and each one is produced right forewards to the
Conjunctiva.

These things being observed, the Eye must be pulled out, that the inward
structure True Coats.
thereof may be made to appear: and in the first place you shall observe two
true Coats of the Eyes, which are orbicular as the Eye it self: the rest are
imperfect coats: and before you cut asunder the Cornea or Horny-Coat, you shall
take away the Nervous productions of the Muscles of the Eye, which some would
have to be a f. 5. a a a a.
Coat, which is absurd.

You shall observe that the Cornea or f. 6. A A. B B.
Horny Coat is transparent before, to serve ^ Cornea.
the sight, but behind and on the sides, it is dark.

Its thick f. 8. C C C.
Substance, is divided into little Skins, especially on the fore-side; when it
is cut, presently the watery f. 9. D D.
Humor Runs out, which is also found Circumfused about the Wea Tunica, or
Grape-Skin q Coat, if the Cornea be divided in the hinder Part: this Humor
cannot be stopped, because it presently Occurs, fllowing out like Water. l f.
2. C C.
p f. 7. A A. C C.


Afterward you shall see the T. 19. f. 7. A. C C. f. 8. B B B.
Wea or Grape-Skin Coat, and its open hole, 2 Wea. Pupilla. Iris.
which makes the f. 7. a.
Pupilla or sight of the Eye; the external Face or Circle of the Pupilla is
termed f. 5. b b.
Iris, or the Rainbow. The Circumference of the Pupilla is adorned with small
threads or little Fibers extended upon the Chrystalline Humor, which they retain
in its Situation.

The Pupilla, in Catts, is manifestly moved, in Men it is unmovable, unless it
be somewhat slackened and straightened, by the Access and Recess of some
extraordinary light.

These things being observed, pour out the Humors, and you shall find the f. 9.
A.
Christallin Humor overwhelmed in the Vitreous f. 9. C C.
Humor, and then the interior f. 7. C C.
Superficies of the Wea Tunica will appear black, and clean; in Brute Beasts
it is varigated, beingtainted with Green Black and Sky-Color. Wherefore, when
you are to demonstrate the Eye, you shall have an Ox and a Sheeps-Eye in
readyness, that you may compare them with the Eyes of Mankind.

In the hinder Part of the Wea you shall see the Optic f. 3. I I. f. 4. K. f.
6. C. f. 8. D.
Nerve fastened, and the Marrow thereof piercing within that Coat.

There are three Humors contained in the Eye; the first is the f. 9. D D.
watery Humor, The three Humors of the Eyes. The Watery Chystallin.
already run out, there remain two fastened together, the Chrystallin and the
Vitreous. The Crystal is like a f. 9. A.
Vetch, transparent, and being placed upon letters in a Book, it makes them
show larger, as a spectacle is wont to do. There is a Membrane attributed
thereunto, termed f. 9. within A. B. a Circle
Chrystalloides. Hippocrates says that in living Creatures it Runs like Water,
or is more liquid at least.

The Christallin Humor being pulled out, there remains the m Vitreous Humor,
The Glassie.
being compacted and not running about, by means of the Reticularis Tunica, or
f. 8. A A.
Net-like Coat Interwoven: which being T. 19. f. 8. a a.
cut asunder, by frequent chopping of the Penknife thereupon, it becomes
Liquid and runs about, the threddy Fibers being cut in sunder.

The Veins and Arteries which accompany the Optic Nerve unto the Eye, are
Their Vessels.
more easily observed within the Brain, than in the Eye after it is pulled out.

Neither is the motive Nerve so easily detected being dispersed among the
Muscles, as it is within the Brain, while you observe its progress, even to the
very Eye-hole. d f. 7. B B. f. 9. B B.


The Medicinal Consideration.
Although the Eye be but a small Part of the body, yet is there no Part aflicted
There are diverse Diseases ^e Eyes.
and destroyed with more Diseases. And therefore the ancient Physicians, when
they had diligently examined the structure thereof, they observed so many and
so diverse disorders in its Parts, as did amount to about one hundred and
twenty, partly Diseases, and partly Symptoms, and distinguished them by their
Proper Names; which in other Parts they did not do. And Rome and Alexandria had
Physicians that attended only the Cure of the Eyes. In imitation of them I
shall Of which some are general of the whole Eye. a^
declare the disposition against Nature happening to the Eyes. And because most
of the Names are Greek, few of them Latin, and our Chyrurgeons use them: after
the example of Leonardus Fuchsius in his Medicinal Institutions, I will retain
and use them as Latin Names.

An Arabian Physician, Haly by Name, has writ a Book by it self of Diseases of
the Eyes: and there is a considerable French Book of the same Argument written
by Jacobus Guillemeau the Kings Chyrurgeon: unto which you may add if you
please the Author of Medicinal Definitions: the Book of Galen touching the
differences and Causes of Symptoms; and a bastard Book de Oculis attributed to
him.

The Eye therefore is afflicted either by being increased, or diminished in its
Diseases of Magnitude.
Quantity.

The Eye is diminished, when it consumes for want of nourishment: its Magnitude
is augmented when it swells without the Eye-hole or Socket.

Its Situation is changed, when it falls without the Eye-hole, which Disease is
Of Situation.
termed Ecpiesmos: or if it turn to one side or another, as in Squint-Eyed
People, and in him that saw through his nostrils and was therefore called
Rhinoptis.

There ought to be two Eyes: and therefore he that wants one, is diseased in
Number.
Number, and is called Monoculus.

Furthermore the Eye is troubled by an hot and a cold Distemper and by
inflammation Distemper etc.
of the whole body, which by putrefaction of the Humors is turned into an
Impostume. It is sometimes Ulcerated, whence the Eye becomes spoiled and the
sight diminished.

And in case an Inflammation of the whole Eye turn to Suppuration, which is
called Hypopyon, and transparent matter be collected under the Cornea Tunica,
showing that the other Humors are not putrified, there is hopes the Patient may
recover sight, the quittor being let out, by pricking the Cornea: which is
happily practiced at Paris; and so with the Quittor a watery Humor is let out,
as in the couching of a Cataract.

Besides these general Diseases, all the Parts whereof the Eye is made up, have
^ Special Diseases of other Parts.
their Diseases and Symptoms, which I will particularly and briefly explain,
beginning at the Eyelids.

Eyelids Diseases. as Emphysema. Hydatis.

A moist distemper of the Eyelids with wind, or a flatulent Spirit, is called
Emphysema. With much Wheyish Humors, its termed Hydatis, and by Celsus Vesica,
and Aquula, which does so load and depress the upper Eyelid, that it cannot be
lifted up.

An hot distemper of the Eyelid, Joined with a thick Humor, is called
Sclerophthalmia, Sclerophthalmia. Xerophthalmia. Psorophthalima
Hard-eyedness.

A dry distemper without Humors, is Xerophthalmia: if it cause Itching,
Psorophthalmia. Unto which may be referred the Phthiriasis, or Lowsie-Evil of
the Eye lid.

If the said said hot and dry distemper Joined with a sharp Humor, do cause
Redness, pain, and falling of the Hairs, it is called Ptilosis, Milphosis, or
Madarrhosis. Ptilosis


If it make the Inside of the Eyelid rough its called, Tracoma: which if it be
Tracoma Sycosis. Tulosis. Crithe Chalasion^
great, so as to resemble the small Seeds that are in Figs, its called Sycosis; if
it be hard and of long Continuance, its Name is Tulosis.

A little Tumor upon the upper Eyelid springing from a thick Homor, is called
Crithe, the Barly-Corn. If it be greater and movable, because of its likeness
to hail, it called Chalasion, the Hail-Stone.

A Disease of the Eyelids in Contiguity is, when the Eyelids stick unto the
Anchiloblepharon.
Coat of the Eye, or to one another, which Disease is called Anchiloblepharon:
the cause whereof is an exulceration of the Coat or the Eyes, or the Eye Lids:
the exulceration being caused by an hot and dry distemper, with a sharp Humor.

Lagophthalmia is a Convulsion of the upper Eyelid, or a drawing back thereof
Lagophthalmia Ippos.
by reason of a Cicatrice or some seam. Ippos is the trembling of the said
Eyelid: both these Symptoms come by Consent of the Brain affected and
therefore they are dangerous.

Ectropion, Inversion, is a Disease of the lower Eyelid in Situation of
Figure: Ectropion.
it is caused by a Scar without, or by an excrescence of internal Flesh.

Chalasis, or the loolness of the Eyelid, is caused either by a Palsy,
through Chalasis.
consent with the Nerves of the Brain, or by a moist distemper of the Eyelid:
in both cases the Hairs are turned inwards.

The generation of the Hairs of the Eyelids being depraved, is called
Trichiasis, and Trichiasis. Dystichiasis.
it is twofold: when more are bredthan ordinary, its called Dystichiasis, when
there is a row of Hairs more than usual. But when the natural Hairs are only
longer and inverted, it is caled Phalangosis: in both these, the Hairs prick the
Eyes: it is caused Phalangosis.
by a moist distemper of the EyeLids, with much Humor which is not sharp.

Tear-Kernels Diseases.
The Caruncle or little bit of Flesh in the greater corner of the Eye, makes a
Tumor Euchantis.
against Nature, which is called Euchantis: the Diminution of the said Caruncle
is termed Rhyas, which causes a dropping of moisture from the Rhyas.
Eye.

Near the said Caruncle and the Nose, there breeds an Impostum through
Inflammation, which is called Anchylops: which being broken and turned into a
Fistula is Anchylops Aegylops.
termed Aegylops. The Diseases of the Muscles of the Eyes, as distempers,
Laxity and solution of Continuity, are distinguished by the Names of the
Respective Symptoms.

Diseases of the Tunica Conjunctiva.
The hot distemper of the Conjunctive Coat with Humor as blood or Choler, if it
be light and proceeding from an external cause, as the wind or dust, or a blow,
is Taraxis.
called Taraxis.

But if it spring from an internal cause as a Plethora or Cacochymia, it is
termed Opththalmia. When it is but beginning, it is called Epiphora; which is a
Name Ophthalmia. Epiphora
common to an Inflammation and fluxion.

And if the Inflammation be very great, so that it hinders the coming together
of the Eyelids, and spoils their Evenness, so that the white of the Eye
becomes higher than the Iris and Pupilla, it is called Chemosis, as much as to
say Chemosis. Hyposphagma
Hiatus.

Hyposphagma is a collection of Blood under the Adnata Tunica, or an effusion
of blood out of the Capillary Veins into the Adnata, proceeding from a blow or
bruise. There is a Disease of Number, in the Tunica Adnata, called Pterygium:
Pterygium
and it is a certain Membranons Eminency reaching from the greater corner of
the Eye to the Pupilla; or a certain hard knob of the Adnata it self: both
springing from a moist distemper Joined with a clammy Humor. Phlyctena.


Phlyctena, is a pustle or small Tumor of the Adnata or the neighboring Cornea,
proceeding from a thick and sharp Tumor, so that it terminates in an Ulcer.
Botrion. Epicauma.


And if it be hollow, it is called Botrion, or Fossula; if it be become crusty
it is named Epicauma. After the Ulcer follows a Scar, which is the Hardness and
thickness of a Spermatick Part springing from a wound or Ulcer.

Diseases of the Cornea Tunica.
The Ulcers and Scars of the Cornea Tunica, have a great resemblance with the
Cheloma.
Diseases of the Adnata, in regard of neighborhood: yet are they distinguished,
because the Ulcers and Scars in the black of the Eye, that is, in the
transparent Part of the Cornea, belong only to the Cornea: such as is the
Cheloma, which is a broad Ulcer of the Cornea, about the Iris.

Argemon, is a round Whitish Ulcer of the Cornea toward the Circle of the
Argemon.
Iris.

Scars in the Black of the Eye, or in the Transparent Part of the Cornea, do
differ Albugo.
in the degrees of more or less. The greater Scar of the Cornea, about the Iris
or Pupilla, because of its whiteness is called Leucoma and Albugo: if it be
small it is termed Nephelion or Nebula, the Cloud: if the Scar be thin, its
called Nebula. Caligo.
Achlys, Caligo, a Mist or Darkness.

Diseases of the Uvea Tunica.
The rupture and Exulceration of the Cornea, is attended by a Disease of the
Proptosis.
Wea in Situation, which is called Proptosis, Procidentia, when the Wea
sticks out above the Cornea.

If the Extuberance of the Wea be small, its called Myocephalon or the
Flie-Head, Myocephalon Staphyloma Melon Clavus.
because it resembles the Head of a Fly: if it be great, it is termed
Staphyloma, because it resembles a Grap-Stone, or Melon as being like an Apple.
If their be an inveterate Ulcer of the Cornea through which the Wea falls out,
its called Elos, Clavus, the Nail.

The Ulcers of the Cornea and Adnata, if they be Malignant are termed
Carcinomata.

Diseases of the Pupilla.
The hole of the Wea is termed Pupilla the Apple of the Eye. Between the
Pupilla and Cornea there is a space, full of Spirit and Watery Humor.

There is a double Disease of that space: Zinifisis, springing from a dry
distemper, Zinifisis.
which consumes the Watery Humor and Dissipates the Spirit; or from a wound,
which lets out the Watery Humor, and suffers the Spirit to vanish and reek away.

The other Disease of the space, is an Obstruction from a corrupted Phlegmatic
or purulent Humor. If it proceed of a purulent Humor or Quittor, it is called
Hypopium. Suffusio.
Hypopium: if the Obstruction be caused by Phlegm, its termed Hypochyma
Suffusio. But Hypopium follows an Inflammation, and Hypochyma is caused for the
most Part by a Congestion or Concretion of a thick Humor: if the Disease be
proper or primary, and do not arise by consent from the Stomath, sending Vapors
up into the Eye.

Fernelius saw a thick and perfect Suffusion bred in one days time; for if a
thick Humor suddenly falling into the Optic Nerve do blind a man in a moment:
why may not the same Humor falling lower into the Pupilla, breed a sudden and
perfect Suffusion?

The narrowness of the Pupilla, springs either from the first formation in the
Corrugatio.
Womb; or from a dry distemper, and then it is called Phthisis or Corrugatio.

Galen writes that a small Pupilla from from ones Birth is occasion of a very
sharp sight but when it happnes a whil after, it is bad. In his first Book of the
Causes of Symptoms. Chap. 2.

The Dilatation of the Pupilla is called Mydriasis or Platu-Corie. It springs
Mydriasis.
from a moist distemper, or from a Rupture, or by breach of Continuity caused
by a blow.

Diseases of the Chrystallin and Glassie Humor.
Diseases of the Vitreous and Chrystallin Humors, are either a distemper simple
Distemper
or with Humors conjoined; or such as happen in the consistence of the said
Humors, viz. Thickness and hardness. The distemper of the Humors and Coats of
the Eye, if it happen without a Tumor or an Ulcer, is commonly attributed to
the weakness of the Faculty, and the quality and quantity of the spirits being
misaffected: but neither of these is a Disease; they are rather effects of a
Disease: for what is the weakness of a faculty other than Actio laesa, the
action hurt.

Thickness of the Spirits is caused by a cold and moist distemperature, either
proper Thinness of the Spirits. Their Paucity
to the Eye, or by consent with the brain or some inferior Parts.

Paucity of Spirits comes from a dry distemper, either of the Eye or the brain:
the Cause and fomenter of which distemper may be a Choleric Humor not purged
out of the body, being the cause and Effect of a distempered Liver.

The thickness and hardness of the Chrystallip Humor is properly termed
Glaucosis Glaucoma
or Glaucoma, because the color thereof resembles that of an Owls Eyes: it
proceeds from a cold and dry distemper, and is therefore familiar to aged
Persons.

The Disease of the Chrystalline Humor in respect of its Situation, has no
name, but if it be somewhat higher and flatter than ordinary, it produces a
Symptom, whereby all things appear double.

The watery Humor may run out, by a prick in the Eye, but it is bred again in
Running out of the watery Humor. Thickness of the Visive spirit.
Children, as Galen saw by experience, and as we may observe in Chickens.

The Visive or seeing Spirit implanted in the Eye, may become thick, and
surround the Chrystalline Humor with darkness and obscurity: as the implanted
Hearing-Spirit of the Ear, being rendered thick, does cause deafness or
thickness of Hearing.

Diseases of the Optic Nerve.
The Optic Nerve may be troubled with any kind of distemper, and with solution
Obstruction
of continuity; but the proper and usual Disease thereof, is Obstruction, which
is known by a sudden blindness, the other Parts of the Eye being al sound:
which made the Neotericks call this Disease Gutta Serena, and sometimes
Amaurosis. Amaurosis


Diseases and Symptoms of the Sight.
Sight abolished is called Caecitas Blindness: when it is diminished only, it is
Caecitas Amblyopia Myopsis Nyctalops
termed Amblyopia, thick sightedness: and it is accounted twofold Myopsis and
Nyctalops: In the former the Patient is Pore-blind, and is fain to look close
to what he would discern and to hold his Eyelids almost shut together. In the
latter, the Patient can see only by day, but very little or nothing at al by
night, or very obscurly: the other differences of sight diminished are
comprehended under the general name of Amblyopia.

Sight depraved, is a falls perception of things before the Eyes: its termed
Parorasis Hallucination
or Hallucination.

The Causes of these Symptoms, are no other than those Diseases of the Eyes,
Causes of blindness. of Anchylo-Blepharon.
which we have before recounted. For the Cause of blindness is, the Obstruction
of the Optic Nerve, Glaucoma, Leucoma, Hypopion, Hypochyma, Proptosis, the
larger Mydriasis, a Pterygium or Film covering the whole sight of the Eye,
Anchylo-Blepharon or Gluing together of the Eyelids.

Imminution or Impairing of the sight, is caused by the other Diseases of the
Eyelids. As by a thin Scar of the Cornea, called Nephelion and Achlys; and by
a Leucoma and a small Mydriasis, which touches but Part of the Sight. Myopsis
Nyct^uopsis


Dry distemper of the Humors of the Eyes cause Myopsis: the over Humidity and
thickness of the said Humors, makes a Man that he cannot see in the Night.

The Causes of sight depraved is an Hypopion beginning; or an Hypochyma,
Namely, when the Humor is not yet united and grown together, so that the visive
Spirit can pass too and fro between the Parts of the Humor through the empty
spaces: whence it is that some see flies as it were, and certain dark bodies,
move before their Eyes.

When true objects presented to the Eyes, have a falls Appearance, the sight is
Hallucination Amalops
depraved, and termed Amalops: so al things appear Yellow, to such as have the
Jaundice.

But that kind of Symptom happens, when the Cornea which is spread out before
the sight of the Eye, is infected with Blood or Choler.

The Animal action of the Eye is hurt sometimes, as Feeling and Motion: the Eyes
pain
Feeling of the Eye is hurt by extreme Pain thereof, which notwithstanding,
according to the Judgment of Celsus, remains within the Eyes, and draws not the
Brain into consent, as Pain of the Ears is wont to do. The Causes of al Pains
in the Eyes, is a distemper, or Solution of Unity.

The hurting of the Eyes Motion, is either a Palsy, Convulsion, or Trembling.
Palsy Convulsion Trembling
In the Palsy and Convulsion, the Eyes become stif and fixed: in that sort of
Convulsion called Tetanus, they are unstable, as in the Trembling.

The Natural Action of the Eyes, is likewise hurt, as Nutrition.

To the Jrregularity of the Excrements of the Eyes, does belong the Involuntary
shedding of Tears. Its caused by a moist or cold distemper of the Eyes, or from
Flowing out of tears.
pricking by a sharp Humor, or some external Cause; or from the Erosion of that
same Caruncle, which is in the greater corner of the Eye.

Hereunto likewise belongs the filth of the Eyes, which is by the Greeks called
Laeimai
Laeimai: they are caused by an extreme distemper of the Eye, which makes a
dissolution or melting down of matter.

The simple insirmities of the Eyes, are the spotts and Scars of the
Conjunctive Spots
and Horny Coats, which are both Diseases and Symptoms.

The Duskynes and obscurity of the Eyes, is when the Bal of the Eye, does not
Obscurity
represent any outward object to him that looks upon it; which is a token of
Death in an Acute Fever.

Chap. 4. Of the Ear.
THe Ear, being the Instrument of hearing, is divided, into the T. 20. f. 1.
and 2.
External The Ears Parts
Part, broad and gristly, and the f. 3 4. etc.
Internal, which lies hid in the Os petrosum.

The external Part is termed f. 1. and 2.
Auricula, made up of a f. 2. B B.
Gristle, which is covered with a Skin full of f. 2. A A.
Folds, and made hollow, with diverse f. 1. A A. B B.
windings; with an hole f. 1. G G.
through the same placed upon the side of the Head, just against the hole of
Windings
f. 3. A.
Os Petrosum.

It is more beautyful, when small: for a great pair of Asses Ears are uncomly.

The Ear was placed as it is, for the Convenience of hearing: and if the
Situation of the Ear inverted would not have been deformed, it had been more
commodious for hearing, then placed as it is upright and Joined to the Temporal
Bone. For we see such as are thick of hearing, put the hollow of their hand
behind their Ear, that they may hear the better.

In the Ear you shall observe two Parts; one is called f. 1. G.
Tragus, and Tragus Antitragus
the other f. 1. D.
Antitragus the Names of the other Particles of the Ear, are useless.

In the Auricula is contained the first passage, or Hole of the Ear, and
reaches Hole of the Ear
as far as the f. 4. B B.
Tympanum or Drum: its entrance is fenced with Hairs, to keep out dust and
crawling Bugs, that might otherwise enter in. There is T. 20. f. 3. C.
collected, the Ear-Wax
Choleric Excrement of the Ear, called Ear-Wax, which Bird-Limes and intangles
any Dust or creeping thing that would pass that way. Its termed Marmoratum.

The internal Ear Concluded in the Os Petrosum, is altogether boney, and
divided Concha
into three Cavities. The first Cavity is the f. 6. B. C. f. 7. within A. B.
Concha: In the extremity of the first f. 4. B B. f. 5. B.
hole is the Membrane streched out, which terminates upon the f. 3 B. f. 4. A
A. etc.
Drum: it has a string that runs cross it, as we see the Military Drums have.
The Drum
l f. 3. B. f. 4. A. etc.


Furthermore, we observe three littel Bones, the f. 4. G. f. 5. E. f. 7. A.
Maller, the f. 7. B.
Anvil, and the f. 7. C.
Stirrup: Four little Bones.
others ad a f. 7. D.
fourth, which is a little Scal of a bone, such as is found in the Carotick
Artery near the Os Sphenoides. But this is vain and unuseful.

Fortunatus Plempius places another Membrane at the other extremity of the
Concha, but how or where it is extended, he does not explain: whether at the
two petty windores, whereof the one is the entrance of the labyrinth and the
other of the Cochlea, or elsewhere? It is a most hard piece of Service to find
out and demonstrate the internal structure of the Ear.

In the Skuls of T. 8. f. 5. 6, 7, 8.
Infants, and in a Calves-Head, it is more easily observed, by lifting up with
a Pen-Knifes Edge that same portion of T. 20. f. 10. B B.
Os Petrosum, which within the Scul reaches unto the Basis of the Brain.

In the Concha you shall observe on the left side an Hole, which passes into the
winding Cavity of the Apophysis Mastoides, or Teat-like Production.

The Auditory T. 8. f. 1. F F. f. 3. R* R. T. 20. f. 12. A A. B B.
Nerve, being f. 10. A A.
drawn through the f. 7. D D. f. 9. A. f. 11. B D.
Cochlea, when it is come to The Nerve
the Concha, it slips through an hole or f. 8. A. B B.
Channel, which opens on the right side of the Concha, into the Palate, by the
Process which is termed Apophysis Pterygoidea.

And this is the natural structure of the internal Ear; for the finding out
whereof we are obliged to Fallopius, after Carpus, who discovered those little
bones the the Hammer and the Anvil. The third, namely, the Stirrup, Philippus
Ingrassias brags to have himself first observed.

In living-Creatures, there is an inbred and implanted Air in the Cavities of
the Implanted Air
Ears, as there is a visive Spirit in the Eye, shut up within the Cornea Tunica.

The Medicinal Consideration.
The Gristle of the external Ear if troubled with Pustles or Pushes, is
confused, Diseases of the ^ar.
Swells, is inflamed and exulcerated. By cold it contracts Sphacelation, is
contracted and djes do what a Man can: and its sometimes cut of both in sick and
in sound Persons. Whence the Greek phrazes Colo^oma and Acrotiriasmenoi, for
persons that are Crop-Eard.

The greatness of the external Ear, though it be ill favored, cannot be
helped. Parotis what it is.
The Swelling and Inflammation of the Kernels which are beside the Ears, is
termed Parotis, which in regard or the narrowness of the place and nearness to
the brain, is not very safe, happening upon an acute fever, though it have the
name of Dioscouros or Castor and Pollux, because of its good token, for such it
gives when it is critical; proceeding from the strength of Nature, and attended
with light somness of the Patient following the same. In Children and young
People a Parotis does many times break forth, void of danger; caused by the
over great moisture of their brains.

In the hollow behind the Ear; according to the advice of Fernelius, a Caustic
must be applied, in Diseases of the Ears and of the Eyes.

The first Auditory passage of the Ear, because it is fleshy is obstructed by a
Tumor, Of the Auditory passage.
by a Caruncle or bit of Flesh growing up, or by quittor Issuing out, or by
Fi^^h, or somewhat from without. It is inflamed, and impostumated, and
Exulcerated either of it self, or by means of some eating Medicine poured into
the Ear: or by a Choleric Humor: wherefore Hippocrates says that when Deaf
persons fall into Choleric Loosnesses, their deafness is lessened, or taken
away: and when their looseness is stopped, their deafness returns.

This passage is terminated inwardly by the Drum, which either of it self and
primarily, or secondarily and by accident through consent of the Bowels, but
especially through fault of the Head, is troubled with a very painful and
dangerous Inflammation, which draws the brain into Sympathy.

The internal Cavities, because they have no Periostium, are not pained, unless
Of the inner Cavities. Of the Drum
the Auditory Nerve be affected, whose offspring makes the Drum: from its
inflammation proceeds an Impostum and from that an Ulcer: which tears asunder
the Drum.

It is broken, not only by an Ulcer, but also by a blow and a vehement sound;
whence it is that those who dwell by the Falls of the River Nilus, are al deaf,
by reason of Lovd roaring and Headlong fall of the flowing Water.

Also the looseness and over great moisture of the Drum is to be considered,
because it may Cause Deafness.

The proper Symptoms of the Ear, are those which belong to the hurts of
hearing, Symptoms of the Action burt. Deafness.
and the Irregularity of Excrements.

The hea^ing is hurt in a threefold Manner. When it is abolished, it is called
Surdita^, Deafness: which if it come from the Womb and is born with the
Patient, it is incurable: if it come by accident, it may be curable.

Hearing diminished is called Barucoia, thickness of hearing. Thickness of
Hearing. Noise in the Ears. Their Cause


Hearing depraved consists in a noise and ringings or buzzings in the Ear; it is
called Paracousis.

The Causes of Deafness and Thickness of Hearing are the same, save that they
differ in Intension and Remission: and therefore the foresaid Diseases of the
Auditory passage and of the Drum may cause these Symptoms.

Paracousis or Noise in the Ears springs from a distemper of the drum, being
more moist or more dry than is fitting: which, as it causes a more exquisite
sense than ordinary, so also does it cause a ringing in the Ear, as being
affected with the very lightest motion of the internal implanted, or external
Air, of while the spirits do continually flow into the Ears; which cannot be
contained in so close a Room* of some Spirit may stir it self within the
Dug-like Cavity.

Several sounds are imagined in the Ears according to the various motion and
mode of the flatulent Spirit which causes the same. So that if it be thick,
whisperings are heard and Hummings* if thin, Hissings: and when it moves by
fits and starts, it presents a tinkling, as it were of bells.

Sometimes noises are imagined without any fault of the internal Ear, by
consent of the Head, whiles the internal and external Arteries being hotter
than ordinary, do beat more violently than they are wont to do, and do make a
great sound in the Ears, if the Patient do lie upon one of them.

The differences and Causes of this seeming Noise in the Ears, are neatly
expressed by Fernelius in his Pathologia.

In natural Deafness, springing from mis-formation in the Womb, and not from
Their Cn^^
any of the Causes aforesaid: whether may we experiment that which fell out
unexpectedly well to a certain Deaf man: who thrusting an Ear-Picker very far
into his Ear, rent the Drum and Break asunder the small bones and afterward,
attained hearing?

Whether in a ringing of the Ear may the teat like Process be perforated, to
let out the Spirits which make a tumult in that Cavity?

Whether does the thickness of the Tympanum hinder Transpiration? so that the
flatulent Spirits cannot break out? whether or no will it avail to rub the
extremity of the Auditory Channel, behind the Grinding-Teeth, with Mustard of
some other opening Liquor?

The Irregulary of Excrements in the Ear, is not only of Choleric and Wheyish
Symptoms of the Excrements. Excretion of blood Choler serum, quittor etc.
Humors, but also of quitter and blood, proceeding from the brain: neither is
so great a quantity of quittor as is avoided, bred in the Cavities, but in the
Brain.

If an intolerable inflamatory and pulsatory pain does occupy the hinder parts
of the head, and the matter flows thither and there stops, the pain abiding: it
will be safe to boar an hole in the hinder part of the Head, that Egress may be
given to the quittor; when no great danger is like to follow from the said
operation.

The Ear-Worms termed Eblai, which are voided from the Ears, belong to the
Worms.
Irregularity of things voided from these parts.

It is good in Children for the internal and external Parts of their Ears to
run and void much Humor, because it purges their Brain and prevents great
Diseases.

There is in Diseases observed a great Sympathy between the Ears, Mouth, Lungs
and Wesand: and therefore when the Ears are hurt, the voice is changed, by
reason of the Auditory Nerve, which being spread into the Throat, reaches as
far as the Wesand or Wind-Pipes Head.

And when Nature has been accustomed to Purge out the Excrements of the Brain,
by the Ears: the stoppage of that Purgation, has made many to die suddenly.

Chap. 5. Of the Face and outside of the Mouth.
THe Face is the broad and fore part of the head, comprehending the Forehead
The Face described.
in a living and dead Man without dissection; and therefore the T. 15 f. 3. A.
Forehead, f. 1. between F F. T. 19. al.
Eyes, T. 15. f. 1. G I.
Nose, and Mouth with its f. 1. N N.
Lips, as far as the Chin, do belong unto the Face: which, as it is the subject
of Anatomical dissection, is divided into the Parts internal and external.

The External Parts are the Scarf-Skin and the Skin, which are thin and very
Its Paris.
smooth in Women. The internal Parts, are the Muscles of the f. 1. G H I. etc.
Nose, f. 1. K L M N.
Lips, and inferior jaw, whose empty Spaces are filled up with fat.

Moreover the Musculus Latissimus, does cover the side of the Face, as far as
the Forehead; yea and it compasses the whole Neck, excepting the hinder Part
thereof.

The Muscles of the Lips, are the Extremities of the Mouth: the other Muscles
which belong to the lower Jaw, as the T. 15. f. 1. P P.
Temperal Muscle, the Muscle called f. 1. S.
Masseter, possessing the sides of the Face, shall be explained in our History
of the Muscles.

The Mouth therefore is a Slit in the Skin of the Face, necessary for
breathing, The Mouth described.
speech, and nourishment of the body: for by the Mouth we breath, speak and
receive our Food.

The extremities of this Slit art termed f. 1. N N.
Lips which are moved by Muscles in their The Lips.
opening and shutting.

The utmost bound of the Face is called the f. 1. n.
Chin, as the upper extremity The Chin.
thereof from the Eyebrows to the beginning of the Hairs is termed the f. 3.
A.
Forehead.

The sides of the Face are the f. 1. O.
Cheeks. The internal Parts of the Mouth, as the The Cheeks.
f. 1. R S T. etc. f. 2. A B C. etc.
Teeth, Gums, T. 10. f. 1. g g.
Palate, T. 13. f. 15. A.
Throat, f 14. A etc.
Tongue, shall be described in order. The f. 9. 10. etc.
Larynx f. 11, 12, 23.
Os Hyoides, T. 3. f. 2. 3.
Pharynx, and the f. 16, 17. etc.
Glandules, appertain unto the Neck.

The Face, besides Veins and Arteries has a notable T. 18. f. 2. A.
Nerve from the third pair, The Vissels.
which is carried along between two f. 2. c c. etc.
boney plates, under the pavement of the Orbita or Socket of the Eye, and is
branched up and down like a Gooses Foot, through the whole Face, by the Nose, as
far as the Lips. gf. 6. m n o.
h f. 6. L L.


The Medicinal Consideration.
The Skin of the Face, is the Looking-Glass wherein are seen the Diseases of
the Diseases of the Face.
Body, especially of the Liver, Spleen and Lungs: for look what Humor bears
sway in the bowels, the same shows it self forth in the Face. If there be a
lasting Ruddyness in the Cheeks, it is a Sign of an hot Liver: if the Redness
be seated upon upon the balls above the Cheeks, it argues an hot distemper of
the Lungs. If Choler stick in the pores of the Skin, it causes Freckles: if the
Color proceed from Sunburning. The Rose.
being in the Sun, it is termed Ephelis. If Redness remain settled on a great
Part of the Face, it is named Gutta Rosacea, and those who are spotted on that
manner are termed Antirhoei.

Palenes is commonly seen in Virgins and such as are recovered out of some
Sickness. Green Sickness


The Green Sickness, is a slow Fever in Virgins and other young Women that
want their Courses.

In such as are sickly and crasie, the Color of the Face is without blood
because the whole Mass of blood is Wheyish, and therefore the blood of the Face
being such, must needs be of an Wheyish Color. Those that are so affected, are
called Liphaemoi, blood-les. A bad Color of the Face, both in Sick and sound
persons, is termed Cacochroia

Furthermore, the Face is made rough and deformed by burning Pustles, Ionthi,
Vari, Fici, Naevi, and Spilloi.

An hard Push is called Ionthos, because it represents a branch of the flowring
Ionthos.
Violet.

Varus is an harder knob, and not so red and fiery as the Ionthos, Ficus is a
certain Varus.
Wart.

Lichen, Impetigo or Darta, is a roughness or Scaly Eminence of the Skin, if it
Lichen.
be dry; if it be moist, it Exulcerates and runs.

Naevi, Warts, are smooth knobs white or bluish: which if they be of a Warts.
bad Color, they must not be tampered with, least some worse and cancerous
disposition follow: and Seneca says that a face without Warts or moles is not
pleasing.

It is a wonderful thing how these Warts of the Face do produce others in
diverse Parts of the body, which answer the measure of the Face as far as the
Neck. Of which subject Ludovicus Septalius has composed a most Elegant Book.

Black and blew Color in the Skin of the Face, proceeding from a bruise, is
called Hypopium.
Hypopium.

Spilloi are Sooty Excrements of the Skin, intruded into the pores thereof,
which Spilloi.
are pulled out, either by a pin, or by squeesing the Skin, or by some
emollient Medicament or Pomatum, if they be hard and thick.

Pani, are scarrs in the Face. Pani Mentagra.


Mentagra, an Impetigo or Dry-Scab of the Chin, which troubled the Gentlemen of
Rome in Plinnies time, where it was a Popular Disease: is a Malignant Scab,
which remains many years and is hardly curable, and to alters the Skin of the
Chin and Lips, that a Man continues Beard-les al his Life long.

The Action of the Skin of the Face being hurt is termed Cynicus Spasmus, The
Cynicus spasmus.
Dog-like Convulsion, or torture of the Mouth expressing the snarling of a Dog:
for it is a depraved motion of the Muscles of the Face, belonging to a Pal^e or
Convulsion.

It is be Paralytick the Retraction is made in the sound Part, because of the
dissolution of the opposite Parts: If it be convulsive, the Part affected is
drawn back: Those Nerves which are affected in this Symptom, do arise from the
spinal Marrow between the second and third Vertebra of the Neck.

Galen attributed this depraved motion of the Mouth to the Muscle termed
Latissimus.

Besides the Cynicus Spasmus, there is another Convulsion very ordinary, of the
upper Lip toward the Eye, by the disorder of that same Nerve of the third pair
described above, which being cut a sunder, below the Socket of the Eye, the
said Convulsion is healed.

The particular medicining of the Face besides the universal, is twofold, the
one called Commotice painting and plastering with Fucuses etc. The other
Cosmetice Painting Beautifying
beautyfing and adorning without any thing laid on: the latter Galen allows to
take away the ill favouredness of Women: but the former, he disallows in a
Physician, and leaves it to panders, bawds and Whores

The Use of those Fucuses, unless skilfully managed does quickly wrinkle the
Skin, such as are the Spanish- White, and Purpurissus or Lovly-Red.

The Diseases of the Lips are very many, distempers, Inflammation, Swelling,
Ulcers, The use of the Lips.
and others consisting in evil conformation, al which pervert the use and
action of the Lips which serve to shut the Mouth, form the speech and for the
easy reception of meat and drink, to contein the Tongue within the Mouth, to
cast forth the Spittle out of the Mouth, for Trumpeters to make a strong blast,
for Infants to Suck with, and both in Men and Women to express their mutual
Affection by Kissing, Diseases of the Lips.
and to beautify their Faces: and therefore if a Man's Lips were cut of, he
would appear very deformed, just like a snarling Dog.

Such as have great Lips and sticking out, are called Labeones: such as are
born In their Shape
with imperfect or cloven Lips, are said to have an Hares Lip: this defect is
amended by Surgery. If the Lips be loose and hanging, it proceeds from a
Palsy. He that has the insides of his Lips turned outward is termed Brochus:
and he that has swelling Lips is called Cheilo. Those are by Arnobius termed
Mentones, whose Chins stick out.

The Chops of the Lips are called Rhagades. Sometimes Tumors and little bladders
Chops Tumors
break out upon the Lips, especially in Fevers, when Nature drives the
virulent Humor out of the Veins and Arteries into the Lips, which Avicen says
is a good sign, that the Fever will quickly cease: and experience does many
times confirms the same. Yet sometimes Tumors and Ulcers in the Lips are in
Diseases signs of Ulcers
Death, as in the two Brothers Hermoptolemus and Andreas in Hippocrates.

Bad Color of the Lips in Diseases is no good sign: in such as are well, it
argues a Bad Color
fault in the Lungs or in the blood.

` Moles and Warts black and blew and Scirrhous sticking upon the Lips, are
Moles and Warts. etc.
things to be warily handled, and not to be tampered with by way of Incision.

Sometimes the Lips do naturally Swel, especially the lower Lip, when the Jaw is
drawn out, and then the lower Teeth before are higher than the upper, and
include them.

The principal hurt of the action of the Lips, is depraved Speech. But this
Symptom wants a Name. Symptoms


The depraved trembling motion of the Lips, happens by consent of the Stomach
Trembling
distempered, by reason of a Membrane common to the Lips and Stomach. Whence it
is that those who are ready to vomit, have a trembling in their nether Lip:
which trembling is called Seismos.

The opening of the Mouth is hurt, when the Jaw is become stif and immovable:
Shutting
its shutting is hurt when the Jaw is Palsied, as in Fevers, by reason of the
Heat of the bowels and Lungs, and difficulty of breathing.

Much spawling, and want of Spittle, do belong to the Diseases of the Mouth,
Frequent spitting.
though they have other remote Causes: for Spittle is necessary for chewing of
meat, for speech and Tasting; but immoderate Spittle is hurtful, and the
voidance thereof is accounted filthy and undecent. Touching the Cure of Lips
cut of, Taliacotius has written.

Chap. 6. Of the Nose.
THe Nose, the Instrument of Smelling and of clensing the brain, is placed in
the The Noses Situation.
midst of the Face; dividing the Eyes and Face into two even Parts.

The length and breadth thereof is uncomly, if it exceed a Man's Thumb in length
and thickness. Magnitude


The Figure of a Man's Nose contributes much to his healthy living: for an high
Shape
Nose is better than a flat Nose, and wide Nostrils are to be preferred before
narrow ones.

It is divided into two T. 15. f. 2.
Cavities, which are called Nostrils severed by a partition, Cavities
and reaching as high as the Colander-bone.

The Depth and Widness of the Nose, are greater within than they appear
outwardly: for that same space which lies between the two tables or boards of
the Palate and Os Sphenoides, divided into two Cavities by the Os Vomeris,
reaching to the Partition of the Nostrils, belongs unto the Nose.

That space is filled up with Spungy Bones, which are portions of the
Colanderbone. Spungy Bones Spungy Caruncles.
And those* Spungy bones are filled with Spungy bits of Flesh, which drink up
the Phlegm which flows from the Head, that Snevil might not be always dropping
out of the Nose.

These bones and Caruncles or Spungy bits of flesh do likewise serve to
Filtrate and strain the Air, which, the Mouth being shut, is drawn in at the
Nostrils, that it may be imparted pure unto the Lungs and brain.

The Nose therefore is compounded of bones, Gristles, Membranes and Muscles.
Bones


It consists of T. 15. f. 3. K.
Two Bones, which stick outward and fashion the same. Five Gristies
Gristles are dependant upon those bones, two being lateral placed by turns,
and movable through the help of Muscles. They are termed Pinnae and Alae Nasi
the Wings and Pinnacles of the Nose. There is a Gristle placed between them,
which is called Septum, the partition, and it depends upon that same boney T.
15. f. 6. ^.
partition, placed between the bones of the Nose, being a continuation of Os
Vomeris.

The Nose is clothed externally with the Cuticula and Cutis under which lie
the Membrane Muscles
T. 15. f. 1. G H. etc.
Muscles. The inner Parts of the Nose are invested with a Membrane sprinkled
with fleshy Fibers, by the help of which, the Pinnacles of the Nose are
contracted, when the breath is strongly drawn in; as the said Pinnacles are
widened by other external Muscles, the description whereof you shall find in my
History of the Muscles. Book the 5.

To the Nose do belong, the Seive like plate of the Colander bone, and the
Mamillary or Teat-like Productions ending at these bones, and given out to be
the Organs or Instruments of Smelling.

Some would doubt whither those Caruncles or little bits of Flesh which are
thrust into the Spungy bones, are the proper Instruments of smelling, or only
some way subservient thereunto; because when they are overmoistened, or by any
Diseases impaired, the smelling is depraved, or wholly lost. c T. 15. f. 5. C
C.
d T. 18. f. 3. a a.


The Medicinal Consideration.
The Gristly Parts of the Nose, are Inflamed, Bruised, and Vlcerated; the
Diseases of the whole Nose.
honey Parts are broken; al of them are troubled with distempers, but especially
with organick Diseases springing from a bad Conformation, as when the Nose is
crooked inwards like a saddle; which is oftimes caused by external Causes: but
if a Child be born with a Saddle-Nose, it may be then raised and rectified. For
as Plato reports in his Alcibiades, if the King of Persia had a Daughter so
born; they did thrust Pipes into the Child's Nose, and reduce it by little and
little to its right shape, by widening the bones and Gristles, whiles they were
yet Waxy and pliable.

An over great and high Nose, cannot be cut shorter without making the party
more deformed. If in persons grown up the Nose be Swelled with Tuberous
Excrescencies of Flesh; that fault may be mended by cutting of the said
luxuriating Flesh.

The inside of the Nose is apt to Swel, and is infested with Inflamatory
bunches, Of the inside Tubercula Ozena
which come to suppuration: but far within in the Spungy bones and their
Caruncles, there is bred a filthy stinking Ulcer called Ozaena, which is
offensive both to the Patients and all that come near them, and is very hard to
cure. Sometimes the little bones are corrupted and come out at the Nostrils. The
Caruncles being swelled with or without an Ulcer, cause the Polypus, which falls
into the Nostrils, or it fills Polypus
the hollow places above the Palate, reaching as far as the Throat.

The Polipus is neatly discribed by Celsus in his sixth Book, Chapter the eight.
Unless it be of a Malignant Color and painful, it may safely be cut away by the
Roots, if possible, which is the true* Cure, for otherwise it will grow again,
if any Part be left remaining after section.

A Malignant Cancerous Polypus must not be meddled withaleither by cutting,
burning, or caustic Medicaments, for if it be exasperated it eats and devours
the whole Face.

Symptoms of the Nose are either its action hurt, or simple affections
thereof, Symptoms of the Nostrils. Smelling lost
or the Irregulary of what is voided forth. The action of the Nose is Smelling,
which is abolished, diminished or depraved. The Causes of the smell diminished
or abolished, are the same, to wit, the obstruction of the inward passages of
the Colander-bones and the Mammillary productions, in which the ^melling is
exercised. Diminished.
If the foremost Ventricles be stopped, other parts of the Nose remaining
entire, it is known by the perfection of speech, which shows that the Colander
and Spungy bones with the Mammillary Productions, are free.

The Smelling is depraved, when al things seem to stink, and when the Patient
depraved.
perceives a stink in his Nose, which is likewise discerned by the standers by.
The true Cause of this Symptom, is a putrified Humor congealed in those
Cavities. If the Putrefaction be within the Scul, the stink is not perceived by
the Patient, but is discerned by those which converse with him, as Fernelius
judiciously observes.

Simple affections of the external Nose, are spors which are black and blew or
red, Spots
and deforme the same. They must be taken away, or corrected with some Fucus,
if there be no other Remedy.

The Irregularity of Excretions, consists in Bleeding at the Nose, and in a
Nose-bleeding Coryza
Flux of Serosities therefrom, which causes the Coryza or Grauedo, or a
continual Nose-dropping. Hippocrates in his sixth Book of Aphorisms says, Such
as have running Noses, are unhealthy.

In bleeding at the Nose, the blood either comes from the Nostrils opened by
Cause of Nosebleeding.
picking, or from that same long Cavity of the Dura Matter, which reaches unto
the Nostrils: if the Veins be opened by the sharpness of the blood or the
abudance thereof, after it has flowed a while, it must be stopped by opening a
Vein in the Arm, unless the blood flow critically.

Fernelius would have al bleedings at the Nose to be stopped, be they what they
will, and would have a Vein opened to that end, contrary to the Doctrine of
Hippocrates. Blood coming from the inner Parts of the Nose may be stopped: but
it is very hard to stop the same when it comes from the Menings or Coats of
the Brain.

Dropping of blood from the Nose in burning and Malignant Fevers, is bad, both
Its Cure.
as a Cause and a sign: because it does not ease the Patient, and it shows a
Plenitude in the brain, and that nature being weak is not able to disburthen
herself. In such a case, great care is to be taken of the head by Revulsion,
and Derivation of the blood, and by cooling of the Head, for fear of
Inflammation or some Sleepy Disease.

If bleeding at the Nose be stopped in young people accustomed thereunto, and
their brains Ache through fullness, they must be let blood.

The Ancients did open the inward Veins of the Nose, which Practice is left
off, because the way they did it, is to us unknown.

Fernelius writes that Worms as long as ones Finger have been found in
Saddle-Noses, being there bred* which at last made the Patients mad and killed
them: those Worms were thought to have been cast out of the brain, where as
indeed they were born and bred in the Cavities of the Nose. For Worms bred in
the Ventricles of the brain, cannot come out, unless they should eat a sunder
or break the Sieve-like table of the Colander-bone.

That which Fernelius has written, is worthy of consideration in reference to
Diseases of the Head. That in Nose-bleedings, the blood comes out not from the
brain, but out of the Veins of the Nostrils. The Veins (says he) do run into
the Nose not from the inner Parts of the brain, but out of the Cavities of the
Mouth and Palate, which are wide and open enough, so as they seem to be the
Emissaries of superfluovs blood; Even as the Haernorrhoid Veins, and those
which belong to the Neck of the Womb. Wherefore the brain being burdened with
blood is not eased, if the blood flow not from the Cavities of Dura Matter. But
I believe it flows out of the brain. And Galen and Areteus do write, that the
Veins within the Nostrils, beneath the Colander-bone, may be opened by Art.

Sneezing may be said to belong unto the Nostrils, because they being vexed do
Sneezing
cause Sneezing. Also Sneezing is referred to Diseases of the Head, and
especially to the Epilepsie or Falling Sickness, because it is a momentany
Concussion or Convulsion of the brain. So says Hippocrates in the seventh Book
of his Aphorisms. It is caused by heating or moistning of what is contained in
the Ventricles of the brain.

Chap. 7. Of the Neck.
THat Part which is interposed between the Head and the Chest, is termed The
Necks use
Collum, and Neck: ordained for the Service of the Windpipe and Lungs, and as
a Pillar to sustain the Head upon.

It ought to be of an indifferent length, that it may be healthy and useful for
the Its Length.
body: because a Neck too short consisting of but six Vertebraes, by reason of
the shortness of those Vessels which are carried into the Head, is liable to
the Apoplexy or Sleepy Diseases; and a Neck too long containing eight
Vertebraes, does at length bring a Consumption: because the Lungs being shut up
in so strait a place do by little and little Wax overhot, and wither away by
degrees.

The Neck is made up of diverse Parts, which are divided into Containing and Its
Parts.
Contained. The Containing are common or proper, the contained are manyfold.

There are reckoned two common containing Parts, the Scarf-Skin and the Skin.
The containing proper Membrane is its Coat viz. The Musculus Latus, which seems
to be a Propagation of the Membrana Carnosa.

The Parts contained are manyfold viz. The Muscles of the T. 13. f. 18. T. 14.
f. 4. etc.
Head, of the T. 13. f. 18. T. 14. f. 2. 3, 4.
Neck of the T. 13. f. 13. etc.
Os Hyoides, of the T. 13. f. 14.
Tongue, of the f. 8 9, 10. etc.
Larynx and he T. 3. f. 2. 3.
Pharynx; which being orderly dissected and taken away there comes in view the
f. 8. 9. etc.
Larynx, the f. 11. 12. A B C.
Os Hyoides, the Pharynx, the f. 15. A.
Tongue, the f. 16. 17. etc.
Kernels, The T. 12. f. 1. e e. ^ f.
^our jugulars, the two f. 2. a a.
Carotick Arteries, A Nerve of the T. 3. f. 8.
^ixt Conjugation both descending and Recurrent, the Cervical T. 12. f. 1. g g.
Veins and f. 2. d d.
Arteries; and the greater number of the^e Parts, is placed in the foreside of
the Neck: in the hinder Part thereof are the T. 13. f. 19.
Vertebraes, and the hinder T. 14. f. 2. 3, 4. etc.
Muscles ordained to move the Head and Neck.

I will reserve the Explication of the Muscles to my Myol^gia or History of
Muscles, where the Reader may look, if he denre to know the Muscles of every
Part.

But you must diligently observe the Kernels placed upon the T. 13. f. 1, 2. 8.
Cartilago Thuroides or Door fashiond Gristle, which are larger in Women than
in Men. In this order therefore you shall search for the Parts of the Neck, and
separate them if you can one from another, or take them out.

And first of al, the Musculus Latissimus being taken away, you shall search
diligentfor Its Vessels.
the Nerve of the T. 3. f. 8. A B. etc.
Sixth pair, placed between the internal jugular Vein and the Carotick Arteries.
The T. 12. f. 1. e e.
Internal Jugular has little values or shutters near the Claves, but the f. 1.
f f.
external Jugular has none.

The Carotick Artery at its entrance into the Skul, has two very small thin
bones, which hinder and keep back the Arterial blood, when it would flow in too
violently.

The Nerves of the sixth Pair being both of them tied in a living Dog, he cannot
bark having lost his voice, if one only be tied, he barks but faintly and by
halves: which is diligently to be observed.

Then you shall consider the Os T. 13. f. 11. 12. A B C.
Hyoides, how it is suspended with strong bands Os Hyoides.
and firmly fastened to the Apophyses T. 15. f. 6. D D.
Styloides; how it sustaines the Larynx, the Epiglottis and the Tongue. For the
Cartilago f. 1, 2, 8. A.
Thyroides, is by its Horns annexeded to the Os Hyoides.

And therefore the Os Hyoides is the Foundation of those Parts, and yet is it
moveable in swallowing: and Rondeletius saw one taken Speechles as in a Palsy,
by reason of the dissolution of the Reluctance of the Muscles of Os Hyoides.
Which is a thing to be observed in that bone.

Besides those Kernels resting upon the Cartilago Thuroides, there are other
little Kernels.
ones, placed al along the internal jugular and orderly disposed, into which
the brain disburthens it self.

Under the lower Jaw, in the upper and foremer Part of the Neck, are seen two
other Kernels, which do often swel, and in them the King's Evil is bred.

At the Root of the Tongue are the T. 15. f. 16. and 11.
Tonsillae, termed Antiades; certain Kernels so called. Whose pain and swelling
are by Vlpian termed Antiagri.

Al these Kernels are diligently to be considered in Fl^^ions which happen in
the Neck, whether they be the Scrophulae Kings Evil or Bronchacele. e f. ^^ a
a.


The Medicinal Consideration.
The Neck is subject to Similar Diseases arising from distemper, and to
Diseases Similar Diseases of the Neck. The Organical Diseases. as Bronchocele.
Organical, consisting in bad Conformation: if it be too long, or too short, or
the Vertebraes thereof be out of Joint, especially the second; in Magnitude, if
it be swelled, as in the Bronchocele, King's Evil and Squinsie.

Bronchocele is a Swelling in the Neck, near the Larynx, arising from an humor
collected in that place, or from the Kernel of the Cartilago Thuroides being
longer than ordinary and producing superfluous flesh; or it is an Impostum
proceeding from the Tumor Atheroma or Steatoma, or it is a Dropsy. Bronchocele
does not proceed, as many have imagined, from immoderate Clamors and Cryings
out, or by drinking of melted Snow, as the fashion is among the Inhabitants of
the Alps or other high Mountains; but from thick and clammmy Phlegm, which
slides thither by bittle and little out of the Head and the external Parts
thereof, down behind the Ears. Which is the Judgment of Fernelius.

It may be questioned, whether the matter be contained between the Musculus
latus and the Skin, or whether it lie al concealed under the Musculus Latus.
For if the matter be collected there, it cannot be drawn out, because it is
crept in between the spaces of the Muscles.

If it lie outward to the sight, it may be rooted out and cured. It is wont to
begin with a wind, which distends and separates the Skin from the Membrana
Carnosa: or the Musculus Latus it self, is separated from the Parts which lie
beneath the same.

Into the which space the matter flows by degrees, which differs according to
the various temperament and Constitution of the Patients.

It grows by little and little, and receives nourishment, not by the Veins, but
by certain little Pipes which Nature creates.

Bronchocele differs very much from the Kings-Evil-Swellings, which rise under
King's Evil
the Jaw and in the Neck, of a rounder shape, distinct one from another, or
clustered together. They spring from a Phlegmatic clammy matter, which drenches
the Kernels and makes them swel; and therefore look where there are Kernels,
there the swellings arise.

Scirrhous Tumors have in them somewhat of the Nature of the
Kings-Evil-Swellings, which makes them suspected. They happen under the Jaws,
in the Groins, behind the Ears, and in all Parts of the Body where there are
Glandules or Kernels. And sometimes in certain places of the Body, a portion of
Fat grows hard and makes a Scirrhous Tumor and sometime the King's Evil.

The Tumor Gongroni is mustered among the external swellings of Gongrone.
the Neck. It is cau^ed by an Humor, not so thick as that in the King's Evil, or
Bronchocele.

Angina the squinsie, is a Tumor of the Neck either internal or external: or an
Squinzie.
internal or external inflammation of the Neck.

The external is properly called Synanche, the Internal is termed Cynanche.
Galen conceives that this distinction of Names is vain and of no use in
Practice. But I account the same necessary. For although general Medicines do
serve for both, yet in Cynanche where the Patient can neither fetch breath nor
speak, the danger is greater: and therefore Medicines are to be speeded with all
have possible: yea and the Windpipe must be opened ere twenty four hours are
past, that the Patient may by that means receive breath, til such time as the
upper Part of the Larynx be unstopped. For in that kind o^ Squinsie, where no
outward swelling appears, the Larynx alone is inflamed and obstructed. In other
Squinsies the Circumjacent Muscles of other Parts are affected: In the
Cynanche, the Fluxion is in the Arytaenois and the Glottis, and in other
Musculous Carnosities of the Larynx, by which means the passage of the Larynx
is stopped, and death follows unvoidably, for though there is some little
passage left for Liquors, yet no man can live without fetching his breath.

A Leek thrust into the Throat, with some sharp biting Powder sprinkled upon it
may do good, as also some strong drawing Medicine or a Vesicatory applied to
the Larynx, and Scarifications made here and there about the Larynx. Touching
the Squinsie, read Hippocrates in the 27. and 34. Aphorisms of his sixth Book.
In the third Book of his Prognostics, And in the 49. Aphorism of his seventh
Book.

Chap. 8. Of the Teeth and Gums.
I Return now unto the inner Parts of the Mouth which are there contained, and
may be seen with the Eyes, such as are the Teeth, Gums, Palate, Uvula and
Tongue, of which in order.

I will begin with the Teeth, the Instruments of Chewing and of speaking; for
use of the Teeth.
those that are Tooth-les cannot well chew and grind their Meat, neither can
they pronounce their words clear and plain as they ought to do.

There is a twofold consideration of the Teeth; as they are in Infants, til
they are two or three years Old, and as they are in persons of riper years.

In Infants they break out by Course, first the Cutters, then the Dog-Teeth,
after Condition of the Teeth in Infants.
them the Grinders, and they have but twenty til they are three years Old, at
which time the rest break forth.

These first Teeth are called Dentes Lactei, the milk Teeth, which have under
them another branch, which will shoot forth another Tooth, if the first be
plucked out, or come out of it self.

There are two seasons observed in which Children are most tormented with
Tooth-breeding: the one is when they first sprout within the Gum, the other is
when they break out of the Gum. And under the Term of Tooth-breeding
Hippocrates does in a manner comprehend al Childrens Diseases, because Children
are troubled with many Diseases upon that account, springing from the pain of
Teethbreeding, and bringing them to their Graves.

In Persons grown up the Teeth are distributed into two ranks or T. 14. f. 3.
rows, according In grown Persons.
to the two Jaws in which they are fixed. In each Jaw are reckoned fifteen or
sixteen Teeth, and they are of three sorts. The first four placed in the
forepart of the Jaw, are called T. 15. f. 6. m.
Cutters: next them on either side, are the two T. 15. f. 6. n n.
Dog-Teeth, and after them on each side five Grinders. They are immovably
fastened in their Holes called Alveoli, by that kind of Articulation which is
termed Gomphosis.

They are bound and fastened both by their proper Ligaments and by the Gums.

They recive Nerves, Veins and Arteries within their Roots, which are hollow,
Their Vessels.
and therefore they are pained more than any other of the bones. The external
and bare Part of the Tooth, is termed its Basis, the internal which is covered,
is called the Root, which is double or triple. d T. 15. f. 6. o o o o.


The Medicinal Consideration.
Tooth-Sicknesses of Infants, have two times in which they are wont to torment
Diseases of the Teeth in Infants.
and kill. The first is when the Tooth first sprouts within the Gum, which is
called Odaxismos, which causes the Gums to Swel and be inflamed, brings
Fevers, continual Vomiting and Looseness: the other is the time of the breaking
forth of the Tooth, which is called Odontophua, and then the poor Infants are
most of al vexed and tormented with pains.

The teeth of grown Persons are troubled with diverse Diseases, as Distempers,
Dryness In grown persons.
through Age, and Looseness; with Organick Diseases in Number Deficient, when
they fall out; or in Number exceeding, when there are two or three rows of
Teeth: or when there is but one Bone, in the place of so many Teeth.

In Magnitude exceeding or deficient, as when there be long gag Teeth, that go
out of their Rank, or when the Teeth are too little and worn away.

In Situation, when they stand not close together, or when the lower Teeth are
not just against the upper, or when the upper Teeth fall within the lower, or
when Teeth grow in the Palate of the Mouth.

Diseases common are, when the Teeth Scale and moulder away with rotteness,
Symptoms of the Teeth are. Setting on edge Toothache.
or when they are broken.

Symptoms of the Teeth, are the hurting of the proper and peculiar feeling of
the Teeth, which is called Haemodia, Setting of the Teeth on Edge; or the
hurting of the common feeling of the Teeth, which causes the Tooth Ach, which
is termed Odontalgia or Odontagra for the likness it has to pains of the Gout.
Pain of the Teeth is reckoned among the greatest torments which are in the
world, although a Tooth be so small a Part. Celsus Book the sixth Chap. 9.

Simple Affections of the Teeth are Blackness, Rustyness and a clammy
gluishness (which Hippocrates counts the sign of a strong Fever) also a stony
Crust which grows upon them.

Symptoms in the Irregularity of things voided, are, A Stinking of the Teeth,
Stinking. Excrescence. Worms. Bleeding.
an excrescence and Worms, which are bred within the Cavities of the Teeth, or
a flux of blood immoderately flowing, after the drawing of a Tooth, which is
sometimes a cause of Death. See Duretus in his Comments upon the Coicks of
Hippocrates, where he explains what is the grinding of the Teeth in Diseases.

Dryness of the Teeth in Sick people, foretells a Convulsion or Madness.

It is worth the enquiry. Whether into the plaee of a Tooth drawn out, another
Whether a Tooth may be fastened in the place of one drawn out?
may be thrust in at the same moment, and fixed in the Room thereof, so as to
stick fast and be clothed with the Gums flesh, and to abide and serve to chew
the Meat with the other Teeth?

He that shall consider that the Teeth have Life, do receive Veins, Arteries and
Nerves; do feel, are pained; and firmly tied and fastened with certain bands
into the Gums: will never say that a strange Tooth, thrust into the place of one
plucked out, can be made so like to the other Teeth, as to perform the same
Office with them and stick there as long as they shall do. Yet some Physicians
in favor of a Norman Tooth-drawer, would persuade Men that it is possible to
substitute such a Tooth, and they have upbraided me with Incredulity and
Ignorance, because I am not of their mind.

You are to consider the holes in the upper and lower Jaw Bone, through which
are drawn the Nerves Veins and Arteries, which are inserted into the Roots of
the Teeth.

In the upper Jaw there creeps an Artery which running toward the Ear, is
there burnt, or seared up, and to that place and upon the Temples, an
astringent plaster is laid to stop the Veins by which the Flux of Rheum does
come.

There creeps an Artery in the Lower Jaw near the Corner, which is to be seared
where it beats, or topics are to be laid thereupon, to ease the Toothache of
the lower Jaw.

Sometimes a bony Fungus or Spungy substance grows out of the hole of a Tooth,
How the Spungy excrescence is taken out of the Tooth-hole.
and comes to be so big as to fill the Patients Mouth, and at length to choke
him, if prevention be not used, by cutting off the said excrescence and burning
the Root thereof.

You shall observe that the brain hurts the Teeth by Distillation of Rheum, the
Stomach hurts them by Fumigation or raising fumes and steems which annoy them:
and that the Lungs likewise do in some Measure damage the Teeth.

That there is a Regeneration of the Teeth, and that Teeth grow out in every
Age Whether Teeth do breed in all Ages?
of Man, is most certain: yet must we not rely upon this Regeneration of Teeth,
so as certainly to make account thereof, and expect it after seven years are
over.

To Cleanse the Teeth you shall find an Admirable Water, in the 96. Counsel of
Fernelius

Chap. 9. Of the Gums.
THe Gums are certain parcels of Flesh folded about the Teeth, which cover the
The natural Constitution of the Gums. Preternatural.
holes of the Teeth within and without: but without they are wider and more
swelling. When this Flesh of the Gums grows Proud and covers the Teeth more
than it should, it causes pain and hinders Chewing, also the Looseness of the
said Flesh is troublesome, because it makes the Teeth to become loose.

Inflammation of the Gums is called Parulis: if the Flesh grow from an Ulcer,
its Parulis. Epulis. Cancer.
termed Epulis. Sometimes the Gums are Cancerated, and sometimes they bleed
immoderately.

The Gums are Eaten up by Ulcers called Aphthae: in the Scurvy (which the Old
Physicians called Stomachache and Oscedo) the Ulcers of the Gums are Malignant.

Sometimes these Aphthae or Ulcers of the Gums are so Malignant, that they eat
Apthae.
into the Tongue, Uvula, and Tonsillae, without suspicion of the Venereal Pox.
such are described by Aretaeus, and such appear in that strangling Spanish
Disease, which the Spanjards call Garotillo, and which is common to the
inhabitants of Naples (who call it Vlcus Syrianum Faucium) perhaps by reason of
their Commerce with the Spanjards, who are much subject to the King's Evil: and
therefore the Malignant Humor of the King's Evil does Produce such Symptoms in
the Mouth and Jaws.

Chap. 10. Of the Palate.
THe Palate is the T. 15. f. 5. L L. etc.
Vaulted Roof of the Mouth, which is a very thin bone, The structure of the
Palate.
clothed with a T. 13. f. 15. D.
Nervous Skin, which is wrinkled, by reason of the Crevesses which are engraven
in the bone: and therefore it sticks very hard to the bone, which has no
Periostium*

This most tender bone does many times become rotten in the Whores-Pocks, Its
Rottenness.
the Palate being boared through (if care be not taken in time) whether the
infection be lodged in the Mouth, or within the Nose: which Hole so boared does
much hinder the Patient in chewing of Meat and in speaking unless it be stopped
with a plate, Cotton, or Sponge.

Chap. 11. Of the Uvula and Isthmus.
AT the inner part or further part of the T. 13. f. 15. D.
Palate hangs the T. 13. f. 15. A.
Gargareon or The Use of the Uvula.
Uvula, a Fleshy Particle, which is given to mankind to help his speech, and to
some birds which imitate the speech of Man: it hangs therefore at the farthest
end of the Palate, to help our speech, being that to the voice, which the Quil
is to the Musical Instrument, whose strings are struck therewith. It is
therefore called the striker bp Paulus Aegineta in the 51. Chapter of his sixth
Book.

It hinders liquid things from running back into the Nostrils, and it purifies
the Air which enters into the Windpipe. Therefore such as have no Uvula, are
hoarse in speaking, part of what they drink runs into their Nose, and because
of the impurity of the Air which they draw into their Lungs, they fall into a
Consumption.

It has T. 13. f. 15. B B. C C. etc.
Muscles for motion, though it be moved very obscurly or rather suspended Its
Muscles.
in Aequilibrio. Of these Muscles you may read in my History of the Muscles.
Lib. 5.

To this Particle are adjoined certain Lateral Ligaments, which being widened
Ligaments.
and spread forth by a Defluxion of rheum, they resemble the wings of Bats or
Flitter-Mice, and are very troublesome to the Patient. Naturally they ought to
be dry, and drawn back toward the Palate bone: they are two, and do include the
T. 13. f. 17. and 18.
Kernels termed Tonsillae.

The Medicinal Consideration.
This Part, viz. The Uvula o^ Gargareon is Inflamed Swelled, Lengthened Its
Diseases. Staphyle. Columella. Chalasis.
and grows Lank. When it is inflamed it represents a Grape, and is termd
Staphyle, if it represent a Pillar, it is called Columella and Chion; if it grow
loose and slap by reason of the Rheum, it is called Chalasis Gargareonis; and
then it is contracted and drawn back, by sprinckling salt or Peper upon it,
whereby the moisture thereof is dried up.

If it hang down too much, part of it is cut away; if the lateral Membranes are
relaxed it is called Imantis by Aretaeus; who elegantly describes the
Relaxation of Imantis.
those Ligaments in his first Book de Causis Acutorum, Chap. 8. Of the
Gargareon read Hippocrates, in his third Progn, sent. 31.

Of the Isthmus.
Isthmus is a place or space between the Larynx and Pharynx, seated in the
Isthmus defined. Diseases of the Tonsill^.
Throat, like a Neck of land between two Seas, which is an Isthmus.

The Kernels there placed are called a Antiades and Paristhmia. The swelling of
those Kernels is called by the same names by which the Tonsillae are called
when they are inflamed. Sometimes they swel and grow to such a greatness, that
they descend into the Throat like two Apples and hinder the Patient from
swallowing and fetching breath.

They are often inflamed and Impostumated, and then they must be pricked deep
in with a lancet, to let out the blood or quittor, otherwise they choke the
Patient. Sometimes they are inflected with Cancerous Tumors, which are incurable.

Chap. 12. Of the Tongue.
THe Tongue, which is the Instrument of tasting speaking and swallowing; is The
Tongues Substance. Number.
made up of a T. 13. f. 14. A. etc.
Fleshy and Spungy substance, compassed about with a thin Membrane. Although it
seem one, yet is it divided into two Parts, which are so separated, although
closly connexed; that one side may have the Palsy and the other be free, and
the one side may be discolored and the other not.

It is placed in the Mouth and throat, born up by the Basis of the T. 13. f.
11. and 12. A.
Os Hyoides, Situation.
and tied with a strong band. It was very conveniently thus seated, that it
might discover the Diseases which lie hid in the three Cavities of the Body
viz. The belly Chest and Head. For it is soaked and tainted with the moist and
fuliginous Excrements of those Parts, and has the Color of that Humor which
bears most swey in the Body.

And therefore because it is the Instrument of Taste, of speech and of the Mind,
it was requisite that it should correspond and communicate with those principal
Bowels: and therefore as the Urin is in all Diseases looked upon and examined, so
ought the Tongue to be diligently considered. Hippocrates Lib. 6. Epidem: Sect.
3. Text 14.

The Tongue shows what the Urin is: which Galen has confirmed in his Commentary
upon that place.

The Magnitude of the Tongue is to be considered: for naturally it ought to be
Magnitude.
as long as a man's middle Finger, but hardly so thick as the said Finger, and
not broader than the breath of two Fingers. Such is the natural greatness of
the Tongue, that it may be fit to speak with, otherwise a thick, overlong and
overbroad Tongue, does much hinder a man's Speaking.

The T. 13. f. 16. and 17.
pointed end of the Tongue, which smites against the Teeth, is termed
Proglossis: Proglossis
the broad end which lies hid in the Throat, is called Basis Linguae, the
bottom of the Tongue. That it may not run out to far or wander from its
bounds, it is retained by a band under neath, which is called Fraenum Linguae,
the bridle Fraenum
of the Tongue.

It has Veins from the Jugular, Arteries from the Carotick. The Veins under Its
Vessels. Kernels.
the Tongue are called Hypoglottides or Ranulae: and two Kernels placed there
are likewise termed Ranulares, in which, grown round and hard, the foundation
of the Elephantiasis, a kind of Leprosy, is bred, as appears by the swelling
of the Lips, Pushes of the Face, and thickness of the Tongue. Muscles
It has T. 13. f. 14. a a. b b.
Nerves for tasting and motion. For though it be of it self Voluble in
speaking, yet for the more strong motions of chewing, swallowing and spitting,
it stands in need of T. 13. f. 14. B. C. D. E.
Muscles, of which you may read in my History of Muscles Lib. 5. a T. 13. f.
14. A.
b T. 13. f. 14. B B.


The Medicinal Consideration.
The Tongue is subject to diverse Diseases, Similar, Organick, and common.
Diseases of the Tongue. Similar. Organical.
For it is liable to al kinds of distempers; to looseness or softness, hardness,
Density and Rarity of substance.

It is Organically Diseased, when it is swollen in all its dismensions and
cannot be contained within the Hedge of the Teeth. Common.


It is inflamed, when the Tumor called Batrachium rises under the Tongue, and
turns to an Impostum: out of which being opened, there flows a substance like
the white of an Egg and sometimes true quittor. If it be removed never so little
from its place, the Cause is in the Os Hyoides, or in its Muscles, being either
Palsied or Convulsed.

It is also Ulcerated by those simple Ulcers termed Aphthae, and sometimes with
Malignant Ulcers, which putrify, Eat and consume the same. Whether its
substance will grow again.


That the substance of the Tongue may grow again is confirmed by many
Histories, and that the same being lost, a man is not wholly deprived of speech.

There have been some seen who could speak distinctly enough, so as to be
understood, without a Tongue. But peradventure they had some Part of their
Tongue remaining far within, which with the Glottis and Uvula did frame the
Speech. Its Symptoms


Symptoms of the Tongue, of the first kind, are two, the Marring of Speech and
Tasting. Speech is marred three ways, by Abolition, Imminution and
Depravation. Speech Abolished. Traulotis. Psallotis. Stammering
Abolition of Speech is termed Anaudia. Depravation of speech is of two sorts,
Traulotis, Psallotis or Balbuties. Traulotis is when the Patient cannot
pronounce some one letter, and Psallotis or Psellismos is, when he cannot
pronounce diverse letters. Ischnophonia, Stammering, is a stoppage of the
Tongue, so that the Patient cannot proceed in his discourse, but repeats one
and the same Tonguetied.
letter often over before he can proceed. Anchyloglossos and Mogilalia are when
the Tongue is tied either too strait or too loose. Taste Vitiated


There is a threefold marring of the Taste, not distinguished by names: for it
is abolished, depraved and diminished.

The depravation of taste happens when the Tongue is filled with some evil Taste
depraved
Humor. So that what ever it tastes is infected with that Humor and tastes
thereof. Taste is abolished when the Tongue perceives no taste in any thing.

The motion of the whole Tongue is abolished in the Palsy, diminished when the
Palsy of the Tongue.
half of the Tongue is Palsied, without any hurt to the Taste.

In a total Palsy of the Tongue, there is great fear that the Patient will fall
into an Apoplexy, though Fernelius saw none to follow: but we must not be too
confident, but meet the Disease when it is coming.

In a total Palsy of the Tongue the Patients are dumb: in a Palsy of half the
Tongue, they speak untowardly.

A simple affection of the Tongue, is its Color changed, which comes not only
Tongue discolored.
from the primary distempers thereof, but chiefly by Sympathy with the Bowels.

There is a certain trembling or wavering of the Tongue observed in Diseases of
the Brain, which is a forerunner of the Frenzy, according to Hippocrates in
his Coicks.

Chap. 13. Of the Larynx, or Head of the Windpipe.
THe Larynx is the Head of the T. 13. f. 9. and 10. E E.
Aspera Arteria or Windpipe, the instrument The Larynx. its
of modulating our speech, and the Channel by which Air is breathed in and out.

It Is seated in the Forepart of the Neck which is termed the Throat. Situation


In Men it bunches out more than in Women, for the Women have two Kernels
placed thereby, which swel more than they do in men, and so make the Neck even,
taking away that same deformed Protuberancy, which is seen in Men.

It consists of five Cartilages or Gristles, whereof the two greatest do make
up Gristles Thuroides Cricoides. Arytaenoides. Glottis.
the Body of the Larynx: the first is called T. 13. f. 1. and 2. f. 8. A.
Thuroides, the second T. 13. f. 3. and 4. f. 9. and 10. D D.
Cricoides, and those are the two largest and hardest. The third is the f. 5.
and 6. f. 10. a a.
Arytaenoides, which is placed upon the Cricoides and shuts up the Larynx.
Within there is observed a fourth, which is called f. 10. beneath A.
Glottis, being the principal Instrument of framing the Voice, which is
contracted and dilated with the Arytaenoides: but the Arytaenois with the
Glottis, is so firmly shut, when we draw our Breath in, that it strives against
the Muscles of the Throat and Chest which resist the same, to hinder
Exspiration or the going out of the breath, by which all the Muscles are
loosned, and Expulsion ceases from the inferior Parts. Only the Glottis Acts,
in the Modulation of our Speech.

And that nothing either solid or Liquid might fall into the Larynx, it has a
cover, which is called T. 13. f. 7. 9. and 10. A A.
Epiglottis. It stands always open for Respiration sake, nor is it Epiglotti^.
depressed save by the weight of what is eaten and drunk.

The whole Larynx is Moveable by way of Ascent and Descent, through help of
Muscles, for to Facilitate our swallowing. Its Moti^.


Again, two Cartilages or Gristles are moved by themselves viz. The Thyrois and
the Arytaenois. The former is widened and contracted, the latter is shut and
opened. For those are contrary motions, which are performed by f. 8. 9. 10.
etc.
separated Muscles, which spring from the Cricois an immovable Gristle, which
is placed to Its Muscles.
fasten the Gristles and Muscles, as a foundation to make the Circle of the
Larynx. Touching the Muscles, I shall speak in my Doctrine of Muscles.

The Larynx though it be Gristly, yet in Old Men it becomes boney, and it has
been found to be so in some that were to be hanged, whom the Halter could not
choke: and not only the Larynx, but also the gristly Channel of the f. 9. and
10. E E.
Aspera Arteria. Either those parts were boney or the Halter way too thick, so
that it could not sufficiently force and rend the same.

The Medicinal Consideration.
The Larynx is subject to a distemper, a Tumor and Inflammation, which when
Diseases of (...) Larynx.
it happens, it hinders Speech and Breathing and strangles the Patient without
any appearance of swelling, without.

Within fifteen or twenty hours it kills a Man, his mind and senses remaining
Squinzie.
sound and perfect. An Horrid Symptom it is, in which besides general
Remedies, if Scarrification of the Neck, will do no good, we must proceed ad
Bronchotemiam, viz. To open the Part by Section.

And this Disease is that most Pernicious Angina which Hippocrates make^
mention of: Liquid things penetrate into the Stomach, but al breathing is
stopped, and consequently sudden death must needs follow.

The Action of the Larynx is breathing, and the forming of speech and singing.
Privation of Speech. Hoarsness. want and disficulty o^ b^eathing.
Privation of speech is termed Aphonia, the depravation thereof is Raucedo
Hoar^ness: the Imminution thereof is called Ischnophonia.

The Interception of Respiration is termed Apnoia, the Imminution thereof
Dyspnoia.

Both these Actions are hurt, either by a proper Disease of the Larynx, or of
the neighboring Parts, or of the Parts remote, especially of the Lungs, from
whence the matter of speech is supplied and respiration proceeds. For the
Larynx affected, does only stop the ways of breathing.

The Epiglottis has its Diseases; either it is relaxed, or it is too much
contracted Diseases of the Epiglottis.
and straightened, or it becomes hard, whence proceeds difficulty in swallowing.

Some there are who can more easily Swallow meat than drink, and in such the
Epiglottis is become hard and sti^, so that it will not be born down save by the
weight of solid meat, with which that which is liquid slips along.

When it is become loose and Flaggy by reason of a Catarrh, it cannot be
conveniently raised up; and when it is become straiter and narrower than it
ought, it does not exactly shut the Arytenoides: which causes that crumms of
bread and some portion of what is drunk, do slip into the Windpipe.

Nature has provided against this inconvenience, having by the sides of the
Glottis, which is almost always shutting, framed and set certain Cavities,
which receive, such portions of meat or drink as slip beside, so that they are
cast out again by coughing. f f. 9. and 10. between A. and E.


Chap. 14. Of the Aspera Arteria or Wind-Pide.
IN the Forepart of the Neck is placed the T. 13. f. 9. and 10. E E*
Channel of the Aspera Arteria, the Use of the ^^sand.
Instrument of speech and breathing, because it brings Air into the Lungs and
carries out sooty Vapors; also there the Voice is formed and begins to be
Articulated.

It consists of many Semi-circular Gristles, which are severed one from
another, Its Gristles.
and are imperfect behind, not filling up the Circle, by reason of the
Oesophagus or Gullet which lies beneath it, being the Channel of Meat and Drink.

The Aspera Arteria or Windpipe is lined within by a Membrane, Its Membrane.
which is drawn from the Mouth into the inner parts of the Windpipe and
Oesophagus.

The Medicinal Consideration.
The Pipe of the Aspera Arteria is troubled with an hot or cold distemper, with
an Humor flowing from the Brain, whence comes Branchos, Raucedo or Hoarsness.

The Windpipe being wounded is curable and may securely be cut, under the
Whether the wouds of the windpipe are Curable?
Larynx, between two Gristles, in a very choking Squinsie.

May we not experiment this operation in a choking s^oppage and whe^zing with
rattling in the Windpipe, seeing that it may be as safely practiced in this
case as in the other? that sweet attenuating and cutting Liquors may be taken
or forced in, to cut the Phlegm and bring it up, if it be possible, and pain,
caused by Choughing, hinder no^?

Chap. 15. Of the Oesophagus, or Gullet.
THe Oesophagus is the T. 3. f. 2. E E. f. 3. E F. etc.
way for the meat to pass into the Stomach. The beginning What the Pharynx is.
thereof is termed Pharynx, which is moved by the help of Muscles, T. 3. f. 2.
and 3. A B C. etc.
to thrust or swallow the meat.

It is made up of a proper Fleshy Membrane. Woven together with straight and
Membrane of Oesophagus.
circular Fibers. It has another internal Tunicle which has its original from
the T. 3. f. 3. D.
Mouth.

Within the Chest, that it may give way to ths Aorta Artery, leaving the
Backbone, it inclines and is wreathed a little toward the right hand.

Two Kernels support that part which is so turned aside, and stay it on either
Its Kernels.
hand, which being drenched and swelled with some Humor, do bring a great
Impediment to the swallowing.

Oftentimes the end of the Oesophagus which is joined to the Stomach, and is in
Obstruction of the Oesophagus.
Latin termed T. 3. f. 3. H. f. 4. A.
Stomachus, is obstructed by a Tumor either proceeding from Phlegm or
Melancholy, which turns at last unto an Ulcer and brings Death*

Which Disease is known by the hard descent of soild meat into the Stomach,
which sometimes stays, and many times is vomited up again.

The End of the Fourth Book.
THE FIFTH BOOK OF THE ANATOMY AND PATHOLOGY OF John Riolanus, THE KINGS
PROFESSOR OF PHYSIC.
Chap. 1. Of the Limbs.
HAving gone over and finished the Trunk of the Body, I proceed The Method of
handling.
unto the Limbs, whose Muscles, Veins, Arteries and Nerves with the Diseases of
those Parts, I intend to explain, which cannot be done without Anatomical
dissection.

But before I proceed to that work: it will do very well to contemplate the
lex^eral Conformation of the Limbs, and and withal to show you what Veins are
wont to be opened, and in what places Issues may be made.

The Limbs are made up of the Scarf-Skin, the Skin, the fatty Membrane, the
Parts of which the Limbs are compounded.
Flesh of Muscles, Veins, Arteries, Nerves, Bones, Ligaments, Gristles and
Kernels. These Parts I shall so divide in the Limbs, as I did in the Trunk of
the body viz. Into parts containing and Parts contained.

The Parts containing are the Scarf-Skin, the Skin, the fatty Membrane, and the
common Membrane of the Muscles. All the other Parts are contained, being
comprehended by these. Touching the Scarf-Skin and the Skin, I shall repeat
nothing, because they are the same and al a like in all Parts. The Membrana
Adiposa or fatty Membrane, is spread out in the Arm as far as the Wrist: and in
the Leg, from the Groin unto the Ankles.

After that, follows the common Membrane of the Muscles, which comprehends the
Muscles in their natural Situation. In the Thigh the Fascia Lata supplies its
place.

The Medicinal Consideration.
The Universal Diseases of the Skin are diverse distempers, simple, Diseases of
the Skin.
or with Humors conjoined. If the distemper be with Humor it makes the Skin
rough or swollen, whence springs the Scab, the Mange, the Morphew, Scurfe,
Leprosy, Tetters, Itch, Pustles, Blains, Water-Bladders, Yellow-Blisters,
Warts, Scalds, Moles, Biles, Night-Blains, Ring-worms, Lowsie-Evil, Chops,
Black and Blewness, Small Pocks, Meazles, Whores-Pox and Elephantiasis or a
Cancerous Tumor, over the whole body. Of the Flesh.


The Flesh is infested with all kinds of Tumors, Inflammations, Carbuncles,
Choleric Tumors, Phlegmatic Tumors, Melancholic Tumors, Cancers, Watery
Tumors, Windy Tumors, Impostums of al sorts, Steatoma the Fat impostum,
Atheroma the Pap impostum, Meliceris the Honey impostume, an Ulcer, a wound and
a Gangrene.

An Athletick or Champion-like constitution of body, high fed, and as we say,
lusty and full of Beef, is dangerous. Hippocrates shows the Reason in his 1.
Book, Aphorism the 3. and Celsus says, that when a Man becomes Corpulent, he
ought to suspect least he be fatted to the slaughter. And in Hippocrates his
Aphorisms we are told, that fat Men are not so Long-lived as lean Men are, and
there are some of cold Constitutions. who have hot Stomachs. Of the Vessels. Of
the Bones.


Veins and Arteries have Diseases proper to themselves, the Nervs have their
peculiar Diseases, and the Joints have theirs. And the bones are subject to
fractures, Dryness, Disjoynting, Rottenness, etc. Which shall be explained when
we come to treat of the bones.

Chap. 2: Of the Superior Limbs.
The Limbs both Superior and inferior are divided into three principal Parts:
the The general* division of the Limbs. Special division.
Arm into T. 21. f. 1. C.
Brachium from the Shoulder to the Elbow, f. 1. D E.
Cubitus from the Elbow to the Hand, and the f. 1. F G H I.
Hand: The Leg into the f. 1. K.
Thigh the f. 1. M N.
Shank, and the f Foot. And forasmuch as the whole Arm hangs upon the f. 1. O P
Q.
Shoulder bone, as the whole Leg upon the f. 4. A.
Huckle bone, and those bones are not reckoned to appertain unto the Backbone,
the best way is to begin our description of the Limbs from them, viz. Of the
Arm from the Shoulder-blad, and of the Leg from the Huckle-bone.

Of the Shoulder Blade and the Arm from the Shoulder to the Elbow.
The Axillary Kernels.
The Shoulder Blade f. 1. A.
Joined to the f. 1. C.
Arm, makes a Joint: in the bending of which Joint beneath, Kernels are placed,
which are counted to be the Close stools of the Chest or Heart, as the
Parotides or Kernels behind the Ears, are of the brain, into which those Parts
do empty their Excrements. The place of these Kernels is called the Arm-Pit.
Diseases of the Kernels.


These Kernels do frequently Swel, Impostumate, are infected with the
King's Evil, and subject to Buboes, yea such as accompany the Whores-Pox, as in
the Groin. Of the whole Joint.


This Joint is liable to be disjointed, but it is more often vexed with the
Gout, Rheumatisme, and other Fluxions. The strong smell of the Arm-Holes
proceeeds from these Kernels. Upon which Martial has wittily and neatly played
in one of his Epigrams. Laedit te quaedam mala fabula, qua tibi fertur
Valle sub alarm trux habitare caper:
Hunc metuunt omnes, neque mirum, nam mala valde est
Bestia.


That is, An ill Report your Credit (Sir.) does wound,
How that a stinking Goat has dwelling found
Within your hollow Armpits shady Grove,
A beast which al Men fear, and none do love;
And good Cause why etc.


Of the Cubit or part of the Arm from the Elbow to the Hand.
The Articulation of the Brachium with the Cubit, is more hardly disjoynted;
admits Fluxions which do there breed diverse Tumors hard to cure. In which case,
The Diseases of the Joints of these Parts.
unless diligent care be taken, the very bones are altered and the Cubit is
made crooked, and such as are on that manner crook't, are by Hippocrates termed
Galliaggones.

If such a croockedness be caused by a retraction of the Muscles, it is more
easily cured, than if it come from a repletion of the Cavities by a thick,
clammy, condensed and dried Humor.

The Articulation of the Cubit to the Wrist is subject to many Diseases, the
Gout, the Rheumatisme, the Tumor Ganglium which possesses the tendons of the
Muscles; Phlegmatic Knobs and other Tumors.

Of the Hand.
The Hand is divided into the f. 1. F.
Wrist the f. 1. G H.
After-Wrist and the f. 1. l.
Fingers. To Diseases of the Hand.
these Parts the Diseases lately named are common. A Disease in number is here
usual in Children from the Womb, viz. A Sixth Finger growing to the Thumb o^
little Finger. It is easily taken away, by the Incision Knife.

Of the Nails
The Fingers are cerminated and closed up by the Nails, which are liable to
Diseases of the Nails.
diverse Diseases, in Figure, in Magnitude, wh^l they grow thick, wrinkled,
unequ^l, rough, ^ooked as in leprous persons; they are also Cleft; and fall off
in the time of Sickness and afterward breed again. The Color of the Nails is
changed in time of Sickness. Also there is a sore Disease of the Nails termed
a Whi^e-Loafe o^ Felon.

A Whey i^h very sharp Humor is bred under the Nail near the bone, which
causes most bitter and intolerable pains, and brings an Inflammation first of
the Hand, and after of the Arm also, unless the Humor be let out, by cutting
the pappy flesh of the Finger to the very bone.

The Pappy Ends of the F^^gers are aften corrupted, and pu^rifie, and sometimes
Of the Pappy Ends of the Fingers.
the last Joint of a Finger must of necessity be out off, by reason of a
sphacelation of the bone.

Paronyc^ia Gr^corum, viz. Opening of the Skin at the corners of the Nails and
Issuing of blood therea^, is a ^leight Disease, which does not affect the
tendons and Nerves of the Fingers Ends, as that Panaritium Arabum, a Disease of
this Part described by the Arabia^ Physicians.

The Ancient Philosophers, and Physicians, were wont to Divine, and tell
Fortunes, by the Nails of Men's Fingers: touching which kind of Divination,
Camillus Baldus has lately written. g f. 1. A.
a T. 21. f. 1. C.
b f. 1. D E


Chap. 3. Of the Inferior Limbs.
The Inferior Limbs are commonly divided into three Parts; The Thighs, the
Diseases of the inferior Limbs.
Shank, and the Foot. The Os Ilium is joined to the Thigh, and from thence we
are to ^ake measure of the length of the Leg. In the bending of the Os Ilii,
and the Thigh, are placed many Kernels, above and beneath; in which diverse
Buboes arise, both Pestilential, Venereal, and springing from common Causes: of
which we have spoken in our Chapter of the Per^^o^eum.

These inferior Limbs are liable to the same Diseases with the superior, which
I will not repeat. Proud Flesh is often bred in the hinder parts by contusion of
the Thighs, occasioned by long and hard sitting, or riding. Fernelius does
elegantly explain the material Cause hereof.

It is not caused by afflux of Humors, but only by the nourishment of the Part,
which being ulcerated within or without, if it be not stopped, it is by
continual access of Nutriment spread abroad, and swelled, and produces
oftentimes as it were certain Pipes of Veins and Arteries, by which it is
nourished. So, when the Skin remaining whole, the Flesh underneath is bruised
and ^orn, a mighty Swelling does arise by little and little, without any pain,
but furnished with exquisite sense, and Natural Heat.

In the Joint of the Thigh, about the Cavity of the Huckle bone, is bred the
Gout The Sciatica.
called Sciatica. If the Humor flow into the Ace^abulum, and cause the Head of
the Thigh Bone to slip out of its place, it breeds a Disease in Situation hard
to cure, and which at last causes the Patient to hault.

If a very sharp pu^rid Humor does corrode, and bring corruption into the
Joint, The Hip-Consumption.
it produces a Disease called Phthisi^ Coxaria, the Hip-Consumption, which
makes an end of the Patient by degrees. If an Humor flow into that part where
the great Nerve arises, which creeps up and down the hind parts of the Leg,
Notha Ischias, The Bastard Sciatica.
o^ a Bastard Sciatica is produced.

Swellings of the Knee, either springing from a Phlegmatic Humor, or from
Inflammation, Swellings of the Knee.
are oftentimes very dangerous, or long-lasting, and at last do hasten the
Patients Death.

The Foot is divided into the T. 21. f. 1. O.
Ta^sus, f. 1. P.
Metatarsus, and the f. 1. Q.
Toes. The first Bone of the Tarsus called f. 5. B.
Pte^na, is subject to a Disease springing from Cold or Fluxion, which i^
called Pernio, a Kibe: And because this Bone receives a very Ki^es.
thick Tendon, if it be bruised and wounded, it causes in^vitable death, by the
very Convulsions thereby raised.

The Toes of the Feet, by comp^^ssion, and straitness of Shoo^ or Boots, have
painful Corns breeding upon them, the unw^^y ex^^^pation whereof has sometimes
Corns.
brought a Gangrene into the Part.

The whole Leg from the bending of the G^oyn unto the T^^s, is sometimes
exceedingly The Legs. Elephantiasis, of the Arabia^^*
swollen with an hard, and il-favored Tumor, which is called Elephantiasis,
Arabum: The Arabian Physicians, Elephants Leg, because it makes the Leg of the
Patient resemble that of an Elephant.

But the Shank and Foo^ are chiefly ^iable to defluxions which are caused
either in Swellings.
such as are newly recovered out of sickness, by ^he Humors falling down into
those parts; or primarily by the evil Disposition of the said parts.

The principal matter of these Tumors, is Wind or Water, or a clammy Phlegmatic
Humor, which produces the swelling called Oedema.

Sometimes the Toes of the Feet, as well as the Fingers of the Hand, are
deficient or superfluous in their Number. There is a little knob grows sometimes
under the little Toe called Gemursa, because it makes the Patient groan.

Di^eases consisting in the Evil-shaping of the Shank and Foot are frequent.
Ill shape
Hence arose those nick Names Varus, one that has crooked Legs bending inward;
Valgus, one that has Legs bending outward; Compernis, one narrow between the
Knees; Scauripeda, one that has hunching Ankles, that interfer and hinder his
going; Pansus, one that has a broad or Splay foot; Atta, he that treads only on
the fore part of his Feet, as it were on Tip Toes; Plautus, he that is
Splayfooted or Broad-footed, al which Infirmities are seen in grown Persons and
in Children.

Some are borne with their Legs contracted, others become so by ill Swaddling in
the time of their Infancy, and by untoward Carriage in their Nurses Arms.
Sometimes one foot is longer than the other which Causes halting.

Sometimes the Feet do Stink intollerably, by reason of their much heat and
Stink Palsy
Sweat; which must be helped. Oftentimes there happens a Palsy of the lower
Limbs, by reason of a Defluxion of Humors out of the Mesentery, into the Lumbal
Nerves. Many times a bastard Sciatica does possess the whole Thigh as low as to
the Ankle-bone, even as far as that most thick Nerve does reach, which comes
from the Os Sacrum. Pains of the Knees are extreme bitter and make stout Men
cry out. Knees pains.
Because of the consent the Knees had with the Veins in the Mothers Womb. And
Pliny says that a Man's life lies in his very Knees.

Fluxions of Rheum into this Joint are long lasting, dangerous and hard to
Wounds of the Ankle.
Cure, in the Judgment of Pardus, which daily experience does confirm. And a
blow or wound in the Anckle, that same great Tendon being bruised or wounded,
do bring Death, not without great Convulsions, so says Hippocrates.

Chap. 4. In what places Issues are commonly made.
NOw I will show you in what places Issues are to be made to purge out Wheyish
Plates of Issues. in The Crown of the Head.
Humors, which flow either through the Vessels or betw^een the Skin. I will
begin at the Head.

And first of al an Issue may be made where the sagittary and coronal Sutures
meet. You may find the place by applying your Wrist to the Nose of the Patient,
and observing how far you can reach upon his head with your middle Finger, for
there the Issue must be made.

Also in the hollow part of the Occiput or hind part of the Head. But if you
The Hind part of the Head.
find no fitting Cavity there, you may apply your Caustic on either side of
the Additions of the Sutura Lambidoides.

Likewise in the hollow behind the Ears, when the Eyes or Ears are Fore part of
the Head.
Diseased.

Sometimes on either side of the Neck, as far as the third or fourth Vertebra.
The Neck The Arm The Breast


In the middle of the Arm between the Muscles Deltois and Biceps.

In the Breast, two or three may be made according to the Longitude thereof, in
Diseases of the Chest and Lungs.

At the bending of the Buttocks, at the Ends of the Muscles called Gloutii, where
The Thigh
the Thigh is perceived to move upon the Joint, an Issue may be made, in a
perfect Sciatica when the Humor possesses the Cavity of the Joint.

Issues are made within side the Thigh, two Fingers above the Knee; also on the
The Leg
inside of the Leg, two Fingers beneath the Ham.

Sometimes to turn away Fluxions into the Thigh, Issues are made upon the The
Loins
Loins, near the Backbone, on each side the said bone.

Chap. 5. Of Veins usually opened.
I Proceed unto such Veins of the whole body as are usually opened. Veins The
Veins which are wont to be opened. in The Fore head Hind part of the Head.
which now adays are opened in the Head, are in the Forehead, the hinderpart
of the Head, and in the Temples.

The Forehead Vein is termed T. 1. f. 1. L. T. 24. f. 1. B B.
Praeparata or the ready Vein, because it is evident, and there is no need to
Shave the Hair to come at it, as must be done in the Vein behind the Head,
which is termed Vena Puppis, the Aftenship-Vein.

The ancients did open the Veins behind the Ears, but that operation is now out
of use: Hippocrates says the cutting of those Veins made the Scythians barren;
perhaps he meant the Arteries in those Parts. The manner of opening these Veins
Albucasis does ^each us in his 2. Book Chap. 97.

Neither is it unprofitable to open the Veins of the Head, by reason of the
external Veins, which through the holes of the Scul have communion with the
Menings.

I know Hieronimus Fabricius ab Aqua Pendente disallowes the opening of those
Veins, because oftentimes they do not appear. But if the Head be rubbed, and
the Hair shaved off and then again rubbed, they will be more evident, provided
you throa^le the Neck a little with a Towel or Napkin.

The b temporal Vein is also cut as is the Artery, in great and continual pains
of In the Temples In the Nose
the Head.

The Ancients did open the inner Veins of the Nose, as appears out of
Hippocrates in diverse places, and from Galen his 6. ^o^k of Epidemicks. The
later Greek writers, Paulus Aegineta and Aretaeus, men^^on ^^e opening of inner
Veins of the Nose: and Areteus himself, declares the Inst^u^ents which the
Ancients used, to provoke those Veins to bleed. ^ut if ^he blood, according to
the Opinion of Fernelius, do flow from the Veins o^ the Face, which creep into
the inner Parts of the No^t^ils; the Head being opp^essed with plenty of blood,
cannot be eased, because that same Irritation and opening of the Veins, ought
to be per^ormed nea^ the Colander bone, h^t ^he Longitudinal passage creepi^g
unto the Nost^^ls may be opened. therefore ^ conceive those Parts are
frequen^ly to be fomen^ed with Lukewarm Water, before we use those Instruments
p^opounded by Aretaeus.

The manner of opening those Veins propounded by Albucasis, may be admitted,
but it does not pene^rate to the inmost Part of the Nos^^^ls, as far as the
Colander bone.

The Veins under the Tongue termed Ra^ulares are more frequently opened In the
Mouth
with good success, in Diseases of the Throat and Head. Only Aurelianus against
Diocles has disallowed that Practice, alleging that it fills the Head, and
the blood cannot be stopped. Lib. 1. Acut. c. 12.

True it is that in some the blood has Issued so plentifully, that it could
very hardly be stopped, as was observed in a Capuchin Friar, Father Joseph. le
Clerc, the great Politician and ^amiliar friend of the Cardinal Richelieu; as
Simon Pimpernel a most expart Surgeon of Paris, himself told me, he having
opened the said Veins, in the Fria^ aforesaid.

In the Neck the T. 1. f. 1. H.
external Jugular is opened. T^alli^nus in Cure of the Squinsie In the Neck.
opened the same with good success Lib 4. Cha^. 1. And Soranus Ephesius, in his
Introduction Chap. 12. Commends the opening of this Vein. In like manner
Actuarius commends this Practice in dangerous Disea^es of the Head. Caesalpinus
Lib. 2. Quaest: Medic. Chap. 12. Commands the opening of this Vein in a
Squinzy, because the Jugular Veins are more filled, than the shut cover and
Mouth of the Larynx.

Prosper Alpinus in his 2. Book of the Egyptian manner of healing Diseases
Chap. 9. Writes that this is a common Remedy in that Country. b T. 1. f. 1. I.
c T. 1. K.


Jacobus Corpus in his Anatomical Introductions, shows the way to open those
Veins. Read Paulus Magnus Lib. de Phlebotomia printed in the Italian Tongue.
And Rondeletius in his Me^hod^^s Medendi; Lud^v^cus Mercatus Chap. 13. Method;
Medend. And Albucasis Lib. 2. Chap. 97.

Rondeletius ^els us of a Vein in the Back Lib. 1. Methodi Melendi. Chap. 37.
In the Back
Which he says is to be found, in the first Vertebra of the Back; it is seen
elevated on the top of the Vertebraes, creeping down the back, as far as Os
Sacrum. It seems to flow from the brain according to the Longitude of the
spinal Marrow. He lets us know that this Vein is profitably opened, in the
Tetanus and Falling Sickness, and if it be not so visible as to be opened, in
that place must Cupping-Glasses be fastened with Scarification.

Ludovicus Mercatus in Lib. 1. Practicae Cap. 19. Commends this Remedy against
the Convulsion. Hippocrates in his Book de Visu, burns and pricks the Veins of
the back: which Remedy is propounded by Alexander Benedictus Lib. 1. de Morbis
Curandis, c. 5. And Gattiuaria advises to open the same in in his Comment upon
the 9. Book of Rhasis.

In the Arm three Veins are opened, the Cephalic or Head Vein accompanied In
the Arm
by an T. 1. f. 1. Q. R. T. 24. f. 4. a a a. etc.
Artery without any Nerve, and therefore it is opened without danger. The
Basilica and Mediana are opened, but the T. 1. f. 1. M. T. 24. f. 1. C C.
Basilica must be opened with prudent waryness, by reason of an Artery near the
same and the Tendon of Musculus Biceps, which lies beneath it: neither is the
T. 1. f. 1. N. T. 24. f. 1. f f. etc.
Mediana void of the like danger.

In the Hand between the Ring Finger and the little Finger the T. 1. f. 1. P.
Salvatella is
opened, the opening thereof many account superstition: howbeit Hippocrates
opened the Veins of the Hands: and this Remedy has not been rejected by learned
Physicians, especially in long lasting Sicknesses, and in the Quartan Ague at
the Conjunction of the Sun and Moon: which I have known to have succeeded
happily both to other Physicians, and to my self, in old Quartans, after the
use of diverse Medicaments.

It is not our Custom to open the Veins in the lower part of the Thigh above
the Knee: yet Lazarus Sotus says that they are opened in Portugal in his 1
Book of Animadversions, Chap. 4. Sect. 61. To stop gouty Defluxions into the
Legs, and to diminish the deformity of the Varices or black swollen Veins of
those Parts, the Ancients were wont to open them. And Platerus commends this
Remedy to to diminish the Varices. Which may be confirmed out of Galen Lib. 2.
Method^ ad Glauconem.

In the ^oot is opened the a Saphena, which is above the Malleolus internus o^
In the Foot.
inner Ancle bone; or the continvation thereof in Tarso, or the swelling side
of the Foot between the Heel and the great Toe.

Sometimes the T. 1. f. 1. SS. T. 24. f. 4. m.
Ischiadica Vena or Sciatica Vein, is opened, which is Situate in the external
Ankle. But this Vein ought not to be opened without very great heed to the
place where the Orifice is made, because of an Artery near, and Tendons very
near the same.

'Twas usual with the Ancients to open the T. 24. f. 4. f f.
Ham Vein, which is now a days seldom performed, and quite out of use:
never^heless the opening thereof would be as beneficial as is the opening of
the Arm Veins.

It might be conveniently opened if the Leg be put into a Vessel of hot Water
above ^^ ^hether the Foot Veins may be opened and how?
the Knee, and rubbed, as is usual in bleeding at the Arm; also a double
Ligature may be used, one above and the other below the Knee. It is easily
found and safely opened, below the hollow of the Ham, at the beginning of the
Musculi Gemelli: and a sick Woman as she lies in her bed, may as conveniently
present her Leg as the Arm, being covered with the sheet or other fitting
covering.

Though the Sciatica Vein and the Saphena are branches of the Crural Vein yet,
because the Sciatica Vein does answer the Basilica, as the Saphena does t^
Cephalica of the Arm; certain it is, blood is drawn by a more direct way from
the Sciatica Vein, then from the Saphena. Howbeit Galen in his second Book
Secundum Locos Chap. 2. The Sciatica Vein not appearing admits the Saphena to
be opened in stead thereof. And if it appear not in the outward Ankle, its
branch must be opened, on the Tarsus or pulp of the Foot beneath the Ankle, or
above the Ankle, if it be visible.

Its also possible to make it the more apparent by such a kind of Ligature as
the Author of the Book de Anatomia Vivorum has described, made with a long and
broad Swath-band brought from the top of the Hip as low as the Ankle.

Chap. 6. Of the Arteries which are opened.
THe Ancient Physi^ians were wont to open Arteries as well as Veins. Howbeit
Whether Arteries may be opened?
Horatius Augenius in his Book of Blood-letting, disswades the opening of
Arteries, because he never saw any Artery opened, that could be stopped again,
Aurelianus, Favors his Opinion, in his 1. Book of Chronick Diseases Chap. 5.
Howbeit Galen in his Book de Venae Sectione, commends the opening of the
Smaller Arteries in very bitter and old pains of the Head.

Heurnius did wish, that in some part or other it might be safe to open an
Artery in burning Fevers, because one Porringer of the Arterial blood drawn
out, would cool the Patient more, than to loose ten Porringers of the venal
blood. And in his Commentary upon the 23. Aphorism of the 1. Book, he says
that in the Hungarian What Arteries are to be opened?
Fever, when very red blood drops out at the Nose, it would do the Patient
good to draw a little blood from an Artery. But who (says he) dares open an
Artery? I desire that al learned Artists would think of it.

I say therefore, and aver, That in Paris, the Arteries of the Forehead and In
the Forehead. In the Temples
Temples, before and behind the Ears, are successfully opened in Ancient or
very acute pains of the Head, in the Frenzy, Inflammations and extreme pains
of the Eyes and Ears.

As for the opening of the temporal Artery Thadaeus Dunus, in the 12. Chap. Of
his Miscellanies, shows how profitable a Remedy, it is.

Lazarus Sotus aforementioned, in the same place, observes that the Arteries
behind the Ears are profitably opened in Portugal.

Ludovicus Mercatus a Spanish Physician suspects this opening of these
Arteries, for fear it should make Men Barren. But daily experience has
delivered us from that fear.

An Artery seated in the hinder Part of the Head is opened, the Hair being
first In the ^ind Part of the Head.
Shaven of, and the Head and hand being ^omented in hot water, or rubbed with a
Sponge, that it may appear. The manner of opening this Artery, is not unlike
that of the temporal Artery, and therefore that same way of Paulus Aegineta,
Aetius and Albucasis, is to be rejected, who did first cut the Skin before they
opened the Artery.

Galen in his Book of Blood-letting near the end, in an Inflammation of the
Liver In the Hand
opened the a Artery, which Runs out between the Thumb and Fore Finger.

Which, Prosper Alpinus observes to be very usual in Egypt, in his third Book
and 12. Chap. De Medicina Egypt. And Septalius in his 6. Book of
Animadversions* Article 122. Judges that in a Palpitation of the Heart, the In
the Foot
Arteries which Run along the Fingers may safely be opened. Which may likewise
be done in the Tarsus and Meta-Tarsus of the Foot, according to the Advice of*
Galen in his 3. Book of Anatomical Administrations, and the last Chapter.

In other Parts Arteries may not in any wise be opened, unless they have a bone
under them, that they may be pressed close down to make the Orifice grow
together again: and therefore in a lean Body, an Artery being unawars opened in
the Arm, may be closed again, if it be timly and closely tied as is sitting, to
avoid Aneurisma.

Before we think of opening the Arteries of the Head to turn away Fluxions, An
experiment of Benedictus ^or the Rheumatism.
that experiment of Alexander Benedictus will not be unprofitable, to apply unto
the Shorn Head, Medicines that are to stop Rheums falling into the Eyes, must
be applied from the Eyebrows unto the Crown of the Head: if the Eyes begin to
appear dry, it is manifest that the Rheum falls into them by those Veins which
are under the Skin: but if they continue moist, it is evident the Humor flows
into them from under the bone.

Now the foresaid Mixture of Alexander Benedictus which stops Rheums is this.
Make a Cataplasme of Course bran, ^ine Frankincense, the white of an Egg, a
little Vitriol and Stone Alum^ and apply it as a foresaid.

Chap. 7. Of the Muscles and first of the Forehead Muscles.
INtending to explain all the Muscles of the Body, I will begin at the Frontal or
The Forehead Muscles should rather be called the Eye-brow Muscles.
T. 15. f. 1. E E.
Forehead Muscles, which I conceive are ordained rather to move the Eyebrows,
than the Forehead it self.

They have their original from the upper Parts of the Forehead, and being
spread ou^ upon the bone thereof, they end at the Eyebrows, that they might
lift them up. They are severed in the midst of the Forehead, right above the
Nose. And because we do at our pleasure depress and draw together our Eyelids
into wrinkles, we must assign to each of them its Muscle, and I can find no
other save the Orbicular T. 15. f. 1. F F.
Muscle of each Eyelid; for the Eyebrows cannot be drawn down without the
Eyelids be closly (...).

Chap. 8. Muscles of the hinder Part of the Head.
IN the after Head are found Muscles, or rather fleshy Membranes, which draw
backwards the Skin of the Head in such persons as have the said Skin movable.
These Muscles, as also those of the Forehead, are portions of the Musculus
Latus or Broad (...); which Sylvius does neatly compare to a riding Hood,
taking away only as much as is covered with a little cap on the top of a Man's
Head: and therefore the broad Muscle does cover the Neck, Face, Fore and side
Parts of the Head. a T. 15. f. 1. E E.
b T. 15. f. 1. F F.


Chap. 9. Muscles of the Eyelids.
THe two Eyelids are moved by four Muscles, of which three are orbicular, and
one is straight belonging to the upper Eyelid, which arises at the internal
The first.
Cavity of the Eye, and being spread out upon the Muscles, which lifts up the
Eye, it (...) unto the Eyelid.

The first of the (...) or round Muscles, is the Musculus Ciliaris, which The
second.
compasses about each of the Eyelids. The other is drawn out under the
Eyelid, arising from the Circumference of the Orbita or Socket of the Eye.

The ^ third round Muscle being of a Fingers breadth, compasses the Surface of
the The Third.
Orbita or Socket, and being placed under each Eyelid, and reaching as far as
The fourth
the Eye-brow, and closly shutting the two Eyelids, it lifts up the lower and
draws down the Eye brow.

Chap. 10. Muscles of the Eyes.
THere are reckoned six Muscles of the Eye, four Straight and two Oblique, The
Attollens.
which are named from their Situation and action. One is termed T. 19. f. 3.
A. 4. 5. A.
Supernus and Attollens Oculum, the upper, and the Eyes up lifter; another is
called f. ^. 4. 5.
Infernus The Deprimens
and Deprimens Oculum, the lower and Eye Depresser; of the two Lateral or side
Muscles, one at the greater corner of the Eye is termed f. 3, 4, 5. C.
Lectorius, the The Adducens
Readers or the Students Muscle; the other placed at the smaller corner is
called f. 3, 4, 5. D.
Indignatorius, the Disdeigners Muscle.

They al arise from the Cavity of the Socket of the Eye and the broad Nervous
The Abd^^ent
production, and are inserted into the Cornea Tunica under the Conjunctiva.

The Contranitency of these Muscles pulling one against another is necessary,
that the Eye might be movable to and fro, which being depraved, the Eye is
drawn to some one side, and so abides in that posture.

And that the Eye might be drawn back toward the greater Corner, and might be
fixed in continual reading or looking upon somewhat, Nature has framed two other
Muscles, which are termed Oblique, because they direct the Oblique motion of
the Eye, which is none at al, neither can the Muscles themselves perform such a
Motion in regard of their Original and Insertion, which ought to be contrary
and opposite.

The Musculus Obliquus T. 19. f. 1. A B.
Major, greater Oblique Muscle, or Trochleator, conteins The Obliquus Ma^^r.
in it a wonderful piece of Workmanship, which is found in Mankind, detected by
Rondeletius and observed in some great Fishes: for taking its rise from the
Cavity of the Orbita, it produces a thin Tendon, which being drawn through a
Transverse T. 15. f. 1. F F.
Gristle affixed unto the bone, by and beneath the Glandula Lachrymalis or
weeping Kernel, is after widened and spread out upon the Eye.

The Obliquus f. 3. and 4. E.
Minor drawn out externally by the greater Corner, and rolled The Obliquus
Minor.
athwart about the Globe of the Eye, comes as far as the Tendon of the greater
Oblique Muscle, that the Nervous productions of both the Oblique Muscles might
meet together to draw back and ^ix the Eye toward the Nose, that from both the
Eyes beholding, one Pyramid Li^e may pass unto the visible Object. a T. 19. f.
3. and 4. F.
b f. 3. and 4. G.


Chap. 11. Muscles of the external Ear.
THey are common and proper, which are Seldom moved, because the Ear it Of the
external Ear.
self is rarely moved. They are therefore rather marks and signs of Muscles,
than true ones, such as are found in Brute Beasts which move their Ears.

And therefore a portion of the frontal Muscle reaching unto the Ear, a portion
of The common.
the Cutaneous or Skin Muscle drawn unto the Pulp of the Ear, and a Part of the
Occipital or after Head Muscle, stretched out behind the Ears, do make the
common Muscles.

There is only one proper Muscle, which lurks under the Ligament One proper.
of the Ear, it arises, from the Mammillary Process, and is inserted into the
Root of the Ear.

The later Anatomists do make reckoning of two Muscles appertaining to the
internal Internal Ears
Ear, one of which is T. 19. f. 3. and 4. F.
external in the auditory passage or hole of the Ear, First. Second
which draws back the Membrane of the Ear: the other is within the f. 3. and 4.
G.
Concha, fastened to the Mallet or Hammer.

In Bruts the Muscles of the internal Ea^ are more evident than in Men 3 f. 3.
and 4. E.
^ T. 20. f. 5. A.
b T. 20. f. 5. C C.


Chap. 12. Muscles of the Nose.
THey are common and proper. One Common.


The common is only one, being the upper portion of that Orbicular Muscle which
compasses the T. 15. f. 1. N N
Lips, which draws the No^e downwards, when the upper Lip is drawn down.

Two T. 15. f. 1. G.
Muscles do lift up the Nose, on each side one, drawn from the space between
^^^ proper.
the Eyebrows and fastened to the bone of the Nose, and so carried to the
wings or battlements thereof; the motion of these Muscles, when they act
together is easily perceived in the drawing up and cri^ping or wrinkling of the
Nose.

In Persons that are largly Nosed, two T. 15. f. 1. I.
little Muscles are found, spread upon the extreme Gristles of the No^e, which
do widen the Laps of the Nose, without any elevation or lifting up.

Within the Nostrils under the Succingent Coat, there lies lurking a little
Muscle of a Membranous Nature, which does stick to the internal Parts as far as
the Laps of the Nose, it is said to contract the Nostrils.

Chap. 13. Muscles of the Lips*
SEeing there are two Lips, each has its Muscles, and there are two common to
both.

The upper Lip is drawn upwards by a T. 15. f. 1. K.
Muscle which taking its rise from the hollow The first of the proper ones.
of the Jaw, benea^h the Cheek bone, de^cends obliquely or sla^ting to the
upper Lip.

It is moved downwards by a f. 1. M.
Muscle brought from the midst of the lower Jaw, The second.
into the said Lip.

The nether Lip is drawn upwards by a Muscle, which being drawn out of the The
third.
lower Parts of the Cheek bone, does and side ways upon the nether Lip.

I^ is moved downwards by a f. 1. N.
Muscle, which Springing out of the Chin, is inserted The fourth.
into the middle Lip.

The common Muscles are the lateral on^^* which do draw the Lips to the right
or The common ones. 1 Zygomaticus. 2 Buccinator.
left side

The first is called f. 1. L.
Zygomaticus, being somewhat long and thin, and arising from the bone Zygoma, it
is ^erminated in the meeting of each Lip.

The other common one, is vulgarly termed f. 1. O.
Buccinator or the Trumpeter, it were more rightly called Bucco the Cheek
driver, because it stirs the Cheeks, wh^^ ^^ drives the meat this way and that
way, in the action of chewing.

It arises from the top of the Gums or the bones in that place near the
farthest grinders, and ends in each Lip. It is loose and s^ack, that it may
give way inwards, and perform its Office of forcing, as the Muscles of the
belly do; and that it may give way, when the Mouth ^apes wide.

There is added a round f. 1. NN*
Muscle, which makes the proper substance of the Lips, Sphincter of the Mouth
by the service whereof the Mouth, is drawn together, the Lips are opened, go
inwards, and swel. It might well be called the Sphincter of the Mouth, or the
Pylorus.

Chap. 14. Muscles of the lower Jaw.
THey are on either side six. The T. 15. f. 1. P P. f. 2. A A.
Temporal Muscle, being a very strong one The Temporal
li^ts up the Jaw. It arises from the whole Cavity of the Temples, and being
carried along under the Os Zygoma, it is by a very strong nervous Tendon
inserted into the sharp a process of the Jaw Bone.

This Muscle is assisted by the Pterygoideus f. 2. D D.
Internus, arising from the Cavity of Pterygoideus Internus.
the Apophysis Pterygoides, and terminated at the corner of the inferior Jaw.
It is called by Galen Masseter Internus.

The Jaw is drawn down wards by the Digastricus or Twi-Belly'd Muscle, and
Digastricus.
the Musculus Latus or Broad Muscle.

The Digastricus or Twi-Belly, being in the f. 1. T T. f. 2. C C
middle Nervous and fleshy at the Ends, springs from the Apophys^^ Styloides,
and being in the Middle reflexed about the Stylo-Ceratoides, it is inserted
into the Chin, under the bending of the Jaw.

The Musculus T. 10. f. 1. (...). T. 15. f. 2. F.
Latus or Broad-Belly, arises from the upper Part of the Brestbone, The Latus.
the Clavicula and Shoulder point, and cleaves firmly to the Basis of the
inferior Jaw, mu^fling the Neck and whole Face; and by reason of the aforesaid
Adhesion, it is said to draw the Jaw downwards.

Pterygoideus T. 15. f. 2. E E E E.
Externus, the external wing fashiond Muscle forces the Jaw Pterygoideus
Externus.
forwards, which being swelled does lightly drive the Jaw Bone forewards: which
happens in the overshooting of the Jaw Bone, when the lower Teeth are above the
upper Teeth.

The Jaw is plucked about this way and that way by the Masseter or Chaw Muscles
being in its Original Twi-Headed, one of whose heads arises from the Os Zygoma,
Masseter.
the other beneath the said bone; each of which being furnished with diverse
Fibers which Cross one another, is inserted into the Corner of the inferior
Jaw. It may easily be divided into two Parts.

Chap. 15. Of the Muscles of the Os Hyoides.
BEcause the bone termed T. 13. f. 11. and 12. A B C. etc.
Hyoides, is placed in the Neck to a prop and foundation for the Tongue and
Larynx, it has obtained Muscles as well as Ligaments, by which it is held
suspended, that it might be moved with the Tongue and Larynx.

And therefore its Muscles are common to the Tongue and the Larynx.

The bone Hyoides has ten Muscles, on each side five, for I add the Muscle
termed Myloglossus (which is commonly attributed unto the Tongue) and I call it
Mylohyoideus, because, it does not any ways touch the Tongue. b T. 15. f. 2. a
a.
f f. 1. S. f. 2. B B.


The Os Hyoides is l^^^^d up by the Muscle T. 13. f. 13. B B.
Geniohyoideus, it arises from within The Genio^yoideus. Mylobyoideu
the Chin and is inserted into the Ba^is of the Hyoides.

Assistant hereunto is the Muscle f. 4. E E.
Mylohyoideus, i^ arises from within the Jaw in the Quarters of the Grinding
Teeth, and reaches to the Basi^ of the Bone Hyoides.

The bone Hyoides is drawn downwards by the Muscle c S^ernohyideus which (...)
springs from the top of the Breast bone, and drawn o^t upon the Wesan^ is
inserted into the Basis or bottom, of the said bone Hyoides.

The Muscle f. 13. D D.
Stylocerathyoideus, from the Apophysis Styloides is carried Stylocerathyoideus.
into the Horns of the Os Hyoides.

Chap* 16* Muscles of the Tongue.
THe Tongue is forced forward by the Muscle f. 13. C C.
Genyoglossus, which growing out Genyoglossus.
of the inner side of the Chin, is terminated to the Tongues Root.

It is drawn back by the Muscle f. 14. B B.
Basiglossus which takes its rise at the Basis of Basiglossus.
Os Hyoides, and is carried unto the Root of the Tongue.

It is forced sidewaies to the right and left, by the Muscle ^. 14. D D.
Stylogossus, which Stylogossus.
taking its beginning at the Apophysis Styloides, is extended into the middle,
very near of the Tongue. d f. 1. E E.


Chap* 17* Muscles of the Larynx.
THe whole body of the Larynx consisting of five Gristles, is moved upwards and
downwards.

It is drawn upwards by the Muscle T. 13* f. 8. B B.
Hyothyroideus, which arising from the Hyothyroideus.
Basis of the Hyoides bone, is inserted into the external middlemost of the
Thyroides.

The Muscle f. 8. C C.
Bronchius draws it downwards, which taking its rise, from the (...).
inner side of the Breast bone, and stre^ched out upon the Channel of the Aspera
Arteria or Wesand, it ascends unto the Bas^ of Thyroides.

Two only of the Gristles of the Larynx are movable, viz. The f. 1, 2. 8. A.
Thyroides and the f. ^. and 6.
A^yt^noides, and to procure their motion they have little Muscles, which
spring out of the immovable Gristle Cricoides.

The Thyroides is dilated by the Muscle Cricothyroideus Anticus, which begins
Cr^cothyroid^^^ Anticus.
at the ou^^er forepart of Cricoides, and ends within the internal sides of
Thyroides.

The said Thyroides is contracted by the Muscle f. 9. C C.
Cricothyroideus Lateralis, Lateralis.
which spri^^ing from the lateral part of Cricoides, is inserted externally
into the sides of Thyroides.

The A^ytaenoides is opened by the Mu^cle f. 9. B B.
Thyroaryt^noideus, which springing Thyroaryt^noideus.
from the inner and foremost part of the Thyroides, ends into the sides of the
Ary^enoides: or rather it takes its rise from the Cricoides and Thyroides,
being placed between both.

The Arytaenoides is shut by one only Muscle called Arytaenoideus, which f. 10.
B B.
compasses about and shuts the Arytaenoides, like the Sphincter Muscle, and
also Aryt^noideus.
with its Basis it Streightens the Glottis, ^or to make the voice ^ound the
better.

The Epiglotti^ has f. 9. and 10. A.
no Muscles to lift it up and shut it down in Mankind, as it has in Brute
^^asts. f. 3. and 4. f. 9. and 10. D D.


Chap* 18* Muscles o^ the Pharynx.
THe Pharynx which is the beginning of Oesophagu^ or the Gullet, has obtained
from (...) seven Mu^cles, of which three have ^ellows and the fourth is without
companion namely that which is termed Oesophag^us.

The ^^^st is T. 3. f. 2. and 3. B B.
Spheno-Pharing^us, which arises from a certain sharp Spheno-Pharing^^.
point of the Sphenoides nea^ the Styloides, and bending a little downwards, it
ends in the sides of the Jaws, that it may draw the Pharynx upwards.

The second is f. 2. and 3. A A.
Cephalo-Pharyngaeus, which arises from that part where the Cephalopharyngaeus.
Head is Joined to the Neck, and descending is spread out into the Pharynx, and
seems to make the very coat thereof.

The third is f. 2. and 3. C C.
Stylo*Pharyngaeus, which arises from the Apophysis Styloides,
Stylopharyngaeus. Oesophagaeus.
and is implanted into the side of the Pharynx, to serve to widen the ^ame.

The Muscle Oesophageus, does draw together and close the f. 2. and 3. D D.
Pharynx, which growing out of one side of Thyroides, and compassing round the
hinder part of Oesophagus, is implanted into the other side of Thyroides; or
being outwardly fastened to both sides of Thyroides, it draws together the
beginning of the Oesophagus and purles the same like the Sphincter Muscle of
Anus.

Chap. 19. Muscles of the Gargareon, Uvula, or Mouth Palate.
THe Uvula has two Muscles T. 13. f. 15. A.
on either side.

The Muscle Ptery-Staphylinus f. 15. B B.
externus, taking its Rise from the upper Pterystaphylinus externus.
Jaw under the last grinding Tooth, ends in a small Tendon f. 15. b b.
which passes through a chink engraven on the upper side of the Pterygoides:
and there being turned back, as it were through a pulley, it is inserted into
the sides of the Uvula.

The Ptery-Staphylinus f. 15. C C.
internus, cast out of the nether part of the inner Skirt Internus.
of the Pterygoides, it has a peculiar movable Gristle ordained for its
original, and ascending according to the Longitude of the internal Wing or
Skirt of the Pterygoides, it ends at the Uvula.

Chap. 20. Muscles of the Head.
THe Muscles of the Head are proper or Common.

The Common are those which move the Neck and Head both; such as are the
Muscles of the Neck: the proper are such as move the Head, the Neck remaining
unmoved.

Now the proper are fourteen, on each lide seven, six of which are placed in
the hinder part.

There is one only in the Fore part, which is called T. 14. f. 2. K K. f. 3. H.
f. 4. F F.
Mastoideus, and Caput flectens. Mastoideus.
bows the Head; it arises from the top of the Breast bone and midst of the
Clavicula, and is obliquely inserted into the Apophysis Mastoides.

Sometimes in the forepart of the Neck, there is another Muscle next the Long
Muscle, which helps the Mostoideus to bend the Head: and I have many times
showed this Muscle, and sometimes I have seen it wanting.

Six Muscles do extend the Head: of which two are large, the other Extenders.
four small*

The first of the larg ones is called f. 2. H H.
Splenius; which arising from the sharp points Splenius.
of the ^ive uppermost Vertebra's of the back, and the four lowest of the Neck,
it is in^erted into the hinder part of the Head.

There comes the other large Muscle to assist the former, and is called f. 2. I
I. f. 3. E F.
Complexus. ^omplexus.
It springs from the transverse or overthwart Eminencies or Apophyses of the
foresaid Vertebra's, and is terminated in the after part of the Head.

The lesser Muscles are some straight, others crooked, and of both these, some
Rectus major
are greater, others le^s.

The greater f. 3. and 4. I I.
straight Muscles, arising from the Spine or point of the second spondile,
Vertebra or Knuckle, are inserted into the after side of the Head.

Under them the f. 3. i. f. 4. K K.
two lesser arising from the hinder part of the first Vertebra, are Rectus minor
terminated in the after side of the Head.

The greater T. 14. f. 3. L. f. 4. G G.
Oblique ones do arise from the spine or point of the second Vertebra Obliquus
mijor. Obliquus major.
and reach unto the overthwart Eminence or Apophysis of the first Vertebra; and
from the same place the Lesser T. 14. f. 3. K. f. 4. H H.
Oblique or crooked ones do arise and are terminated in the Occiput, or after
Part of the Head.

Chap. 21. Muscles of the Neck.
THe Neck has eight, on each side four, being placed before and behind, to bend
The Neck benders. The Longus.
the Neck and extend the same again.

It is bent by the Musculus Longus and the Muscle Scalenus or the unevensided
Muscle.

The T. 13. f. 18. A A.
Long Muscle being situate under the Oesophagus, springs out of the body of the
third Vertebra or Knuckle bone of the back, and ascends laterally connexed or
knit unto all the bodies of the Vertebra's, ending into the former part of the
first Vertebra.

The Scalenus arising from the T. 13. f. 18. B B.
first Rib of the Chest, it is inwardly ingrafted The Scalenus.
by oblique Fibers into all the overthwart or transverse Eminencies of the
Neckbones: through it the Vessels are drawn, which are to be distributed into
the Arm.

The Neck is extended or stretched out by two Muscles. The Extenders Spinatus


The Spinatus Muscle T. 14. f. 4. D D.
arises from the Roots of the seven uppermost Vertebra's of the Chest and five
of the Neck; and is inserted into the Spina or point of the second Vertebra of
the Neck.

The Muscle Transversarius, arising from the T. 14. f. 4. E E.
transverse Apophyses or Eminencies Transversarius.
of the six uppermost Vertebra's of the back, is planted externally into all the
transverse Eminencies of the Neck.

Chap* 22, Muscles of the Shoulder-blades.
THey are four in Number. The Muscle Levator g Proprius, does lift up the
Shoulder blads lister.
Shoulder blade. It arises from the transverse or overthwart Apophyses or
Emineneies of the second, third and fourth Vertebra of the upper part of the
Neck, and ends in the uppermost Corner of the Shoulder Blade.

The Muscle Trapezius a arises from the hinder part of the Head, at the Points
Trupezius.
of five Vertebra's of the Neck, and of eight or nine of the uppermost
Vertebra's of the Chest, and is inserted into the Basis of the Shoulder blad
and the Spina, as far as the shoulder tip. It causes diverse motions according
to the original and direction of the Fibers; that is, according to their* Rise
and insertion.

The Shoulder-blad is drawn forwards by one only Muscle termed Serratus
Serratus minor
b Minor, which arises out of the four upper most Ribs, and ends in the
Coracoides.

It is drawn backwards by the c Rhomboides o^ lozing fashioned, or diamand
Rhomboides
fashond Muscle, which arises from the three points of the lower Vertebraes of
the Neck, and the three points of the uppermost Vertebraes of the Chest, and is
inserted into the external Basis of the Shoulder Blade.

Although by its own weight it return to the natural Situation: yet a d
portion of Musculus Latissimus, running out unto the Arm, cleaves by a loop to
the lower Corner of the Shoulder Blade, and is said to draw the Shoulder Blade
downwards.

Chap. 23. Muscles of the Arm.
THey are nine. The Muscle Deltoides and Supra Spinatus do move it upwards. Arm
lifters.


The Deltoides e does arise from the midst of the Clavicula, the Shoulder
tip, Deltoides
the whole spine of the Shoulder Blade, and is carried out unto the middle of
the Arm.

The Supraspinatus being thrust into the Cavity above the Spina or sharp point
Supraspinatus
of the Scapula, and being conveyed under the Shoulder tip, is inserted into
the Neck of the Arm.

The Latissimus and Rotundus Major, do move the Arm downwards: the Latissimus
The depressers Latissimus.
g springs from the sharp prominencies of the Os Sacrum, of the Vertebraes of
the Loins, and of nine Vertebraes of the Back: it is inserted into a part of
the Arm, not far below the Head.

It is assisted by Rotundus a Major or the larger round Muscle, which arises
from Rotundus major.
the whollower Rib of the Shoulder Blade, and ends very near in the middle of
the Arm.

The Pectoralis and Coracoidaeus draw it forward. The Pectoralis arises out The
drawers to. The Pectoralis.
of the first sixth and seventh true Ribs, the Brest-bone and more than the
middle of the Clavis; and it is inserted by an acute Tendon into the middle of
the Arm between the Deltoides and the Biceps.

The Muscle Coracoidaeus c springs out of the Apophysis Coracoides, and ends
Coracoidaeus.
very near in the middle of the Arm; it draws the Arm toward the left Shoulder.

The Arm is moved backwards by three Muscles, Infraspinatus, Rotundus Drawers
back.
Minor, and Immersus.

The Infraspinatus arising in the middle between d the lesser round Muscle and
Infraspinatus
the Spina, ends into the Neck of the Arm which is muffles about.

The Rotundus e minor begins at that Cavity which appears under the lower Rib
Rotundus minor.
of the Shoulder Blade, and ends in the Neck of the Arm.

Immersus or the f Subscapularis does possess the hollow and inward Part of the
Immersus
Omoplata or Shoulder Blade, and is carried out unto the Neck.

The three last Muscles which act al at once, do carry about the Arm upwards
with a sudden motion flanting outward, so that the motion seems to be doubled.

Chap. 24. Muscles of the Cubit.
THe Cubit consists of two Bones, which as they are Knit together by diverse
Articulations, so do they perform diverse motions.

The Cubitus guides the motions of the Bending and extending. The Radius
directs the motions of Pronation and Supination, and therefore they have proper
Muscles for these motions.

The Cubit is bended by two Muscles Situate in the internal Part of the Arm
viz. Cubit benders
The Biceps and Brachiaeus internus.

The Biceps arises from a a double beginning, the one of which from the
extremity Biceps
of the Cavity of the Glenois is conveyghed through the cleft of the Arm, the
other taking its Rise from the Apophysis Coracoides, they are after united and
make one Tendon, which is inserted into the inner Part of the Radius, there
where is bunches out.

The Brachiaeus b Internus, being placed beneath the Biceps, takes its rise
from the middle of Os Brachij, unto which it firmly adheres, and is terminated
between Brachiaeus internus.
the Radius and the Cubitus, in that Part where they are fastened together.

The Cubit is extended by ^^ur Muscles, Viz. Longus, Brevis Brachiaeus Cubit
extenders. Longus
externus, and Angoneus or Cubitalis.

Longus, the long Muscle c arises from the lower Rib of the Shoulder Blade near
the Neck, where it has a peculiar Cavity, and it is terminated into the Elbow.

Brevis, the short Muscle, d springs from the hinder Neck of the Arm and ends
Brevis.
likewise at the Elbow. Both those Muscles do make up one strong and sinewy
Tendon.

For the third Muscle Galen in the first Book and last chapter of his
Anatomical Administrations, reckons a lump of Flesh which is confounded with
the two foregoing Brachiaeus externus.
Muscles, and inserted into the same place. I call it Brachiaeus externus,
because being spread upon the outside of the Arm, it is placed beneath the other
two last mentioned. In the same place Galen does acquaint us, that any man may
accurately separate these three Muscles following the rectitude of the Fibers.

The fourth Muscle called e Angoneus, is Situate in the bending of the Cubit
on Angoneus.
the hinder side, which is called Agcoon or Ancoon and answers to the Musculus
Poplitaeus. It arises out of the lower and hinder Part of the Arm, being
Situate between the Radius and Cubitus: and it is inserted by a sinewy Tendon
into the side of the Cubitus, a Thumbs length below. Sometimes ^^ cleaves so
fast to the Fleshy end of Brachiaeus Externus, that there is no apparent
difference to be discerned between them; and then it is Judged to be a portion
of the Brachiaeus externus, extended so far as to that place.

Chap. 25. Muscles of the Radius.
THe Radius is bowed downwards by the two internal Muscles, so called because
The Radius its
they are placed in the inner Part of the Cubit; and one is called Inferior
Pronator, and the other Superior Pronator.

The Superior being a T. 22. f. 1. and 3. D.
round Muscle, springs form the inner Part of the inner knob of the Arm, and
ends with a Membranous Tendon, obliquely carried unto Pronator superior.
Pronator inferior.
the Radius.

The Inferior Pronator T. 10. f. 1. A. B. T. 12. f. 1. E.
Quadratus, is carried overthwart from the lower Part of the Cubit unto the
lower Part of the Radius, and is thereinto inserted, being altogether Fleshy.
Also it Knits the Vlna to the Radius, as if ^t were a Ligament.

The Radius is drawn down backwards by two external Muscles.

The Longus T. 22. f. 1. H.
Supinator, springs out of the top of the Arm, above the external Supinator
Longus. Supinator Brevis.
Knob, and being drawn out upon the Radius, it is inserted on the inside of the
lower Epiphysis thereof, being fleshy.

Brevis Supinator, arising out of the T. 22. f. 3. B.
outside of the inner Knob, is carried obliquely very near to the middle of the
Radius, and turning back does straightly comprehend the same. a T. 22. f. 1. G. d
T. 22. f. 1. I I. f. 2. B. c T. 22. f. 3. E. d T. 22. f. 3. F. e T. 22. f. 3.
^. f. 4. G.
a T. 22. f. 2. C. b T. 22. f. 2. D. c T. 22. f. 4. E. d T. 22. f. 4. F.
e T. 22. f. 2. and 3. C.
f T. 22. f. 1. B.


Chap. 26. Muscles of the Wrist.
THe Wrist is bended, stretched forth and laterally moved by two Muscles, the
bender and extender of each side, acting both together.

It is bended by two inward Muscles, of which the one may be termed Cubiteus,
Wrist-benders
the other Radieus, by reason of their Situation.

The Cubiteus T. 22. f. 1. N.
internus takes its rise from the inner part of the inner Knob of the Cubiteus
Internus.
Arm, and being fastened unto the Cubit and to the fourth Wrist bone of the
first Rank, it is drawn out aloft.

The Radieus T. 22. f. 1. M.
Internus, having its original in the same place, and being stretched Radieus
Internus.
out upon the Radius, is inserted into that bone of the Metacarpium, which
sustaines the fore Finger.

The Wrist is extended by two external Muscles, which hold the same way with
Wrist extenders
the internal, and are therefore called by the same names.

The Radieus T. 22. f. 3. H.
externus or Bicornis, takes its rise from that bony point which is Radieus
Externus.
in the Arm above the Knob thereof, and resting upon the Radius, it sends forth
a double Tendon, the one of which is inserted into the Wrist bone lying under
the Radius, the other into that bone of the Metacarpium which is seated under
the fore Finger.

Some will have this Muscle to be a double one, because it appears wholly
distinct in its original and insertion. For that which is carried to the Wrist
grows out of the bony point of the Arm: the other arises out of the external
Knob of the Arm and extends the Metacarpium with the Wrist.

It has its Tendons separated and enclosed in peculiar cases and sheaths, which
are of a sinewy Gristly substance, without the Ring fa^iond Ligament of the
Wrist.

The Cubiteus T. 22. f. 3. G.
externus, arising from the outward Apophysis of the Arm, and Cubiteus externus.
being carried along the Cubit, it inserts its Tendon into the fourth bone of
the Metacarpium, Situate beneath the little Finger.

Chap. 27. Muscles of the Palm of the Hand.
IN the Palm or Hollow of the Hand are found two notable Muscles, which are
termed the Palmar Muscles, the one of which is short, the other long.

The long Palmar Muscle growing out of the T. 22. f. 1. K.
inner side of the knob of the Long Palmar Muscle.
Arm, is spread into the hollow of the Hand, as far as the first Articulation of
the Fingers.

In its original it is Fleshy and presently after lessens it self into a small
Tendon, which passing above the Ring-shap'd Ligament of the Wrist, and not
included with the rest of the Tendons, it is widened into a sinewy Membrane,
which is so firmly fastened unto the Skin (to make the sense of feeling the
more quick, and that the Hand may hold things the faster) that it is a very
hard thing to sever it from the Skin.

Besides the Palmar Muscle in the hollow of the Hand, a Certain piece of Flesh
Short Palmar Muscle.
four Square of a Thumbs breadth is found upon the Ring-shaped Ligament, which
is redder then the Flesh, between the Thumb and the middle Finger, and is
sometimes single and sometimes double, looking like two Muscles: and being
carried under and implicated with the Palmar Muscle, it seems to take its rise
from the Root of the Fleshy part of the Hand called Thenar, and to be inserted
into that same eigth bone of the Wrist, which is placed out of order.

Its Office is to hollow the Hand and so to make Diogeness his Dish to drink on
of, together with the Muscles of the Thumb and the Hypothenar. This Muscle shall
be named Palmaris brevis; the short Palm Muscle.

Chap. 28. Muscles of the Fingers.
THe Fingers are bended, stretched out, and moved sidewaies. Four Finger
benders.


There are two Muscles which bend the four Fingers, viz. The Musculus Sub^imis,
and the Musculus Profundus.

The Sublimis arises from the inner, T. 22. f. 1. O. f. 5. A.
part of the inner knob of the Arm, and produces Sublimis
four T. 22. f. 5. a a a a.
Tendons about the Wrist, which are terminated at the second Articulation of
the Fingers, and have holes bored in them, to give passage to the Tendons of
the Musculus Profundus.

The Profundus springs out of the T. 22. f. 1. P. f. 5. B.
upper parts of the Cubitus and Radius and Profundus.
being T. 22. f. 5. b b b b.
divided into four, it is carried through the holes of the Tendons of the
Sublimis, unto the third Articulation of the Fingers.

Do but observe the Industry of Nature, who to the end the Fingers might be
rightly bended, on the inside according to their length, she has framed a
Channel of most hard Membranes resembling Ligaments, which Channel does
straightly infold the Tendons of the Musculus Profundus and Sublimis, least in
the bending of the Fingets the Tendons being bowed should be drawn out of their
place, and like ropes rise up and lift up the Skin.

And although the Tendons be closely comprehended within the said Channel, yet
have they their fre^ course and passage, because the Channel is smeared with a
fat and Oily Humor.

Out of the very Tendons of Musculus profundus by the Wrist, do arise the
Lumbricales
four T. 22* f. 5. C C C C.
Lumbricales, being firmly fastened thereunto, and carried to the first
Articulation of every Finger, where they unite themselves to the Interosseans.

The Muscles which extend the Fingers are Common and proper. Extenders Extensor
Magnus.^


I call them common, which serve the four Fingers, such as the Extensor magnus
Digitorum [the great extender of the Fingers] or which beside extension, do
cause other motions, as the Lumbracales and Interossei joined together.

The proper are they which belong and are attributed only to certain Fingers,
as the Extensor Indicis [stretcher out of the fore Finger] and the Extensor
Auricularis [stretcher out of the little Finger.

Magnus Extensor Digitorum, the great T. 22. f. 3. K.
Finger stretcher arises out of the outward Knob of the Arm, and by the f. 3.
e.
Wrist is cloven into four f. 3. f f f f.
Tendons, which end into the two lower Joints of each Finger.

The Fingers are moved sidewaies, which motion is commonly termed adduction
Side way movers.
and Abduction.

The Adduction or drawing to, is when they are drawn toward the Thumb;
Abduction or drawing from, is when they are moved sidewaies from the Thumb* And
this motion is performed by the Interossean Muscles: of which there are
Interosseans
three f. 4. I I I I.
External and as many f. 2. f f f f.
Internal, spread in the spaces between the Bones of the Metacarpium.

They arise from the upper Parts of the said bones near the Wrist, and in the
first Internodeum or space between the Joints, with a very small Tendon, they
creep side longs over the three bones of the Fingers, until they come unto the
Roots of the Nails; in the former and upper Part whereof, the Tendons, being
first united are terminated. And therefore the Interossean Muscles acting
together, do keep the Fingers both stretched out, and one close to another,
just as we hold out hands when we swim.

Moreover you shall observe two Muscles, which are as it were external
interosseans, Proper.
which are spread without, upon the first and fourth bone of the Metacarpium,
the one of which called f. 2. g. h. f. 1. S.
Hypothenar, is Peculiar to the little Finger, and Abductor minimi.
may be divided into two.

It arises from the third and fourth Wrist bone of the second Rank, and is
sidewales inserted into the Joints of the same Finger, to draw the same toward
the outside.

The other belongs unto the fore Fingers, and lying beneath the Antithenar, it
Abductor Indicis.
it grows out of the inner Part of the first bone of the Thumb and is inserted
into the Joints of the Fore Finger, to draw the same unto the Thumb. So that it
may be called Musculus Abductor Indicis.

Besides the Tendon of the common extender, it has a Peculiar extensive Muscle,
Proper extenders. Of the fore Finger.
which may be termed Indicator the ^. 3. I.
Pointer, because this Muscle serves the Finger to point withal.

It arises from the middle and external Part of the Cubit, and is inserted by a
forked Tendon into the second Articulation: and the other Tendon grows together
with the Tendon of the greater extender.

There is a Proper extender ascribed to the little Finger. It arises out of the
upper Of the little Finger.
Part of the Radius being seated between the Cubitus and the Radius, and it is
with a double Tendon planted into the little Finger on the outside thereof, but
with another tendon it is mingled with the Tendon of the greater extender.

Mean while you shall observe the Lumbrical or worm Muscles, which are sometimes
three, other whils four, seldom five: which though they are implicated with the
Tendons of Musculus Profundus, and are constantly thought to arise there from;
yet I conceive, they are bred out of the sinewy and orbicular T. 22. f. 3. ^.
Ligament of the Wrist, that it might have a firm and stable Original.

Chap. 29. Muscles of the Thumb.
THe Thumb has peculiar Muscles, whereby it alone is bended, extended and moved
sidewaies. Thumb Muscles


It is Extended by two long Muscles. One of which arising out of the T. 22. f.
3. M.
upper Extenders
and outward side of the Cubit, goes up upon the Radius, and being carried
beyond the Wrist, it is inserted into the first and second Joint of the Thumb,
by a double and sometimes a triple Tendon.

The other arises from the T. 22. f. 3. L.
same Part of the Cubit, but lower, near the Wrist, and is inserted into the
third Joint of the Thumb.

The Thumb is bended by T. 22. f. 2. D.
one Muscle, which growing out of the Inside of the Bender.
Cubit, it carried unto the second and third Joint thereof.

It is moved sidewais by two Muscles. Lateral movers.


The Thenar T. 22. f. 4. K.
arises from the inside of the Wrist, beneath the Thumb, and is inserted into
the second Joint of the Thumb, to draw it from the Fingers.

The other Muscle termed T. 22. f. 1. Q. f. 2. F.
Antithenar, draw^ the Thumb toward the ^ore Finger. It grows out of the
external side of the first bone of the Metacarpium which sustains the Thumb,
and is inserted into the first Joint of the said Thumb.

It is drawn to the four other Fingers by a T. 22. f. 1. R. f. 2. G.
Muscle, which being Joined unto, and seated beneath the Thenar, grows out of
the three lower bones of the Metacarp^um, and is inserted into the second Joint
of the Thumb. It may be called Hypothenar Pollicis, because it is spread out
under the Thenar.

Chap. 30. Muscles of the Chest.
THe Muscles of the Chest are Proper or Common.

Those are said to be Proper, which particularly and properly belong unto the
Chest; the Common are such as being destinated to some certain Part, yet do
assist the Breast with their help, as Auxliaries, such as are the upper Muscles
of the Shoulder blade.

The Chest is widened or lifted up by five Muscles. Three of which are before
Which widen. The Chest.
viz. Subclavius, Serratus major, and the Triangularis or Pectoralis internus.
One is hinderly Situate viz. Posticus Serratus superior: and the fifth is the
External Intercostal.

The Subclavius arises from the T. 10. f. 1. F.
inner part of the Clavicula, near the Shoulder Subclaviu^
tip, being of a Fleshy substance, and is inserted into the first Rib, near the
Breast bone.

The Serratus T. 10. f. 1. C D.
Major, reaches from the inner Basis of the Shoulder blade, unto Serratus major
six, and sometimes seven Ribs, of which the five lowest are true Ribs, and the
two uppermore are bastard one.

The Serratus T. 14. f. 2. E.
Posticus Superior, being Situate beneath the Romboides, Serratus Posticus
Superior
grows out of the sharp points or spines of the three lower Vertebras of the
Neck, and the first spine of the Back; and ends into the three upper Ribs, and
sometime the fourth.

The eleven T. 10. f. 1. G G.
External Intercostals, hold the place of one Muscle, which is carried External
Intercostals.
Obliquely forward from the lower side of the upper Rib, into the upper side of
the lower Rib. Unto those Muscles which widen the Chest, we must add the
Diaphragme or Midrif.

The Triangular Muscle, growing out of the middle and inner Part of the
Brestbone, Triangular Muscle.
is inserted into the Gristles of the lower Ribs, as far as the third or fourth
bastard Ribbs.

Three Muscles there are which Contract the Breast, the Sacro-Lumbus,
Intercostalis Contracters.
internus, and Serratus Posticus inferior.

The Sacro-Lumbus, takes its original from the Os T. 14. f. 1. L L. f. 3. B B.
Sacrum and the Spiny productions Sacrolumbus.
of the Loins, and is terminated into the upper Ribs, near unto their Roots;
bestowing upon each Rib a double Tendon or Tendinous handle or claspe, an
internal and an external; and therefore it serves both to depress the Ribs and
to raise the Backbone, when it is bowed and bended forward.

The Eleven internal Intercostals, which fill up the spaces between the Ribs,
are Internal Intercostals.
reckoned to be but one Muscle. It is carried obliquely from the nether Rib to
the upper more. It has Fibers contrary to those of the external, cross wise
intersected.

The Serratus Posticus T. 14. f. 2. F G.
inferior, growing out of the spines of the three lowest Serratu^ p^sticus
inferior.
Vertebraes of the Back, and the first of the Loins, is Terminated into three
or four of the lower Ribs.

This same Serraticus Posticus inferior, is just opposite to the Serraticus
Posticus superior, and both of them by a broad and Membranous Aponeurosis, do
so grow together, that they serve instead of a band to bind and keep together
the hinder Muscles of the Backbone.

Others do ad eight Muscles of the Belly, because more Muscles are requisite to
cause violent Exspiration. e T. 10. f. 1. H H.


Chap. 31. Of the Midrif.
THe Diaphragme or Midrif is an T. 10. f. 1. I I. f. 6. and 7. the whole.
admirable kind of Muscle, both in regard of ^se of the Midrif.
its composition and continual Action, whiles it does night and day incessantly
fan the Natural and Vital Parts, serving nevertheles as a Wall of partition to
sever the one from the other.

It arises from the Circumference of the bastard Ribs, through which it is
obliquely Its Original.
drawn about, as far as to the Vertebraes of the Loins: the end or Sinewy Part
thereof, is in the Nervous Center.

When we draw in the Air, it is contracted and bent, and when it draws the
lower Its Motion.
Ribs downwards and of unequal becomes straight and even. When we blow the Air
out, it is by help of the Mediastinum drawn upwards, and of straight is made
Unequal or bunching like the surface of a Bucklar.

Chap. 32. Muscles of the Back and Loins, wherewith the Backbone is moved.
THe Back is not moved, because of the Ribs interposed, and the Penury of
Muscles The Back properly is not moved.
both internal and external; it has indeed Muscles spread upon the outside
thereof, but they are for another use. So that between the Neck and the Loins
it remains immovable, whiles the extreme Parts are moved.

Now the motion is made in the last Vertebra of the Back which is received on
all hands by its neighboring Vertebraes, and receives none; and because it is
Contiguous with the Loins, The Motion is attributed to the Loins rather than to
the Back: although it belong to the whole Back-bon.

The Backbone therefore, as the Loins, are bowed and extended and drawn to the
sides.

They are bowed by two Muscles, on each side one. The Musculus T. 14. f. 2. O
O. f. 4. C C* f. 1. N N.
Quadratus Back is bowed by the Quadratu^.
takes its rise from the hinder Part of the Os Ilij and from the inner side of
the Os Sacrum, being inserted into the transverse Apophyses of the Loins as far
as the last Rib, and of a Fleshy substance.

I for my Part would rather say it arises from the transverse Productions or
Apophyses of the two lower Vertebraes of the Back and the last Rib, that it
might together with the oblique descending Muscles and the straight ones, stir
and move forwards the whole frame of the Ossa Ilium.

The Muscles of the Abdomen which serve for Inspiration or drawing in of the
Air, do also further the bending of the Loins and of the whole Backbone; for
whiles they bear down the Chest, they do withal bow the Backbone* if lying
along upon your Breech, you would lift up the Trunk of your Body; or would leap
up upon your Fee^, without the Assistance of your Hands.

The Loins are distended by four Muscles, on either side two, which are so
infolded Extenders.
al along the Backbone, that either we must make so many pares, as there are
Vertebraes, or we must say there is only one Pare of Muscles distributing
Tendons to all the Vertebraes, according to the Opinion of Ga^en.

The Semi-Spinatus Muscle, takes a T. 14. f. 3. D D. f. 4. A A.
sinewy beginning, from all the Spines of Semispinatu^.
the O^ Sacrum, and ends into the transverse Apophyses of the Loins and whole
back.

The Musculus Sacer* with a T. 14. f. 4. B B.
pointed Fleshy beginning grows out of the hinder Part of Os Sacrum and
terminates into the Roots of the Spiny points of the Vertebraes of the Back,

The Spina or Loins are laterally moved, when the Muscles on the contrary side
do act by themselves, both the benders and extenders.

It the Muscles which extend the Spina or Backbone, are opposite to the
oblique Muscles of the Belly descendent and the stiaight ones, which move the
frame of Ossa Ilii, they must needs grow out of the upper Parts of the Spine,
that they may be inserted into the Ossa Ilium and Os. Sacrum. And although they
arise from the upper Parts of the Spina, they will nevertheless serve to erect
the Spina; and they will be ever more Antagonists against the Muscles which bend
the Spina, viz. The Quadratus* and the * Musculus Obliquus ascendens.

For they receive Nerves, as well in their upper as middle Parts.

Chap 33* Muscles of the Belly:
BEcause those a ten Muscles, which are found displayed upon the Belly, were
accuratly discribed, At the beginning of the first Book, I will not here repeat
them, because they are excepted from this Discourse.

Chap. 34. Of the Motion of the Ilium Bones and Os Sacrum Joined together.
THe frame of the Ilian Bones and Os Sacrum Joined together, is moved backward
By what Muscles its moved forwards.
and forward in the Genial Embracements tending to Procreation.

The said Conjunction of bones is moved forwards by the b Right and Oblique ^
descending Muscles of the Belly, the Chest resting and the Thighs remaining
unmoved, unless they follow the Motion of the Ilium Bones.

It is moved backwards by the Musculus T. 2. f. 8. A B. f. 9. A B D.
Sacer and the T. 2. f. 9. B C.
Semispinatus, which By what moved backwards
arise from the upper Parts of the Back: which I have demonstrated by many
reasons and experiments in my Anthropographia.

Chap, 35. Muscles of the Testicles.
THey are Proper or Common.

The Proper is that which is peculiar to each Testicle called T. 2. f. 8. A.
etc.
Cremaster. It Proper Muscle of the Stones. Cremaster.
grows out of the lower T. 14. f. 4. B B.
fore Part of the spine of Os Ilium: or rather it is the fag-end of the Oblique
ascending Muscle, bordering upon the Os Pubis, whose Flesh is redder, thinner
and as it were severed from the Flesh of the said oblique ascendent Muscle. ^^
^^^olds ext^^nsecally the production of the Peritonaeum, and is carried
together with the Seminary Vessels unto the Testicle.

It draws the Testicle upwards and retains it suspended in that Posture.

The Common Muscle is the Membrane of the Scrotum or Cod termed T. 6. f. 2. B
B.
Dartos, The Common^ ^a tos.
being a Continuation of the Fleshy Membrane. And this Musculous Membrane
suspend both the Testicles.

Women have likewise their Cremaster, shorter than that of Men, Situate upon
the production of the Peritonaeum.

Chap, 36, The Bladders Muscle.
LEst the Urin collected in the Bladder should run out of it self against ones
will; Office of the Sphincter of the Bladder.
their is a T. 6. f. 5. F F.
round fleshy Muscle which being rould back over the Prostatae, does shut the
bladders Neck; and being made broad it expels the Urin; and by wringing or
squeezing the Prostatas or Auxiliary Testicles, it squirts out the Seed in
Venereal Conflicts. Now the Neck of the Bladder being Fleshy, performs the
office of an internal Sphincter Muscle, and exactly closes the Bladder. b T.
14. f. 3. D D. f. 4. A A.
c T. 6. f. 2. D D.


Chap. 37. Muscles of the Yard.
THe Yard has four Muscles, two on each side.

Musculus T. 6. f. 1. a a. f. 5* H H.
Erector is bred out of the innermore bunching out of the Ischium, Yards
Erectors
and being knit unto the Ligament of the Yard, it reaches sidewaies as far as
the middle of the Body thereof. The Accelerator takes his Ri^e not only from
the Accelerators.
sphincter of the Anus or Fundament, but also from the internal Tuberosity of
the Ischium or Huckle-bone, and being with his Mate spread out under the
Vertebra or Piss-pipe, it is drawn out as far as to the middle of the Yard.

It hastens the squirting out of the Seed, and forces out the drops of Urin, in
the conclusion of Pissing. And because it is in its Original twofold, it may
therefore be accounted a double Muscle; but because I attribute that portion
which arises from the Tuberosity of the Huckle-bone, unto the Fundament* and
call it Levator externus* Any [the external Arse-heaver] therefore the true
Accelerator, according to mine, and other Anatomists Opinion, must arise only
from the external Sphincter of the Fundament.

Chap. 38. Muscles of the Clitoris.
THe Clitoris in Women represents the Man's Yard, and therefore is furnished
with Muscles alike, though not serving for the same of Office. Of which I have
treated in my first* Book, in the Chapter which describes the Womb* b T. 6. f.
1. b b. f. ^. I I.


Chap. 39. Muscles of the Fundament.
I Have descrided the Muscles of the Fundament very sufficiently in the 33.
Chap. of my second Book.

Chap. 40. Muscles of the Thigh.
THe Thigh is extended, bended, drawn to a man, and from a Man and oblickly
Extenders of the Thigh.
wheeled about.

It is extended when we stand, our Thigh being Perpendicular to our Hucklebone,
which posture is caused by three Muscles which constitute the Buttocks, and are
therefore by Authors termed Musculi Gloutii; that is the Buttock Muscles.

Maximus and ex^imu^ T. 23. f. 2. B. f. 3. A.
Gloutius, the greatest and outmost buttock Muscle* is Gloutius m^^imus.
^^ed out of the spines of Os Sacrum and more than half of the Ilium Rib; and
is inserted* four Fingers ^^neath the great Trochanter, where a certain
Eminence of the ^one is ^iscer^ed.

Secundus and medius* Gloutius, the second and middle buttock* Muscle, springs
Medius
out of the external Pa^^ of the Os Ilium, and is inserted into the great and
external Trochanter.

Tertius and intimus T. 23. f. 4. B.
Gloutius, the third and innermost buttock Muscle, arising Minimus
from the outward and lower side of Os Ilium, is implanted into the Top of the
great Trochanter.

The Thigh is bended by three Muscles. Benders. Psoas.


Primus Lumbaris, The first Loyn Muscle called T. 10. f. 1. O O. T. 23. f. 1.
A.
Psoas, spread over the bodies of the Lumbal Vertebraes, in the Cavity of the
belly; is bred out of the transverse Apophyses of the lower Vertebraes of the
back, and being carried along upon the inner surface of Os Ilium, it is
inserted into the small Trochanter.

I have in Men, oftimes found a little Muscle spread over this, which in its
original, being of the length and thickness of a Man's little Finger and fleshy,
with a small and flat Tendon is carried above the Psoas, and when it is come to
the Illiac, it looses it self into a broad and very strong Aponeurosis, which
firmly combiness the Iliac and Psoas Muscles. And therefore I conceive it is
added, in strong Men, that it might straightly embrace the Psoas and hold it
firmly in its seat.

It is called Pa^vu^ Psoas, and is more rarely found in Women than in Men:
Howbeit in the year 1631. In a very stout Virago or kind of Mol Cutpurse, it
was my hap to see one of these Muscles, she having been hanged for Robberies and
Murders by her committed. b T. 23. f. 3. B. f. 4. C.


Iliacus Musculus, the Iliac Muscle, takes its rise out of the T. 23. f. ^. B.
internal Cavity of Iliacus.
Os Ilium, and being by its Tendon Joined with the lumbal Muscle, it is
terminated between the great and little Trochanter,

T. 23. f. 1. C. below b.
Pectineus Musculus, The Comb Muscle shootes out of the upper Part of Os
Pectineus.
Pubis, and is inserted a little below the Neck of the Thigh, on the foreside.

The Thigh is drawn to the inside by the Musculus Triceps or T. 23. f. 1. and
2. C C.
three headed Drawer to.
Muscle, which has three originals and as many distinct Insertions.

One of its Heads arises from the upper* Part of the share bones or Ossa Pubis;
the Triceps.
other arises from the middle of the said bones, and the third from the lowest
Part of the said bones* and they are inserted into the hinder line of the
Thigh, being disposed by course.

The Action of this Muscle is strong and Praevalent, drawing the Thighs inward,
when we Climb Trees, ascend to the Main mast and Ride on Hors-back.

This trebble headed Muscle is the first that receives the Excrementitious
Humors of the body which fall into Legs, because of the Vessels which pass that
way.

The Thigh is drawn to the outside by very small Muscles, because the drawing of
With drawrs.
the Thigh outward is not very necessary.

The Musculi Quadrigemimi, are four little Muscles, interchangably placed upon
The Quadrigeminals.
the Articulation of the Thigh in the hinder* Part thereof.

The first and T. 23. f. 3. C. f. 4. D.
uppermost of the Quadrigemini being longer than the rest and as First
it were p^ar fashiond, is by others termed Iliacus externus. It arises from
the lower and external Part of Os Sacrum.

The T. 23. f. 3. b. f. 4. G.
second of the Quadrigemini, arises from the Tuberosity or bunchy* Part Second
of the Huckle-bone.

The third which is contiguous unto the former, arises from the same Part, and
Third
these three are inserted into the Cavity of the great Trochanter.

These three of the Quadrigeminal Muscles, being included in the Cavity of the
great Trochanter, do serve likewise to thrust downwards or lengthen out the
Thigh When it is stretched a little beyond its natural length, which* you may
observe in a Man that l^^s upon his Back, with his body and Leg streched out.

They perform this Action in the same manner as the Pterygoideus internus,
interposed between the two Jaws, does drive the lower Jaw forwards.

The Quartus Quadrigeminorum T. 23. f. 3. D. f. 4. E.
Quadratus, is broader and more fleshy than The Fourth.
the other three, being distant from the third of the Quadrigemini two Fingers
breadths; and is propagated from the inner Part of the Procuberance of the
Huckle-bone, and fastened into the external Part of the great Trochanter.

The Thigh is obliquely wheeled about by the two Obturators, the external and
Oblique wheelers. Obturator Internus.
the internal.

The Internal T. 23. f. 3. E. and 4. F.
grows out of the inner Circumference of that hole which is in the Os Pubis or
share bone; and being carried along thorough that hollowness which is between
the Knob of the Huckle-bone and its Acetabulum or Socket, it is by a tripartite
Tendon inserted into the Cavity of the great Trochanter.

Its Tendon is folded up and enclosed by the second and third Quadrigeminal
Muscles, which resemble a purse. Its action is to direct the external wheeling
motion of the Thights.

The Externus a Obturator, taking its revolution from the external
Circumference Obturator externus.
of that hole, which is in the share, and being Circumducted through the Neck
of the Thigh as through a pully, it is carried unto the Cavity of the great
Trochanter under the fourth Quadrigeminal Muscle.

It governs the internal wheeling motion of the Thigh.

When the Quadrigeminal Muscles and the Obturatores, are soaked in Wheyish
Humors, they cause most bitter pains, which counterfeit the true Sciatica, and
lengthen the Thigh, as if it were half out of Joint, which is diligently to be
noted and distinguished.

Chap. 41. Muscles of the Leg.
THe Leg is Joined with the Thigh, by that kind of Articulation which is called
The Motion of the Leg.
Gynglymus, and therefore it is only moved by bending and extending; but
because the Articulation is loose, it suffers a man to draw his Leg sidewaies:
for which Cause Laurentius and other latter Anatomists, will have the Leg to be
turned inwards and outward by certain Muscles ordained to that end.

It is drawn inwards or toward the other Leg, by the Sutorius, a very long
Muscle. It is drawn outward or from the other Leg, by a Membranous Muscle, or
broad sw^th. I leave it free for any Man thus to divided the Muscles, which I
distinguish into benders and extenders.

The Leg is bent by four hinder Muscles. The Leg benders. The Semi. Nervosus.
The Semi-Membranosus.


The first of those four, is called T. 23. f. 3. G G.
Semi-Nervosus, the Half sinnew Muscle. It arises from the Tuberosity or
bunching Part of the Huckle, and ends in the hinder and inner Part of the Leg.

The other is termed T. 23. f. 3. H H.
Semi-Membranosus Musculus, the Half Membranary Muscle, which proceeds from the
same bunching* Part of the Hip or Huckle-bone, with a beginning which is
Nervous and Membranous; and with a larger Tendon, is inserted into the inner
and hinder Part of the Leg. a T. 23. f. 4. e.


The Muscle T. 23. f. 3. III.
Biceps springs from the foresaid Tuberosity of the Hip or Hucklebone, The
Biceps
and being carried along the outward Part of the Thigh, about the middle
thereof it becomes fleshy, which fleshyness I have seen separated as a second
Muscle, as far as the Head. It is by one only Tendon inserted, into the ourward
Part of the Leg.

The fourth being commonly termed Posticus T. 23. f. 3. F F.
Gracilis, arises from that ^ne The Gracilis.
which shows where the Hip-bone and the Share-bone grow together, and
descending along the Inside of the Thigh, it is inserted into the inner Part of
the Leg.

The Muscle called T. 23. f. 4. H.
Poplitaeus, is to be reckoned among the ^^^ders, it lies lurking The Popliteus.
in the Cavity of the Ham, above the Head of the Soleum. It arises out of the
external swelling or bunching out of the Thigh, and is Obliquely inserted into
the hinder and upper Part of the Leg, which it closely embraces.

The Leg is extended by six Muscles. The first we meet with (...) the T. 23. f.
2. F F.
Membranosus, which is drawn out of the upper spine or sharp point of the I^ian
bone and Extenders. The Membranosus. The Sutorius
carried into the fore part of the Leg, or rather of the Thigh, and g^^ts in
the Muscles of the Leg it self, like a e Membranous ^wath, al save the Musculus
sutorius.

This Muscle taking its rise from the upper f Spine and fore Rib of the Ilium,
and sliding down Obliquely by the inner Parts of the Thigh, ends into the
inside of the Leg, which it is said to bring to and place over the other, as
Tailors are wont to do when they would sit Cross-Leg'd.

The Rectus g Gracilis, Springing out of the lower Spine of Os Ilium, and being
R^ctus ^^acilis.
carried right out al along the Thigh, ends on the fore Part of the Leg,
beneath the Epigonatis.

The two Muscles called Vasti do on either side border upon the Rectus
Gracilis; Vastus externus.
the one of which being T. 23. f. 1. G G.
External, arises out of the Root of the great Trochanter, and is inserted into
the Leg, a little below the Patella, on the outside.

The other which is T. 23. f. ^. H H.
internal, arises from the Root of the small Trochanter, and Vastus internus
falls into the inside of the Leg, a little below the Patella.

The Muscle termed T. 23. f. 1. etc.
Crureus placed under the two Musculi Vasti, springs out of Crureus.
the fore bone of the Thigh, between the two Trochan^ers, and cleaving to the
whole body of the Thigh, it produces its Tendon over the Epigonatis, unto the
fore part of the Leg.

These five Muscles, the Re^tus, the Gracilis, Duo Vasti and the Crural Muscle,
being united al together about the Knee, the produce one only Tendon, very
broad and strong, wherewith the Patella is infolded.

Chap. 42. Muscles of the Feet.
AS the Hand is divided into three Parts, so is the Foot into the Tarsus,
Metatarsus Motion of the Foot.
and Phalanx or Row of Toes. And as in the H^nd, the Wrist is moved while the
Parts after the Wrist remain unmoved: so in the Foot, the Tarsus is moved, the
Metatarsus remaining unmoved. And therefore the Tarsus is bowed, when it is
moved forward, and it is extended, when it is forced backwards.

In the mean while you shall observe that the bowings of the Members in the
whole Leg and Foot are contrary; in the hand they are like one another, for the
convenience of taking up of any thing; in the Leg and Foot they are contrary,
to make us stand firm, and for the performance of different actions. For the
flexion or bowing of the Thigh is performed forwards, the bowing of the Leg is
performed backwards* the bowing of the Foot is done ^orwards, the bowing of the
Toes of the Foot, backwards.

The Foot is bowed by two Muscles seated before, which are called Tibiaeus and
Foot-benders.
Peronaeus.

The Tibiaeus T. 23. f. 1. K.
anticus, taking its rise from the upper Epiphysis of the Leg near Tibiaeus
anticus.
the Fibula, and cleaving to the Tibia all along, about the middle of the bone,
it degenerates into a Tendon, which beneath the T. 23. f. 1. z.
Ring-fashion'd Ligament of the Foot, is ^^it into two Tendons, the one of
which is inserted into the O^ primum innominatum or first nameless bone, and
the other is lengthened out as far as to the Bone of the Me^ata^sus which is
placed under the Great Toe.

The Peronae^^ T. 23. f. 1. L L.
Ant^^^^ is in it^ Original ^oyned to the Peronaeus Posticus, although Per^^^us
anticus.
though both ^^^ Tendons are d^awn through the cleft of the external Ankle, yet
in their and and inse^^ion they are separated. The Anticus has its rise from
the middle and external part of the Perone, and being led through the cleft of
Malleolus externus, it is inserted on the foreside into the bone of the
Metatarsus, which susteines the little Toe.

The Foot is extended by the after Muscles. The first and outmost are the
Extenders.
T. 23. f. 1. d d. f. 2. D D. f. 3. K K.
Gemell^ or twins, so called because they are equal ^n Bulk, Strength and
Action. They are al^o termed Gastrocnemij, because they make the Belly or
swelling of the Calf o^ the Leg: and the one of them is internal, placed in the
inner side of the Ti^i^ or shank, the other is external, and possesses the
outside thereof.

The internal Twin-Muscle, arises from the inner knob of the Thigh; the
external Gemellus internus. externus.
Twin-Muscle arises from the ex^ernal knob of the said Thigh. They are severed
in the^ beginning, but grow together at l^st into one Belly, which by a strong
Tendon is ^engthened out unto the hinder part of the Heel. Vesalius was the
first that ob^erved that. To several beginnings of every one of them, there are
several little c T. 23. f. 3. o o.
Bones placed like unto Se^amine Seeds or like Tares or Ve^ches, to the end
that with their smooth and slippery surface, being placed between the Muscles
and the Bones, they may hinder the Muscles from being hurt, when the leg is
turned this way or that way. Plantaris.


Plantaris T. 23. f. 3. M.
Musculus, which lu^ks between the Twins and the Soleus, arises from the
external knob of the thigh, being fleshie on the upper part, and quickly ending
into a very ^mal and longish tendon, it is drawn under the Heel, by the inner
Ankle-bone, and diffused into the sole of the Foot.

It performs the same office in the Foot as in the hand; that the Foot might
answer to the hand, and that whilst the Foot is hollowed, the Skin, by the
Tendons lieing under, might be firmly fastened.

The T. 23. f. 3. f. 3. L L.
Soleus, a broad and thick Muscle, takes its original from the upper part of
Soleus.
the Leg, or from the upper and hinder closure of the Tibia and Perone; and is
inserted by a tendon mixed with the Gemelli or Twins, into the hinder part of
the Heel.

Under the Muscle Soleus remarkable vessels have their passage, both Veins,
and Ar^eries and Nerves: whence it comes to pass that the pains of the Calfe of
the Leg are deep and lasting.

Of the T^ins and the Soleus mingled together in their inferior parts, is made
that The Chorda of Hippocrates.
same common Tendon, which is so exceeding thick and strong, which Hippocrates
terms the Cho^da m^gna, the Hurts, Brui^es and wounds whereof, do cause death.

The foot is extended by two hinder Muscles, the Tibiaeus posticus and the
Peronaeus Tibiaeus posticus.
posticus.

The Tibiaeus posticus does arise from the upper part of the Tibia, and being
a^^^xed to the whole body thereof, through the cleft of the inner Anckle bone,
it produces two Tendons, the one of which ends at the Scaphoidean Bone, and the
other is carried as far as to the primum Os innominatum.

The Peronaeus f. 23. f. 2. F F.
Posticus, does arise from the upper and hinder part of the Peronaeus posticus.
Perone, And being carried with the Peronaeus anticus through the cleft of the
external ankle bone into the bone of the Metatarsus, which sustaines the great
toe, under the sole of the Foot, it transmits its broad, hard and gristly kind
of Tendon, under the Tendinous head, of that Mass of flesh, which does produce
its internal inter-osseans.

The Mu^cles Peronaeus anticus and Posticus, as they are distinct in their
original, so are they also distinct in their insertion, although they are
drawn through the pulley of the external ankle: but the Tendon of the other
Peronaeus Flexor, is i^serted into the outside of the Os metatarsi which
susteines the little Finger.

The Tendon of the other Peronaean Muscle, whose office is to extend the part,
being situate behind, is carried further and more inwardly under the M^scle
called Pediaeus. These two tendons are separated one from another, b^^ng
enclosed in two distinct sheaths or scabberds, of a nerve-gristly substance. b
f. 2. E E.


Chap. 43. Muscles of the toes.
THe Toes have their proper Muscles, fitted to procure their bending,
extending, The Annular Ligament.
and lateral motion from one side to another: also their tendons are
comprehended within a Ring-fashioned or circular and transverse T. 23. f. 1. g.
ligament, which does incompass them beneath the Ankles, just as we see in the
Wrist.

They are extended by the Musculu^ longus and Brevis. Toe-stretchers.
cnimodactylius


The longus, or T. 23. f. 1. M M.
long-Toe-stretcher called in Greek Cnimodactylius, takes its rise from the
fore and inner side of the Tibia, there where it is joined to the Fibula,
lurking close under the Tibieus anticus, and goes downright all along the
Fibula, till having passed the Ring-fashioned ligament, it ends into the three
Articulations of the T. 23. f. 1. f f.
four Toes that it might at once and by one motion, move the three ^oyntings
of the four Toes aforesaid.

Brevis Digitum tensor, or the T. 23. f. 2. G.
short Toe-stretcher, or Pediaean Muscle, springs Pedi^us.
out of the Heel and the external and upper part of the neighboring Astragalus
or bone so called, and being spread under the Superior, it is with its tendons
inserted into all the Joints of the Articulation.

The Tendons of these Muscles, as well the long as short, do pass cross-wise
one over another, above the Metatarsus.

The Toes are bowed by two Muscles the Brevis and Longus, which answer to The
Toe-benders. Perodactyleus.
these Muscles of the hand which are called Profundus and Sublimis.

Longus T. 23. f. 4. II. f. 6. C.
Digitum flexor the Long Toe-stretcher called also Pero-dactyleus, arises out
of the hinder and upper part of the Perone or Fibula, and being carried along
under the inner anckle, through a peculiar cavety of the Heel, it is divided
into four tendons, which are drawn through the slits of the short Toe-bending
Te^don (as we see likewise in the Hand) and then inserted into the third Joint
of four Toes.

Brevis T. 23. f. 4. ^. f. 6. A.
Digitum flexor, or the Pediaeus internus, or short Toe-Bender, springs
Pediaeus internus.
from the inner and net her part of the Heel, and being parted into four* it
is terminated into the second Articulation of the Toes.

The Tendons of this Muscle have holes bored in them for the Long Toe-benders
Tendon to pass through.

Moreover, the Toes are drawn sidewaies by the Interossean Muscles. They are
The oblique movers.
eight in number, four internal and as many external, which are otherwise
disposed in the foot than they are in the hand.

The T. 23 f 2. a a a a.
external arise from the spaces of the Bones of Metatars^s: the internal, The
Interosseans.
being situate in the T. 23. f. 5. d d d d. f. 6. f f f f.
Hollow of the foot, and knit unto the bones, and seem to take their original
from that lump of T. 23. f. 6. D D.
Flesh, which possesses and fills up that same Cavity of the Bones of the
Metatarsus: but the membrane being taken away, they are seen to arise from one
nervous pointed or acuminated Original, fixed on the inside near the Heel,
and divided into four tendons, and to end into the second Articulation,
whereunto the worme-fashiond or lumbrical Muscles do cleave.

And therefore the external inter-ossean Muscles, do fill up the empty spaces
of the Bones of Metatarsus.

The Lumb^ical or wo^^-fashion'd T. 23. f. 6. e e e e.
Muscles, do not arise from the tendons of the long Toe-bender, as in the Hand,
but from a fle^^y lump, which lies hid underneath the short Toe-bender; and
that has its original from the Heel.

Chap. 44. Muscles of the Great Toe.
THe great Toe T. 23. f. 4. K. f. 6. B.
Bender, being situate near the long Toe stretcher, and of a The great
toebender.
fleshy substance, arises out of the upper Part of the fibula, where it is
joined with the Tibia, and passing along under the inner Ankle bone and the
Sole of the Foot, it is inser^ed into the first bone of the Great Toe: and
before it comes unto the second bone a little Sesamoidean Bone is preposed; and
the Tendon for securities sake is intercepted, with two greater Sesamoidean
Bones.

Sometimes under the sole of the Foot it is divided into two Tendons, the one of
which is transmitted to the great Toe, the other to the second of the little
Toes; and then the great Toe-bender is divided only into three.

Extensor T. 23. f. ^. N.
Pollicis the great Toe-stretcher, arises from the external side of the The
Stretcher.
Tibia, where it is separate from the Fibula and creeping along the surface of
the Foot, it is inserted into the whole great Toe, in its upper side. The
other ends into the Bone of Metatarsus, which is spread beneath the great Toe.

The great Toe and the little Toe, have two notable Muscles, externally
situate, The Abductor,
which draw these Toes outward from the rest* so that one of them, being
externally fastened unto the bone of the Metata^sus, which is placed under the
great Toe, is termed Abductor T. 23. f. 3. O. f. 5. b b
Policis, the Drawer aside of the great Toe.

The other being externally spread upon the first ^one of Metatarsus, may be
The little Toes Abductor.
called Abductor T. 23. f. 3. P. f. 5 c.
minimi digiti, the drawer aside of the little Finger. It answers to the T^enar
and Hypo^henar of the Hand.

Furthermore the Great Toe has in the sole of the Foot another Transverse The
great t^^^ drawer ^^.
T. 23. f. 5. a.
Muscle, like the Anti-thenar, which arising out of the Ligament of that Bone
of the Metatarsus which is placed under the least or next Toe, and going
obliquely upon the other Bones, it ends with a strong Tendon into the first
Joint of the great Toe, beneath the same.

This Muscle is opposed to to the Abductor, that it might draw the great Toe
back again.

The flesh being taken away, we find a threefold or fourfold Membrane, I
suppose it is that M^ss of flesh which fills the Cavitie of the sole of the foot.

In the lowest p^^t of the Foot which is termed Vestigium, there is contained
a The Massa Ca^^^^.
T. 23. f. 6. D D.
Lump of flesh which ^ils up the Cavity and empty space of the first Joints:
from whence writers say Tendons are drawn to the several Toes.

I coneive the use of this flesh is rather to strengthen the Toes and to
combine their Its Use.
first Articulations, than to move the same, also like a soft Cushion, it is
spread under the Tendons of other Muscles.

Chap. 45. An Introduction to the Art of Muscular-Dissection, showing an
Accurate Method to cut up the Muscles of the whole Body.
Whosoever has perfectly learned the History of the Muscles, will easily
understand The Method
the Art of their Dissection, and be able of himself without any help, to
administer this part of Anatomcal section, which many account the hardest of
all, provided he diligently observe the Method which I here deliver. And
therefore having finished our Myologi^ or History of Muscles, Myotome or the
Art of their Dissection, will seasonably follow.

The Frontal Muscle.
The Skin of the forehead, being circulary cut off above the Eyebrows and
drawn The frontal Muscle.
away as far as to the Coronal Suture, or to the beginning of the Hairs, you
meet with the two frontal Muscles, which are most exactly to be separated from
the frontal or forehead bone which lies beneath, beginning from above and
cutting all away into the very Eyebrows. They are in the middle of the
Forehead distinct one from another. b T. 15. f. 1. E.


The Orbicular Muscle of the Eyelids.
The Skin of the Eyebrows and of the whole face being industriously
dissected, The Orbicularis The Ciliaris.
there appears a double T. 15. f. 1. F F.
orbicular Muscle, which does circularly cover the socket of the Eye a
Fingers-breadth on al sides, and is spread under each Eye* lid. Also, you shall
^ind the Musculus Ciliaris, s^ierched out orbicularly under the Tarsus.

Muscles of the Lips.
After wards, the whole Face being made bare and the Skin flead off, a little
below Zeugomaticus.
the Eye-hole, we meet with a little lean longish Muscle, placed athwart and
called T. 15. f. 1. L.
Zygomaticus. For it is produced from the Zygoma unto the opening of the Lips.
This Muscle must be separated from the Fat; for much Fat (which is also crowded
into the Muscles) does cover the whole face, which you shall pluck away with
your nails or with a pair of pinsers, or with a very sharp penknife, that
the Musculous flesh may more evidently be distinguished.

From the Zygoma toward the Lips, you shall search for five Muscles besides
Lip-heavers.
the Zygomatick muscle: and you shall find two above the upper Lip; each of
which is exactly to be separated from the other. That Muscle which is nearest
the Zygoma, belongs unto the nether Lip, which is lifted up thereby. The other
being Buccinator.
very near to the T. 15. f. 1. H.
Nost^ils, is reckoned to belong to the upper Lip. The lateral T. 15. f. 1. O.
Muscle broad and Fleshy which opens and forms the Cheeks, and therefore is
called Bucco, must not be stirred out of its place.

In the nether jaw, as far as to the middle of the lower Lip, you shall search
for Lip depressers.
two *Muscles* having first taken away the skin. b T* ^9. f. 1. C C.
d T. 15. f. 1. K.


That T. 15. f* 1. n.
which is nearest the Chin, does depress the lower Lip. That which lies T. 15.
f 1. M.
beyond next the Masseter or fastend to the Corner of the mouth, draws the
up^er Lip downwards. These two Muscles, though most ^^actly united, are yet
distinguished one from another by the various posture of their fibers; namely,
in as much as the Fibers of the former Muscle, do ^eeme to go upwards from the
Chin to the (...)* (...) do it were constitute a pyramidal Muscle, whose Basis
rests beneath and its top reaches to the Lip: the Fibers of the other Muscles
do ascend unto the Meeting of the Lips.

Muscles of the Nose.
The Skin of the Nose being curiously taken away, two Muscles discover
themselves Nose-^is^ers*
being ^^st^ned unto the bones and laps of the Nos^^ils, which arising* out of
T. 15. f 1. G.
the (...) between the Eyebrows, are carried into the laps of the Nostrills.

Other Anatomists ad (but only in such as have great Noses) two little* T. 15.
f 1. I.
Muscles Nostril widners.
spread athwart upon the ends of the Nose laps, which widen the Nostrils, as the
former do lift them up.

Other Anatomists ad (but only in such as have great Noses) two little f. 3.
and 4. F.
Muscles Nostril widners
spread ath^art up in the Ends of the Nose-Laps, which widen the Nostrils, as
the former do lift them up.

In the Inter^m you shall observe, that all these Muscles are so strictly
conjoined, that one of the Lips, or the Nose cannot be moved without the motion
of the Neighboring parts.

The internal Muscles of the Nostrils are seldom found, and only in such as
have ^olly ^oating Noses.

The Temporal Muscle.
That same thick and fibrous Flesh which is situat between the smaller Corner
Temporalis.
of the Eye and the Ear, is called the T. 15. f. 1. P P. f. 2. A A.
Temporal Muscle; whose tendon being drawn along under the Zygoma, is T. 15. f.
2. a a.
terminated into the Top of the lower Jaw.

The Masseter Muscle.
From the lower part of the Zygoma, arises the Muscle T. 15. f. 1. S. f. 2. B
B.
Masseter, which makes Masseter
up the fleshy sides of the Face. It is inserted into the Corner of the Lower
Jaw; and ^^ may be divided into two, the internal and external fibers being
cro^s-waies intersected.

The Parotick Kernels.
Above the Joint of the lower Jaw, behind the Ears, there are scattered certain
Constitution of the Parotis.
Kernels, of which one great kernel is made, called Parotis. this cannot be
seen unless the broad Muscle, which reaches unto the Ear, b^torn away. This
Kernel being plucked out, you may proceed to the Mu^cles of the Ears.

The Muscles of the Ears.
Although the Ears in Mankind remain firm and immovable, yet have they
their T. 15. f. 1. Q. R. T. 20. f. 1. H I. etc.
proper muscle placed behind them. The first is a very little one, divided into
two or three fleshy fibers, very friendly imbraceing the ligament of the Earth.
you must search for it at the root of the Ear.

The other Muscles of the Ear, are only portions of the frontal muscle, the
br^ad Muscle, and the Hinder-Head Muscle; all which are bred out of the fleshy
pannicle.

The Muscles of the Eye.
Within the Eye-hole are contained seven Muscles, such as are the Attollens
Palpebram The Eye-lidli^^er
the Eyelid li^^er, Four straight ones and two oblique. Six of these arise out
of the deepeest part of the Eie-ho^e;

You shall find two above the globe of the Eye, of which the one being first in
situation, Four right muscles of the Eye.
is the T. 19. f. 1. A A.
Lifter-up of the upper Eyelid; and the other is called Attollen^ f, 3. 4. 5.
A.
Oculi the Eye-Lifter. You shall search for three other f. 3. 4. 5. B. C. D.
straight Muscles, every one ^^ its sitvation suitable to the action which it
is to perform.

^^^ you shall diligently observe the six^ d large oblique Muscle, which at the
Obliq^^s ma^^^
great corner of the Eye, or by the space between the Eyebrows above the
Tearepipe or foramen lachrymale, runs back about the Cartilage or Gristle, as
about a pulley, or as a bridle about the Annulary or ring-fashioned ligament.

Be very careful that you do not break this Conjunction. For which cause you
shall begin your Anatomical administration of the Eye* in that place, that is
to say from the greater corner of the Eye, that you may pre^erve entire the f.
3. and 4. G.
Pul^y and the Insertion of the Te^don, which is enclosed within a small
nervous Ligament which receives the Te^don it self, and accompanies the same
unto the Eye. The flesh of that muscle is fixed to the boney sides of the
Eye-Hole at the greate^ corner.

The septimus Musculus Obliquus f. 3. and 4. E.
minor, seventh Muscle, being the lesser of the Obliquus m^nor.
crooked ones, is bred out of the inside of the lower part of the Eye-hole,
near the Tear f. 1. D.
Kernel, and taking its revolution above the Muscle Humilis, but below the f.
E. 4. and D.
Indigna^ori^s: it is terminated aloft upon the Globe of the Eye, by the Muscle
called f. 3. 4. etc. A.
supe^bus.

In he Ana^omical Dissection of the Eye, this Muscle is to be looked after in
the second Place, and to be warily preserved, least we tear it in pieces,
while we seek for the rest.

If with the point of your Penknife you pluck back the Coat of the E^e called
Conjun^^va, you shall see that all the Muscles of the Eye, do Terminate by a
fine Membranous Aponeurosis (conjunction or Contexture of many Nerves) into the
Tunica Cornea. But they do not make a peculiar Membrane, as Columbus imagined,
because the Aponeurosis (nerv^ contexture) of every Muscle, is distinct by it
self. h f. 3. 4. and B.


But you cannot see or demonstrate the Muscles of the Eye, unless with a pair
of Scissers you take away the fat placed about them; and after that you have
shown the Muscle which is the Up-lifter of the upper Eyelid, with the four
straight Muscles and the little crooked one.

That you may plainly discover the Obliquus Major or greater Crooked Muscle,
with its revolution to the pully, you shall take out the Eye, leaving that
greater oblick Muscle, but cutting the rest away with your scissers.

Muscles seated in the Neck.
The Neck, which we make account reaches from the Basis of the Head unto the
shoulder-blades, comprehending seven ^^ondyl^ or Vertebra's, has diverse Muscles
in its fore side; of which some appertain unto the Head, to the Os byoides,
some to the Larynx, others to the tongue, and others to the Pharynx.

And first we met with the Musculus T. 15. f. 2. ^. T. 15. f. f. 1. g g.
^atus, the broad Muscle, which infolds the Latus.
whole Neck. It ^^e^ds out of the Clavicul^ and Brest-bone, and being sastened
to the Bas^^ of the nether Jaw, it is laterally carried forth unto the Ear;
it must be very exactly se^ara^ed from the Fleshy parts which lie beneath it,
because it is an exce^^in^ thin Muscle.

The Musculus Latus being revelled or drawn back, in the fore part of the Neck
under the Chin you shall find nine as ^ar as to the Larynx, and beneath the
Larynx six.

T^wards the outward part of the Neck, there appears the thick and round
Mastoid^us.
Muscle Mastoid^us, which asce^ds slan^^^g from the Cl^vicula to the Mastoides.
this Muscle (...) to be separated at its original, that the others may be
seen. But observe, by the way, that this Muscle is very often broken asunder
by the Halter in such as have bin hang^d.

V^der the Ma^^^ideus there lies l^^keing the Coraco-^yo-ideus, a ^ean and
longish Coracohy^ideus.
Muscle, ^bl ^k^y str^^ched out ^^om the Scapu^a, to the Os Hyoides, for the
re^^action whereof, it is ordained. b T. 14. f. K K. f. 3. G.
c T. 13. f. 13. F F.


Then you shall see afterward the Carotick Artery, and the internal Jugular
Vein, and the Nerve of the sixth Conjugation, interposed between the said two
Vessels. And then you shall pass unto the Muscles se^^^ beneath the Laxy^x.

The first which presents it ^^^^ is the T. 13. f. 13. D D.
Sterno^yo-ideu^, which is bred out of the top of the s^er^^m or ^^est* bone.
Under this lies the T. 15. f. 1. T T. f. 2. C C.
Bronchius which belongs to the Larynx.

Then you shall di^^ect and show the Muscles placed above the Larynx and under
the Chin.

The first is Digastricus maxillae internae, or the Twi-bellyed Muscle of the
lower Digastricus.
Jaw, which is small and nervie in the midst thereof, that it might be turned
back about the Stylo-cerato-ides, and ends into the Chin, inwardly.

There are two Glandules or kernells under the Chin near neighbors to this
Muscle, which in r^eumatick defluxions do often swel. They are termed by
Vesalius, I know not why, Animellae. You must remove these Glandules that the
rest of the Muscles may be discovered, also you must separate the Digastric or
Twibelly from the Chin.

Under it lies the Muscle T. 13. f. 14. E E
Mylohyo-ideus with his Mate most straightly tied and Mylo^yoideus.
united, but a line drawn from the no^ch of the Chin as far as to the middle of
Os Hyoides within, will show you how to dissect.

Under this Mylo-hyo-ideus are found two remarkable Nerves, Branches of the
Seventh Pair, and the Muscle T. 13 f. 13. B B.
Genio-Hyo-ideus, rising from the inside of the Geniohyoideus.
Chin and ending into the Os Hyodes, but so closely linkt with his Ma^e, that
it is distinguished no otherwise, than by a white line which is manifest within.

Under these lurks the T. 23. f. 13. C C.
Genio-Glossus, by the outer side whereof lies the Meloglossus: Genio-glossus
Basiglossus.
under which lies the T. 13. f. 14. C C.
Cerato-glossus, or rather Basiglossus. b T. 13. f. 5. C C.


Afterward you shall come unto the hollow of the Neck under the lower corner
Styloglossus.
of the Jaw, where the Kernel was situate, which was formerly taken out. In
this place is found the T. 13. f. 14. D D.
Stylo-glossus, which is inserted into the Ceratoglossus.

Beneath there appear two Muscles, the one of which being lean and altogether
^^eshy, Stylo^yoideus
is called Stylo-hyo-ideus, the other which is next unto it and touches it,
being fleshy in its original at the Styloides Process, and small as a st^ing in
its middle, is called T. 15. f. 1. T T.
Digastricus or Twi-belly. The first was observed in the Neck under the Chin.

Under the Stylo-glossus, lies sculking the Stylo-Pharingaeus. Under the corner
Stylophary^gau^. P^erygoid^u^ internus.
of the lower. Jaw Bone, there is internally and immediately fastened the
Pterygoideus T. 15. f. 2. D D.
internus; which taking its rise from the Cavity of the P^erygoides, ends into
the Corner of the lower jaw, on the inside. You must not remove it from its
posture.

From the Basis of Os Hyo-ides on the outside, presents it self the short
Muscle Hyothyroideus.
T. 13. f. 8. B B.
Hyo-thyro-ideus, which is inserted into the middle of the Thyroides. This whole
Muscle, is commonly found broken by the Haltar, in such as have been hanged.

Al these Muscles having been showed and taken away, there appears the T. 3. f.
2. and 3. D D.
Oesophagaeus, Oesophageu^.
a broad and Membranous Muscle spread under the Oesophagus, which it embraces,
and is externally terminated in the Wings or Skirts of the Car^ilago Tyroides,
or Gristle so called.

Muscles of the Larynx, Pharynx and Gargareon.
The Oesophageus being showed and separated, take away the whole Larynx that you
may see those little Muscles which are proper to it. You shall observe eight or
ten of them, of which ^ome are ordained to move the Thyroides, and others
pertain to the Arytaenoides.

In the foremost and lowest part of the T^^roides, are placed the two Muscles
Cricoarytenoid^^*
called Crico-arytaeno-idei antici. c T. 3. f. 2. and 3. C C.
g T. 13. f. 8. D D.


By the sides and lower Corners of Thyroides are situate the Muscles called T.
13. f. 9. CC
Crico-arytaeno-idei ^aterales. In the hindermore and outward side of the
Cricoides, you shall find the two Muscles called Cricoarytaenoidei. Having
separated Thy (...) Ar^^eno^deus.
the Tyroides, inwardly and toward one side* you shall see the Muscle
Tyroarytaenoideus. To these is added the f. 10. BB.
circular Muscle insolding the whole Arytaenoides.

But al these Muscles cannot be seen unless the Osephageus be taken away, and
the f. 16. and 17.
Paristhmian Kernels plucked of, with which the Cartilage Thyroides or Gristle
so called, is covered.

The Epiglott^^ f. 7. 9. and 10. A.
in Mankind, has no Muscle; in Brutes, two pretty ones are found, which you may
see in the Larynx of an Ox. But in Mankind, we find only a sinewy Ligament,
which keeps the Epiglottis continually erected, unless it be depressed with the
weight of the Nutriment passing by.

Afterward you shall search for two other Muscles of the Pharynx, viz. the T.
3. f. 2. and 3. BB.
Sphenopharyngeus The Pharyngei.
and f. 2. and 3. AA.
Cephalopharyngeus.

And then you may easily find the other two T. 13. f. 15. BB. CC.
Muscles of the Gargarreon, if you have learned their Originals and Insertions
out of the History of the Muscles.

The Muscles of the hinder-part of the Head and Neck.
The Skin being removed, and the Fat of the hinder part of the Neck and of the
whole back as far as Os sacrum being pluck away, you shall observe many Muscles;
the first of which is called Trapezius or Scapularis, which with the Latissimus
does Traptzius.
cover the Neck, Back and Loins, at it were a cloak.

Now the scapular T. 14* f. ^. and 2. AA. f. 2. AA. * I. f. 1. CC.
Muscle, which belongs unto the shoulder, its broad end reaching out as far as
the Occiput or Hind-part of the Head, does compass all the Muscles of of the
Neck, and must in the lower part thereof be separated from the i Latissimus
Musculus, and wholly plucked up from the roots of the Spines or pointed Bones
of the whole Backbone as far as to the hinder part of the Head, from which it
must be separated, and only left sticking to the shoulder blade. b f. 10. CC.
c f. 9. BB.


This Muscle being taken away, the T. 14. f. 1. B B. f. 2. ^. C.
Rhomboides a Muscle of the Shoulderblade, Rhomboides. Servatus minor.
must be cut from the spines of the Backbone. Under these lies the f. 2. E.
Seratus Supernus minor posticus, the upper and smaller Saw-Muscle situate
behind.

These Muscles being plucked away as far as to their Insertion, the Muscles of
the The splenius.
Head do show themselves. And the first that occurs is the f. 2. H H
Splenius.

Near unto which is placed on the side of the Neck, Levator f. 2. D D
proprius Scapulae Levator scapulae.
or the Muscle appropriated to pluck up the shoulder; whose orginal cannot be
discovered, unless the Mastoideus having been showed, be taken out of the way.

The Splenius Musculus, toward the Roots of the spines of the Neck, being
taken away, there lies under it the f. 2. I I. f. 3. E E.
Complexus, near unto which at the side of the Complexus.
Neck, lie certain portions of Musculus Spinatus, and the Sacrolumbus ariseing
as high as the second Vertebra of the Neck.

The Complexus being taken away, below the second Vertebra of the Neck, are
Transversarius
seen two Muscles which ow their service to the Neck. The first of these is f
4. E E.
Transversarius, inter-posed between the transverse and Spinie Apophyses of the
Neck and Back.

Under this is spread the f. 4. D D.
Semispinatus immediately covering the Bodies of the Semispinatus.
Vertebra's.

Upon the first and second Vertebras of the Neck, are seen eight small Muscles,
Obliquus major.
in each side four, of which the two Greater f. 2. L. f. 4. G G.
Oblique Muscles, are carried from the transverse Apophysis of the second
Vertebra, to the transverse one of the first. The two f. 3. and ^ I I.
Recti Majores, do begin at the Spina of the second Vertebra, and end into
Rectus major.
the Occiput.

Under their upper ends are situate the two Musculi minores, or lesser Muscles,
Rectus minor.
the Straight and the Crooked, or the Rectus and Obliquus. The f. 3. 1. f. 4. K
K.
Minor Rectus lies hid under the Major Rectus, which you shall unloose at the
Head and pluck it a side, that the minor Rectus may appear.

The Muscle called Obliquus T. 14. f. 3. K. f. 4. H H.
minor, is carried from the Hinderpart of the Head Obliquus minor.
by the Minor Rectus, into the Transverse Apophysis of the first Vertebra: But
you must free and lay bare of fat these Muscles, as well the st^eight as the
Oblique or crooked ones, that they may be the more appa^ently seen. And you
shall begin your Section of the Muscles of the Head and Neek at the respective
Spines or pointed Eminencies of the Backbone.

When you have viewed the Muscles aforesaid you shall then make diligent search
after one that lies closely sci^lking, above the Articulation of the inferior
jaw and under the Zygoma; it is sit^^ate upon the external wing o^ Lap of the
Pterygoides, and being altogether fleshy and round in a manner, it is ^erted
into that same sli^ which is interposed between the Coronis and the knob of the
Lower Jaw bone.

It may be termed the Pterygoideus Externus to difference it from the Internus
Pterygoideus externus.
described before.

Muscles of the Arm.
These Muscles being administered, you may proceed to others. And first you The
pectoral muscle.
shall separate the T. 10. f. 1. A. B. T. 22. f. 1. E.
Pectoral Muscle either from the Brest-bone, or from its lowest part, by which
it is joined to the Serratus Major.

Mean while observe that the Serratus Minor or T. 10. f. 1. E.
Smaller Saw-Muscle, lies Serratus minor
under the Pectoral or Ribs: least you should tear the same, whiles you
dissect the pectoral Muscle, which you must cut up, as far as to the middle of
Clavicula. To which place being come, you shall separate it from the Deltoides
or Delta-shaped Muscle, unto which it is fastened by a firm, but obscure band.
Then you shall separate the Delto-ides from its original.

From thence you shall proceed to the Muscles which are spread out upon the
shoulder blade. Infraspinatus.
One lies upon the Spina or Backbone, three are seated beneath the same. That
which is Next the Spina, is called T. 22. f. 3. B B. * f. T. 22. f. 1. and 3.
C.
Infra-Spinatus.

Next thereunto, is the Rotundus f Minor. b T. 15. f. 2. E E E E.

Beneath that, you find the T. 22. f. 1. and 3 D.
Rotundus major, stretched out beneath the lower Rotundus major. Rotundus
Immersus.
Rib of the Omo-platae or shoulder blade.

Under the scapula you shall find the Muscle called Immersus o^ T. 22. f. 1* B.
Subscapularis: it fills the Hollow of the Shoulder Blade.

You shall leave the Original and Insertions of those Muscles untouched, only
you must separate the sides of one Muscle from another, that they may be
dis^guished asunder, one from another.

Muscles situate upon the Back and Loins.
From the Omoplata or shoulder blade, descend unto the Back and loins* which
pa^^s Latissimus*
are covered with a Muscle called Amplissimus and Latissimus, or the T. 14. f.
1. C C. D D. T. 22. f. 1. F.
Large^^ and broadest Muscle. This Muscle must be separated from the Os Sacrum
and the external Rib of Os Ilium, as far as to the lower Angle or Coruer of the
shoulder blade, and its insertion at the Os Brachij a little beneath the Neck.

You must while you cut it up at the Spines of the Vertebra's, take heed of
spoileing Serratus posticus*
a Mu^^le which lies beneath it, and is termed Serratus d T. 14. f. 2. F. G.
posticus infernus, the Hinder and lower Saw-Muscle, being a little one.

Which after you have plucked off, from its original by the Os sacrum, as far as
its Insertion, you shall show three other Muscles, stretched out from the Os
sacrum, all along the Spina or Backbone.

Of which the first being lateral and seated toward the Ribs, is called T. 14.
f. 1. L L. f. 3. B B.
Sacro-Lumbus. Sacrolumbus.
You shall begin your dissection of this Muscle at the upper part by the Root
or the Ribs. A white line of fat will guide you from the top to the bottom,
where you may separate it from the T. 14. f. 2. O O.
Musculus quadratus which belongs unto the Quadratus.
Loins, but in its original it is exceeding hardly separated from the Spinatus.

Note by the way that the Sacro-lumbus does reach as far as the Hinder part of
the Head, and that it does bestow a double Tendon upon every Rib.

Now you shall separate the T. 14. f. 3. D D. f. 4. A.
Spinatus from Os sacrum, by easily and gingerly taking Spinatus.
away the hard Aponeurosis which is spread out over the Sacer.
Musculus sacer; which being taken off, if you lengthen out your section above,
you will discern the difference between the Spinatus and the T. 14. f. 4. B B.
Sacer.

Which when you have attained, thrusting your penknife straight in, as far as
to the transverse Apophyses, you will easily separate those Muscles.

The Spinatus, goes as high as the second Vertebra of the Neck, being in the
midst between the Transversarius and the Complexus.

The Spinatus being fastened to the transverse Apophyses, does also arise as
far as the Neck.

Muscles of the Breast.
The Body being turned and laid with the face upwards, you shall sever the T.
10. f. 1. C D.
Serratus Serratus major
Major laterally, and putting in your hand underneath, you shall find it
stretched out under the Omoplata or shoulder blade as far as to the Clavicula.
And then you shall see the T. 10 f. 1. F.
Muscle subclavius placed between the Clavis and the first Rib. Subclavius.
Triangular is.


You shall look for the Pectoral Muscle internal or the Triangular Muscle, in
the inner part of the Breast Bone plucked off. Afterward you shall carefully and
gingerly separate the T. 10. f. 1. G G.
external intercostal Muscle form the T. 10. f. 1. H H.
internal. The fibers Intercostalis.
Cross ways interposed, will distinguish the one from the other.

Muscles of the Cubit.
When this is done, you shall return unto the Arm to make observation of the
Muscles of the Cubit, which are seated in the Arm.

Five Muscles do infold the whole Arm, two in the fore parts, and three behind.
You shall separate the two Benders of the Cubit, on the former and inner part.

The first, which presents it self is the T. 22. f 1. G.
Biceps or Twi-headed Muscle, which Biceps.
from its Original to its Insertion, may very easily be divided into two. But
you must mark, that one Head of the Biceps, which grows out of the Coracoides,
has a certain flesh adjoined to it, which creep along the side of the Pectoral
Muscle, as far as to the middle of the Arm, unto which it is fastend most
firmly; and this Portion of Flesh makes a Muscle, which is ordained to draw the
Arm forwards, which from its original I call T. 22. f 1. H.
Coraco-ideum, the Coraco-idean Muscle. Coracoideum.


I have observed the Biceps or Twi-Head in a very strong and brawnie Man to be
a Triceps or Tri-Head, being exquisitely separated into three parts, both in
the Original and end thereof. The third Head sprang out of the tendon of the
pectoral Muscle.

Under the Biceps is placed the T. 22 f 1. I I. f 2. B.
Brachieus internus or Inner Arme-Muscle, Brachieus internus.
whose original is at the end of the Muscle T. 22. f. 1. A.
Deltoides. This Muscle must be separated sidelongs from such as border upon it.

In the outer part of the Arm three Muscles are placed, viz. the Longus,
Brevis and Brachieus externus, and beneath the Elbow, the Angoneus is seated.

The external are the T. 22. f. 3. E.
Longus and T. 22. f. 3. F.
Brevis which embrace that Mass of flesh Longus Brevis*
which makes the Brachieus externus. In their original they T. 22. f. 3. above
E
are distinguished by the tendon of Musculus ^a^^ss^^nus which comes between
them: but at their ^on they grow together by a firm and sinewy tendon. And
therefore they are easily, in their upper part, separated from the Brachieus
externus; but in their lower parts Brachiaeusexternus.
toward the Elbow, they are very hardly divided from the Brachieus.

Now thus you shall proceed: you shall curiously take away the nervous tendon
near the Elbow, and goeing upwards by little and little, you shall gently (...)
on the one side and the other, also inwardly; diligently observeing the line
which separates the long Muscle from the short, until you have separated the
Brachieus externus; from the Muscles which are placed above it. Then you shall
see it (...) from the Bone of the Arm, a little beneath the Neck thereof, with
a fleshy substance.

The Muscle Angoneus T. 22. f. 3. a. f. 4. G.
cannot be seen til you have pulled away the ^^newy membrane wherewith it is
covered. It arises at the lower part of the Arm near the Elbow, lying hid
between the Radius and the cubitus, and it is inserted into the Cubit. It is of
the Length and thickness of a Man's forefinger.

Muscles of the Radius, the Wrists, the Fingers, and the Thumb.
In the Cubit you shall find the Muscles of the Radius, the wrists, the Fingers,
and the Thumb. And in the Inside of the Cubit as far as to the wrists, you
shall find Nine Muscles; on the outside you shall meet with seven.

In the Inside you shall find them disposed in this Situation and order
following. Longus-Supinator radij Wrist-benders.
The first that presents it self is the Longus T. 22. f. 4. E.
Supinator Radij, which arises from the external apophysis of the Arm, and is
stretched out upon the Radius.

Next to that, is the Radieus T. 22. f. 1. M.
Flexor Carpi, after which follows the T. 22. f. 1. K.
Palmaris Remarkable by a very small and very long Tendon.

By the Palmaris is seated the T. 22. f 1. O. f 5. A.
sublimis Digitorum Flexor, and next to it, so as to touch the same, you have
the T. 22. f 1. M.
Cubiteus* Flexor Carpi.

On the upper part of the Cubit, near the Joint, between the Longus Supinator
and the Radieus flexor, the round Head of the Pronator T. 22. f* 2. C.
Radij shows it self; Pronatoacs-Radij.
which is a very shor^ Muscle, ariseing from the internal Apophy^is of the Arm
and obliquely carried to its insertion into the Radius.

Under the Radieus, lies the Flexor T. 22. f. 2. D.
Pollicis.

Beneath the Sublimis, lies the Profundus T. 22. f. 1. P. f. 5. B.
Flexor Digitorum, and in the lower Finger*bendexs
part of the Cubit, by the wrists, lies the T. 22. f. 2. D.
Quadratus spread under the Tendons of the Muscles, being three Fingers broad,
and immediatedly fastened Cross-w^^es, into the Radius and Cubitus.

On the outside of the Cubitus above the Radius, the Extensor T. 22. f. 3. H.
Carpi is stretched Extenders of the wrist.
out.

Next to it, is the Alter T. 22. f. 3. G.
Extensor, which is carried obliquely to the Cubit, and being fastened
thereunto, takes its course downwards.

Between the Radius and the Middle-part of the Cubitus, the Extensor T. 22. f.
3. K.
D^g^torum is placed, which has a parcel of flesh* annexed unto it, spread under
the Muscle of Of the fingers.
the Extensor Pollicis.

Under it, near the Cubit, lies the Extensor parvi Digiti, by the Wrist.

Under the Tendons of the Extensor Digitorum you shall find two other fial
Muscles, the one of which is the Extensor T. 22. f 3. M.
Policis, the other is the T. 22. f. 3. ^.
Indicator ordained to wait upon the Index or Forefinger, whose Tendon is
united by certain Fibers with the Tendon of the Extensor Digitorum.

The dvision of all these Muscles is easy on the upper part of the Cubit, both
on the The best way to dissect these muscles.
inside, and on the outside, and in the said upper part, you must begin your
section. For if you should begin at the Tendons you would multiply Muscles, and
make as many Muscles as you find Tendons. Thus therefore, near the Wrist, on
the inner side of the Cubit, you shall distinguish the Tendons of the sublimis
and the Prosundus, allotting ^ou^ Tendons to each Muscle, and then take your
course upwards.

Radieus Externus extensor Carpi, is termed also Bicoruis twi-horned, by reason
of its double Tendon. You may divide this Muscle into two, Muscles, distinct in
their original and insertion, but you shall do better to make but one of it.

In the Hand, you shall find Seventeen Muscles. Muscles of the Hand.


In the Palm or Inside of the Hand there are Thirteen; viz. the four T. 22. f.
5. C C C C. f. 2. f f f f.
Lumbricales, the T. 22. f. 1. S. f. 2. h.
Hippothenar, the T. 22. f. 4. K.
Thenar, the T. 22. f* ^. R. f. 2. G.
Anti-thenar, the Abductor Indicis, the Massa Carnea, and the four Interossei
T. 22. f. 2. f f f f.
interni.

In the outside of the Hand you shall find only the four Interossei f. 2. I I I
I
externi; with the Tendons of the Finger-stretchers, or of the Thumb-stretcher,
and of the little Finger-stretcher.

Muscles of the Abdomen or Belly.
In your anatomical Administration of the Muscles of the Belly you shall thus
proceed. The first you meet with, which must be plucked out, is the Musculus T.
^. f. 2. H H. T. 2. f. 8. A.
Obliquus descendens, which you shall see conjoined with the e serratus major,
T. 2. f. 8. a a.
tooth Obliquus descendens.
within tooth, as if the Edges of two S^wes were Put togeher, and Joined one
within another, or as some parts of the Scul are coupled by the sutures. You
shall know the difference of the Serratus and Obliquus one from another, by
certain white lines and by the different posture of the Fibers. You shall
separate the Musculus Obliquus from its intanglements with the Teeth of the
serratus major, with help of a very small and sharp Penknife.

The first tooth is interposed between the Musculus rectus and a portion of the
Serratus: the second and the T. 1. f. 2. F F. T. 10. f. 1. C. D.
third are very hardly separated. The other four lie lurking under a portion of
the Latissinus, not receiving the fleshy Productions of the Serratus.

To bring them therefore into sight, it will be convenient to pluck up a portion
of the Latissimus, as far as to the hinder spine of the Os Illium; and th^n you
shall take those four Teeth off from the Ribs, and in conclusion you shall cut
off the Muscle, from the whole Rib which appertains to the Os Ilium.

If you be industrious and can endure to take pains, you shall observe that the
second, third, and fourth Tooth [or Finger] of this Muscle, do creep higher up
under the Serratus, than vulgar Anatomists imagine, and that this Muscle does
there attain a sinewy tendinous Head, which cleaves fast to the lower side of
the Rib.

A tendinous Head receives a portion of the intercostal nerve.

For the nerve, when it is come thither, it is divided into two parts, the one
of which does insinuate it self into the sinewy Head of the Tooth of the
Muscle: the other sticking fast unto the Rib, does make the T. 2. f. 9. d d d.
nervous intersections of the Musculus Rectus. The Muscle being thus cut up,
must be turned back upon one side of the Belly.

You shall in the mean while observe, that the T. 2. f. 8. b b.
Aponeurosis of this Muscle, is bored through near the Os pubis; as the T. 2.
f. 8. B.
Aponeurosis of the Obliquus ^ ascendens, and of the Transversus are
perforated, near the foremost and lowest Spine of the Os Illium; and therefore
the Holes of the two oblique Muscles are not set just one against another, but
at a distance one after another, that the Gut might not be so apt to fall down
into the Groine or Cod.

These Holes are broken in Ruptures into the Cod* or else dilated, which are
diligently to be observed, in reduceing of the Gut when it is strangled in the
Groine.

And if at any time an Incision be made in the Groine, to reduce the Gut, that
hole ought to be made wider by Incision, that the Gut may more easily return
into the Belly.

Above the Obliquus ascendens toward the Hypogastrium, you shall find a little
Nerve which insinuates and winds it self into the Apophysis of the Peritonaeum
that it may be carried to the Testicle, because it penetrates the transverse
Muscle. It arises from the Nerves of the Loins, and is a portion of those
nerves which are disseminated into the Oblique Ascendent and the Transverse
Muscles.

When you have cut the T. 2. f. 8 B. c c.
Oblique Ascendent from the Rib of Os Ilium to which it cleaves very fast, you
shall bring it to the Loins, where it may be separated from the Transverse.
Then you shall separate it from the Ribs themselves as it returns upwards. And
it will be convenient to turn back this Muscle to the contrary side, after the
manner of the primus Obliquus; and when you shall come unto the Musculus Rectus,
you shall observe that this same Oblique Muscle does embrace the Musculus Rectus
or straight Muscle above the Navel, and below the Navel it transmies a single
Tendon under the Rectus* which notwithstanding by the Edge of the Rectus does
cleave so obstinately to the Aponeurosis of the Oblique Descendent, that it is
not possible by any Art to separate or pull them asunder, without rending them.
d T. 2. f. 9. A.
e T. 2. f. 8. d d. f. 9. bb.


While you cut the Tendons of the oblique Muscles from the share Bones, be very
careful least you mangle the Apophysis of the T. 2. f. 9. E E.
Peritonaeum which is carried through those Tendons, and tear the T. 6. f. 2.
D D.
Muscle Cremaster placed upon the said Apophysis, and also least you tear the
Tendon of the Transverse Muscle lieing beneath.

You shall know the Muscle Cremaster by its color and Consistence. For it is
How the cremaster is known.
a piece of red flesh, thin, sprinkled with straight fibers, severed some
space from the flesh of the Oblique Descendent, and according to the Length of
the Groine, incloseing the Apophysis of the Peritonaeum. You shall find such a
parcel of flesh in women, but shorter and narrower, placed upon the production
of the Peritonaeum.

Between the Oblique ascendent and the transverse Muscle toward the Loins,
many veins are seen, which are the offspring of the Lumbal and the Hypo-gastrick
Veins. But you shall take precise notice of two remarkable nerves or sinnewes,
which besides the little intercostal twigs inserted into the Teeth of the
Oblique Descendent Muscle, do arise out of the two inner Vertebra's of the
Back, and creeping obliquely upon the bastard Ribs, are by the last Rib
dispersed into the flesh of this Oblique and the Transverse Muscles.

You may conveniently separate the T. 2. f. 8. ^ e. f. 9. C.
Musculus Rectus following the white Musculus rectus.
Line, but not meddling with the ends thereof. If you shall diligently and
leasurely pare off the extremities thereof opposite unto the Linea Candid^ or
white Line, you will find the intercostal Nerves which bore their way through
the peritonaeum, that they might come unto and constitute the nervous T. 2. f.
9. dd.
intersections of the Muscle, which now and then are wanting, as I have
observed in some Bodies. I have often found two imperfect ones above the Navel;
if a third be found, it is always directly opposite unto the Navel; you shall
very rarely find a fourth Intersection.

Toward the end of Rectus Musculus, on the inside you shall observe the
Epigastrica Which is the true Linea candida.
T. 2. f. 8. e
ascendens and the Mammaria T. 2. f. 8. d.
descendens to T. f. 8. f.
meet together about the middle of the Muscle, where they grow into one by a
close Anastomosis.

That which separates the right Muscles is a real T. 1. f. 2. K K.
white Line streched out from the xiphoides as far as to the Conjunction of the
Share-Bone; and it is simply done of them, who call the growing together of the
nervous conjunctions or Aponeuroses of the Obliquus descendens, the White-Line,
seeing the Aponeuroses themselves are united continually and not disjoined by
any apparent Line.

In big-belly'd women when their Bellies are very much distended, in the last
months of their going with Child, by reason of the Drawing of the Musculi Re^
asunder, a certain black-blewish Line remains for two or three months after
the woman is delivered, which begins at the xiphoides and reaches unto the
place where the share-bones grow together, which vanishes away by little and
little, the Right Muscles being reunited and growing together again.

Over the lower end of the Right Muscles lies a small Muscle called T. 2. f. 9.
D D
Pyramidalis Pyramidalis.
which you must curiously part into two, and having taken away one, you shall
see a most strong sinewy Tendon of the Musculus Rectus, fastend to the Os pubis
or Share-bone.

The Lef^ Pyramidal Muscle is often times shorter and narrower than the right.

The transverse T. 2. f. 9. A f. a a etc.
Muscle which cleaves to the Peritonaeum, is not easily drawn off Transversus.
yet if you are desirous to take it away, you must cut it from the Loins, and
then gently separate it from the Peritonaeum with your fingers alone.

Muscles of the Yard.
In a Man's Yard on either side in the Groine and the peritonaeum you shall
search for The Yard Erector.
two Muscles, having first removed a great deal of fat wherewith they are
covered. The one of these Muscles is T. 6. f. 1. a a. f. 5. H H.
Erector Penis the Raiser of the Yard, which a^^ses from the Sphincter Any or
Arse-muscle so called, and is inserted into the hollow and spungy Ligament of
the Yard.

The other being placed upon the Urethra or Piss-pipe is called T. 6. f 1. b b.
f 5. I I.
Accelerator or The Accelerator.
the Speeder, it arises out of the same Tuberosity beneath the spungy T. 6. f.
5. K K.
ligament of the Yard, although it be fastened by a bit of flesh to the
foresaid sphincter or Arse-Muscle, that it may bear up the fundament* which
fleshy portion or bit of flesh forementioned I am wont to show for the
Levatores externi any, or external Arse-Heavers.

Muscles of the Fundament.
The Fundament has six external Muscles belonging unto it. The Sphincters, The
sphincters of Anus. The Levatores any.
and four external Lifters, for the Levatores interni or inner-lifters do lie
^ut of sigh^ women there is a fifth Muscle which belongs to the Coccyx or
Crupper-Bone.

In the first place you shall anatomise and show the Sphincter T. 3. f 4. O.
Cutaneus, then another larger red Muscle, and then the side-muscles before and
behind, the T. 6. f 3. N N.
Levatores which arise out of the tuberosity of the Huckle-bone, you shall seek
for them behind the Crupper bone and above the accleratores on the foreside,
putting your hand in beneath, or putting in a little knife made of boxe-wood.
But you shall more evidently discern the largeness of the Levator Any, if you
shall take away the Bladder, the Intestinum Rectum or Arse-Gut and the womb of a
woman, and withal shall sever the Conjuction of the share-Bones.

For then you shall see a br^ad but thin piece of flesh, drawn out from the Os
Sacrum as far as to the Spine of the Os Ischij, underproped with a firm
ligament, which is in that space, and produced as far as to the Os Ischij it
self: which fleshy Membrane ought to be taken for the Levator: for under it the
Obturator Internus is situate.

Besides those Levatores there is another sound to arise from the far^h^st
extremity The Muscle peculiar to the Coccyx in women.
of the Os sacrum and the Crupperbone, viz. a thin and sharp pointed piece of
flesh strewed with right fibers, encloseing the lateral parts of the
Crupper-bone or Coccyx on either side, which holds up the Sphincter, and so the
external Orifice of the Privy Parts in Women are widened, this Muscle drawing
the Crupper-bone backwards, that in Childbirth the passage may be more free
for the Infant.

I have seldom seen such a Muscle in the Bodies of men, and the use of it when
it is extant in men, is, to render the voidance of Dung more easy, by drawing
back the Crupper-bone when men are at stool.

The internal Sphincter (if we must needs admit, and allow of a third) is no
other The internal Sphincter.
than a Membranous parcel of flesh, somewhat black and blue, which comprehends
the Rectum Intestinum, or Arse-Gut, like a Sheath or Scabberd, being adorned
with straight Fibers and interwoven with a few circular ones; which if the Coat
of the Guts is fleshy, it differs from that common Coat of the Guts, which
covers their inside. So the Rectum Intestinum is distinguished from the rest,
neither is the Situation of the Membranes, or Coats, varied.

The Bladder-Muscle.
The Bladder-Muscle T. 6. f 5. F F.
Sphincter, is placed in a Man above the Prostatae, The Bladdermuscle in men.
which it embraces for the Space of two fingers breadth, and is easily found
without the Channel of the Pi^s-pipe: If you shall cut up the Pipe with a pair
of Scissers from the N^^ of the Yard, as far as to the Prostatae.

You shall examine if you can find two Sphincters of the Bladder, one beneath,
and the other above the Prostatae, which I never observed. a T. 2. f 5 Q.


Now that part of the Neck of the Bladder, which respects the Bones of the
Share, is manifestly fleshy, between the two Kernels called Prostatae* and
there a twofold Demonstration of the Double Sphincter.
Sphincter may be allowed; one fle^hy, placed upon the Prostatae, and in that
sense above them; but under the Prostatae, is the Membranous Muscle of the Neck
of the bladder: the other broad Muscle above the Prostatae, and turned back
under the same, will ^e the Second Sphincter Muscle, because it does circularly
embrace the Prostatae, above and beneath.

The Neck of the Bladder in women, is very near as long as ones Thumb, being
The Bladder-Muscle in Women.
Nervous, Spongy, and black within, like the P^^s-pipe, or Urethra in Men, and
compassed about with reddish flesh, which is taken to be the sphincter: and
while the Neck of the Bladder in women swells, if you put your finger within
the watergate, you shall percive an hard and long tumor or swelling* and the
uppermore carnositie of the Privy Part, which closes and stops the end of the
Bladder, is both in Girls and women allwaies found larger than the rest, and
the other glandules being by frequent childbearing torn and defaced, this
allwaies remains to the End of their lives.

Muscles of the Clitoris.
You shall seek the Muscles of the Clitoris, after this manner; having
leasurely Latus.
taken away much fat till such times as rudd^ flesh appears, you shall sever
the Latissimus Musculus which lies very low, growing out of the sphincter of
the Fundament, and inserted into the very Lips of the Watergate or female
Privity, for the moveing or straitening whereof, I concevie this Muscle is
ordaind. The other is Gracilis.
the Gracilis Musculus fastened to the Ligement of the Clitoris.

Musclus of the Thigh.
In the Cavity of the Belly, when the Entralls are removed, you shall observe
above Psoas.
the Loins the Musculus longus and rotundus, the long and round Muscle which is
termed T. 10. f. 1. O. O. T. 23. f. 1. A.
Psoas, which you shall separate from its original to its insertion which is in
the small Trochanter

I have oftentimes in Men, and sometimes in Virago's, or manly Women, observed
another ^ank Muscle placed over the Psoas aforesaid. It seems for this Cause
added, that as a Ligament or Band it might strengthen, and as it were gird in
the ^o^t and loose flesh of the Muscle Ploas.

The Cavity of os Illium is filled by the Musculus latus T. 23. f. 1. B.
Iliacus or broad i^^ak Iliacus.
muscle, which together with the Psoas being conveyed along upon the Os Pub^s
and by its tendon united to the Psoas, is terminated in the small Trochanter.

Having turned the Body, you shall proceed to the Muscles which make the
Buttocks, called Gloutii that is buttock Muscles. There are three of them
resting one upon another.

The first and greatest T. 23. f. 2. B. f. 3. A.
Buttock* Muscle, you shall separate toward its tendon, Gloutius major
both before and behind, having first made it clean and freed it from the fat.

Then you shall proceed in your section upwards til the whole is on all sides
cut of, til you come to its insertion, which is in the great Trochanter, and
there you shall leave it, or having first taken away the broad band, you shall
cut off the said Muscle in the fore part.

Under this lies the Gloutius T. 23, f. 3. B* f. 4. C.
Medius or middlemast Buttock muscle, which may Medius.
easily be separated in its upper and lateral part toward the Os sacrum. But
bene^^h the middle part of the Gloutius Secundus the T. 23. f. 4* B.
third is placed, immediately fastened Minimus.
to the Os Ilium: this Muscle you must not cut of.

Between the middle and the lesser Buttock Muscles there are two remarkable
veins, which from the Hypogastrica do creep over the Obturator Internus ^ with
an A^^e^^e, Hand in Hand, and a portion of the Nervus major posticus, they
spread themselves into numerous branches: and there arise most cruel pains in
the inmost parts of the Buttocks, which counterfeit the sciatica or Hip-gout.
Would not drawing blood from the Haemorrhoid Veins, serve well to disbu^^hen
these parts?

In the next place you shall proceed to the Quadrigemini and the Obturatores,
Quadrigemini
which are seen beneath, the greater Buttock Muscle being taken away. The
uppermost being the first and longest of all, is called the T. 23. f. 3. ^. f.
4. D.
Pyriformis unto which the two T. 23. f. 3. b f. 4. G.
Purvi or little ones do follow in order, coupled together, that between them
^d in their Bosom as it were, they might contein the Tendon of the Obturator
internus.

To these two there is orderly adjoined the T. 23. f. 3. D. f. 4. E.
Quratus Quadrigeminus being broader and more fleshy than the rest.

The Obturatores are two, the T. 23. f. 3. E. f. 4. F.
internal and the T. 23. f. 4. ^.
external, the Internal has its Obturator internus.
orginal out of the Circumference of the Oval hole; and its Tendon being
carried along between two Ligaments, and being hid in the bosom or holownesse
of the second and third Quadrigeminal Muscles, it is carried into the Cavity of
the great Trochanter. And therefore you must pull asunder the second and and
third Quadrigeminals, before this Muscle can come in sight.

Now the Ligaments through which the Tendon of the Obturator Internus is
carried, are two; the one being external is carried from the Os sacrum to the
Tuberosity of the Os Ischij: the other being internal and placed beneath the
external, is carried from the same Os sacrum, into the spina of the Os Ischij.

The Obturator externus cannot be discovered unless the fourth broad
Quadrige^nal Externus.
Muscle be plucked back, and that the Propagation thereof may more evid^^^ly
appear, you shall take away the Musculus Triceps or Three-Headed Muscle.

Sometimes I have observed above the Primus Quadrigeminus, the Iliacus exter^
Graci^, which from the lower and transverse spines of the Os sacrum, did and
into the top or the great Trochanter. You shall therefore anatomise and show
eleven Muscles of the Thigh, placed above the Os Ilium.

In the hinder part are nine, Three Gloutij or Buttock Muscles, which being
drawn aside, there appear four Quadrigemini and two Obturatores. In the fore
part and hollowness of the Os Ilium are found two Muscles, the Psoas which
indeed has its original higher than from the Os Ilium, and the Iliacus.

Muscles of the Leg.
In the Thigh from the Haunch to the knee and Ham you shall observe and show
eleven Muscles.

In the fore part you shall find seven, the Longus, the Fascia lata, the Rectus
Sutorius. Membranosus. Rectus. Vasti. Crureus.
gracilis, the D^^o Vasti, the Crureus and the Triceps; which are so situate,
that in the first place you meet with the longus or ^u^orius, then the
Membranosus or Fascia ^ata. According to the streigh^^e^s and length of the
thigh the Rectus Gracilis is drawn out. Near and bordering upon this are the
Vasti d^o, under which lies the Crureus which immediately covers the Os
femo^i^, or Thigh Bone, Adjoining to the vastus internus is the Triceps, which
lie^ scu^keing within the Thigh.

In the hinder-part of the thighs you shall find four, disposed after this
manner. Unto the Triceps on the Inside is ^^^^ened the Gracilis Posticus:
bordering upon it, is the seminervosus, with the Semimembranosus, and between
this and the vastus externus is the Musculus Biceps placed.

In the forepart of the thigh, you must begin at the T. 23. f. 1. l l.
Long Muscle; which being cut of, you shall cleverly take away the Fascia f. 1.
E. c c c.
^^^a, either all of it or as much as you can, and you shall bring it as far as
to the knee.

Then you shall cut of the Gracilis f. 1. F F.
Rectus.

Afterward you shall proced unto the two vasti, which that you may more easily
separate from the Crureus, they are distinguished one from another by a line
running between them, which you shall cut up.

Then you shall dissect the Vastus f. 1. G G.
Externus by the latus externum; but it is harder to separate the Vastus f. 1.
H H.
internus.

And you shall begin to separate the same at the lower part near the Patella,
and thrusting in your hand, and neatly mannageing your penknife, you shall cut
it toward the upper parts: and so the two Vasti shall be severed from the T.
23. f. 1. etc.
Crureus.

From these, you shall come unto the Triceps, which may more truly be termed
Triceps.
quad^icep^ or rather quadrigeminus, because of four Heads and as many
distinct ^mer^ions.

It is placed in the inner part of the Thigh, and its first and upmost portion
growing Pectineus.
out of Os Pubis, seems to be a Distinct Muscle, which in regard of its
situation may be termed Pectineus.

I have sometimes found four other portions perfectly distinct one from
another, besides the Pectineus, and the last portion was ve^^e long, like a
semi-nervous Muscle, and was carried on with a sinewy tendon as far as to the
Leg.

I conceive this is the Muscle, which has been in women observed distinct from
the rest, in the hinder part of the thigh, and is wont to be joined as a fifth,
unto the four P^stici. For it arose from the Tuberosity of the ^^chium and was
inserted into the H^^der Part of the Tibia.

It is found in Women, because they were to have broader Buttocks and larger
Thighs than Men.

It is an ea^^e matter to separate those four Muscles placed in the hinder part
of Seminorvosu^. Semimembranosu^. ^iceps. Gracilis.
the thigh, viz the T. 23. f. 3. G G.
Seminervosus, the T. 23. f. 3. H H.
Semimembranosus, the T. 23. f. 3. ^ ^ ^.
Biceps, and the Gracilis T. 23. f. 3. F F.
internus. I have often sound the Biceps distinct both in its Original and
Insertion. b T. 23. f. 1. etc. C C.


Muscles of the Tansus.
In the Leg from the knee unto the Tarsus are found 13. Muscles; in the hinder
part you shall find five placed after this manner. Gemelli* Popliteus.
Plantaris. Soleus.


The first are the T. 23. f. 1, d d, f. 3. K K.
Gemelli; under their Heads lies the f, 4 H.
Popliteus hidden; between the Gemelli and the Soleus, the f. 3. M.
Plantaris hides it self.

The Soleus lieing beneath the Gemelli, does immediately cover the shin-bone.

In the lateral and external Part of the Tibia, by the Spine, there appears
the Foot-benders
Peroneus f. 1. L L.
Flexor pedis, Neighbor to which is the Longus f. 1. M M.
Extensor Digitorum.

After which follows the Extensor Pedis, tibieus f. 2. E E
posticus. Under the Extensor Extendors.
longus Digitorum, lies the Extensor f. 1. N*
pollicis; and beneath the Flexor pedis Peroneus, lies the Extensor f. 2. F F.
Peroneus.

The Flexor f. 4* K. f. 6. B.
pollicis does take up the internal and lateral part of the Tibia. In the lower
part of the Tibia, between the flexor pollicis and the Tibieus posticus, the
Flexor f. 4. l l f. 5. C.
digitorum medius holds its place.

It is easy to separate the Muscles which infold the Tibia on all sides,
provided The separateon of these Muscles.
you do fir^^ pluck off the fascia f. ^ E. c c c.
lata, which is carried out as far as to the foot. Having divided the Heads of
the Gemelli, you shall diligently search for the Popliteus or Ham-Muscle,
situate obliquely over the Head of the Soleus. Then you shall observe the fleshy
Head of the Musculus Plantaris, which lies lurkeing between the Gemelli and the
Soleus. The Plantaris is like the Palmaris.

In the fore part of the Tibia the Peroneus externus and Peroneus internus seem
to make one Muscle, because they arise from one and the same part, and are
carried through the Cleft of the external Ankle-bone.

But the one is internally inserted into the Os meta-tarsi, which sustaines the
little Toe: The other being drawn under the sole of the ^ee^, is carried into
the Os metatarsie which susta^es the Great Toe. d f. 3. L L.


In the Foot you shall take notice of seventeene Muscles. In the out side of
the Foot the^e are five, viz the T. 23. f. 2. G.
Pedieus and the four interossei f. 2. a a a a.
externi.

In the sole of the Foot you shall observe twelve, viz. the Brevis Digiti f.
4. L. f. 6. A.
Flexor or little-Toe bende^, the three f. 6. e e e.
Lumbricales, those which are made out of the Massa f. 6. D D.
Carnea, the four external Interosseans and as many f. 5. d d d d.
internal.

Upon each side of the Foot is placed one Muscl, viz. the Abductor ^. f. 3. O.
f. 5. b b.
Pollicis; and Minimi Digiti abductor.

In the hollow of the foot, there is placed another Massa carnea, spread under
the first, and cleaving immediately to the Bones. it may be perfectly divided
into four or five portions, although in the middle spaces of the Bones of
Metatar^us the Musculi Interossei are contained.

Furthermore in the Sole of the Foot you shall find that same Internal Muscle
which is opposed to the Abductor Pollicis or Great-Toe withdrawer, like unto
the Antethenar in the Hand. It may be called f. 5. b b. e
Musculus Transversalis.

Chap. 46. Of the Veins, Arteries and Nerves belonging to the Limbs.
The Veins of the Limbs begin in the Arm at the Arm-pit, and in the Feet
they (...) the Veins of the upper* Limbs* Axillaru.
take their Original from the Groines.

The Vena T. 24. f. 1 A.
Axillaris near the Arme-pits does produce the Humeralis, which is called the
f. 1. B B B.
Cephalica or Head-Veine. It has no Artery to accompany the same, and it
holds its Course through the whole Radius.

A little after it sendes forth the f. 1. ^. m m.
Thoracica which is expanded into external parts Thoracica.
of the Chest, and meets with small twigs of the Vena T. 12. f. 1. a a a a.
azygos.

It is afterward termed T 24. f. 1. C C.
Basilica and by the Bending of the Arm, it is divided Basilica.
into two branches. The f. 1. e e. etc.
one of which creeps all along the inside of the Cubitus; the other being T.
24. f. 1. x. y. etc.
external descends beneath the Skin unto the Hand. h f. 3. P. f. 5. c.


The Ramus internus or inner branch is called Mediana 1. t t. etc.
Vena, and it receives Mediana.
a branch of the f. 1. f f.
Cephalica below the bending of the Arm, where it is called the Cephalica or
Basilica. These three Veins are opened beneath the Bending of the Arm.

But the Basilica has an f. 2. A. by L.
Artery under it or very near it, and a f. 3. ^. 1. etc.
Nerve and the Tendon of Musculus T. 22. f. 1. G.
Biceps, which bends the Arm: which parts must (in the opening of a vein) be
avoided, for if they happen to be cut, they bring great Inconveniences to the
Arm.

The Cephalica being streched out upon the T. 24. f. 1. i i. etc.
Radius near the wrist, diverts to that part of the hand termed Metacarpium,
that it might with its twigs water the Hollow of the Hand.

Between the Ring-finger and the little finger, they place the f. 1 ^
Salvatella vein, Salvatella.
which is wont to be opened; between the thumb and the fore finger, there is
another opened, which is called Vena f. h
pollicis or the thumb vein.

The Mediana f. 1. g
vena is to tally external and runs under the Skin, into the palm of the Hand.

The Basilica creepes through the f. 1. o o. x. y. etc.
internal and external parts of the Cubit, with a two-headed branch.

Now the Veins have one thing peculiar to them in the Limbs viz* that they
Anastomosis of the Veins and Arteries.
manifestly do communicate with the Arteries. This Galen proves in his third
Book of Natural faculties, the last Chapter, And up and down in other parts of
his works. Which thing is so ma^^test that it ought not to be called into
question.

Moreover the veins in the f. 7. the whole
Limbs and internal Jugulars have Valves. In the The Valves of the Veins
greater channells and in the division of the lesser ones there are f. 8. the
whole
two on each side one opposed to the other and placed interchangeably.

Now we may doubt of their use since the circulation of the blood has been
found Their use.
out, for the common opinion was that they were placed in the Limbs and in the
internal jugular to stop the exceeding flux of blood into those outmost parts
which are in continual motion. But those that hold the Circulation of the
blood, do say their use is to hinder the flowing back of the Blood which
ascends upwards unto the Heart, according to the opinion of Dr. Harvy, unto
which I willingly give my Assent.

Let us pa^son from the Veins to the Arteries of the Arm. The Ramus
supe^^^av^us The Arteries. Axillaris.
proceeding to the Arme-pits, is termed T. 24. f. 2. A.
Axillaris. It accompanies the Vena Basilica, whereas there is no Arteria
Cephalica.

Near the Arme-pits it produces the f. 2. c. d.
Thoracica and in its progress bestows Thoracica*
certain twiggs upon the bordering Parts, and being lengthened out as f^r as
to the bending of the Arm, it is divided into two f. 2 C. B.
branches, which are carried o^, to the Inside of the Hands.

For the outside of the Hand above the Metarcarpium, is void both of Muscles
and Arteries.

The other f. 2. B.
Branch being drawn out upon the Inside of the Radius, is felt to beat Ram^
minores.
in the wrist.

The other running straight along the Ulna is with its Cousin spread out into
the hand according to the length of the Thumb and of the little Finger, so as
to bestow of their twigs upon every Finger.

I shall in the same Method dispatch the Nerves of the whole Hand. The Nerves.


Out of the Holes of the four lower Vertebra's of the f. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.
Neck, and the two first Vertebras, of the f. 3. 1.
Back, f. 3. a. b. c. d. e.
five or six Nerves take their Original, which being overwhelmed under the
Muscle scalenus, they are brought under the Clavicula, as far as to the
Arm-hole, where they are f. 3 X X.
twisted one within another, like the strings of a Cardinals Hat. e f. 2. C.


Afterward the four superior ones are under the Deltoides scattered over the
internal part, accompanying the Vena basilica and the Artery of the Arm, and
creeping between the Muscles Biceps and the Brachieus externus.

The T. 24. f. 3. f f.
fifth and sixth T. 24. f. 3. I I.
Nerve, being bowed back under the scapulary Muscle Rotundus major, they are
disseminated into the hinder Muscles of the Head.

There remain then the Quatuor Primi already described, which being carried
through the Arm and Cubit; they are dispersed into the said Cubit and the Hand

The Primus T. 24. f. 3. g g.
Nervus beneath the head of the shoulder is overwhelmed in the Primus.
Coracoidaeus and drawn along under the inner side of the Biceps, and lurking
under the Tendon of the said Muscle, it joines it self to the Vena Cephalica,
where it grows small: also it is placed beneath that Vein, below the bending
of the Arm.

The Second T. 24. f. 3. K K.
Nerve being undivided and thicker, does descend to the bending of Secundus.
the Arm, being covered only with fat, and at the bending of the Arm it is
placed beneath th Arteria and Vena Basilica.

Howbeit the Vena Basilica a little below the Cubit does, toward the interior
part, recede a little from that Nerve, that it may be united to the Vena
Cephalica.

But four fingers beneath the bending of the Arm, being always
superintendent to the Basilica, it passes undivided along, unto the wrist, the
vein appears above.

At the Wrist it is cleft into ten small branches affording two little twigs to
every singer, which crepe along the sides of the said singers.

You shall observe by the way, that three fingers breadth beneath the bending
of the Cubit, it is covered by the Muscles which bend the wrist and Cubit,
which arise cut of the internal Tuberositie of the Arm.

The third T. 24. f. 3. h h.
Nerve is carried along undivided unto the Angona, where being Tertius.
conveyed through a Cleft which is between the Elbow and the inner Condylum
or Tuberosite of the Arm, according to the length of the Cubit, and being
drawn out over the Cubitaeus externus, it is carried unto the wrist, toward
the little finger. And therefore by leaneing on the elbow, the whole Arm is
benumbed. Being divided near the Hand into four branches, it is spread into
the outside, of the Hand or Back of the Hand.

The fourth Nerve is the thickest of all interwoven with Veins and Arteries,
and Quartus.
sunk deep in the Brachiaus externus; it is carried from the forepart of the
Arm into the Hinderpart, and descending there through unto the Radius, and
being carried all along the same, it is joined to the vena Cephalica, and
looses it self at last into the wrist.

I proceed unto the vessels of the Inferior Limbs. The Crural T. 24. f. 4. A.
vein, does in The veins of the lower Limbs. Poplitea.
the groine produce a remarkable branch viz. The T. 24. f. 4. a a a.
saphena, which according to the longitude of the sutorius Musculus descends
unto the Ham. Beneath which, in the Anckle it constitutes the vena poplitea,
which was opened in Times past. There it transmics the branch which is in the
upper part returrent, above the Ham, unto the crural veins, or the sarhena
receives that same branch, from those cruralls.

Afterward being divided into two parts it slips down unto the two external
Ankles, but the greater portion takes its course unto the internal Ankle, where
it forms the true T. 24. f. 4. a. beneath
Saphena which is usually opened.

It is termed corruptly Saphena, as if one would say Saphaia because of the
Apparencie, Saphena.
which is a new name brought into use by the late Greeks, unknowen to Galen.

When the crural vein has produced the Saphena, it is soon after divided into
four branches, of which, the two T. 24. f. 4. b b. etc.
external and lateral ones which are the shortest are disseminated into the
superior Muscles of the Thigh, both the internal, namely the Biceps, and the
external viz. the vasti and the Musculus Cruraeus. a T. 24. f. 3. i i.
d T. 24. f. 4. f f f.


The Ramus ^er^ius which penetrates into the inner parts, is termed
Ischiadicus. Ischiadicus.


The fourth is called T. 24. f. 4 d d.
T. 24. f. 4. g g.
Muscularis. Muscularis.


These branches being propagated, the Trunk of the Vena cruralis being split
into two, descends unto the knee, being attended with the crural Artery
branshched The lesser branches.
into two: But one of the T. 24. f. 4. h h.
branches is aloft and waters the external parts, the other is more T. 24. f.
4. g g.
deep: both of them do afford twigs to the neighboring parts, and when they
have reached unto the Ham, being spread along between the Soleus and the
Gemelli, they descend to the two Ankles.

But the external Ankle is princspally watered from the low-laid crural vein,
yet so that in the compass of the Ankle two notable veins are observed.

That which quarters upon the Malleolus internus or inner Ankle-bone, is the
branch of the Saphena. That which takes its course beneath the malleolus, being
spread out above the Tarsus, is a branch of the crurall Vein.

Neither of these Veins can be safely opened unless they swel, by reason of
the neighboring arteries, which the Vena Saphena placed in the inner Ankle is
free from. And this Vein is opened in all diseases as well of Men as of Women.
Yet nevertheless in the Sciatic, the Vein beneath the Malleolus externus, is
more advantageously opened, because it has greater Communion with the Part
affected, namely the Coxendix or Hip.

The Distribution of T. 24. f. 5. A A.
Arteria Cruralis, is not equal to the Vena Cruralis, because The Arteries.
it produces no Saphena. For a little lower than the Groine, it transmits two
Cruralis.
T 24. f. 5. etc.
within the Musculus triceps, which are lengthened out as far as to the Gloutij.

Afterward it sends forth T. 24. f. 5. d d. etc.
two, into the former parts of the Thigh. a T. 24. f. 4. c c. etc.


And then the Cruralis descends undivided as far as to the Ham, Where it is
divided Its branches.
into two Branches; the T. 24. f. 5. i i
one of which does laterarlly creep all along the outside of the Leg upon the
Musculus Peroneus. The other being thrust into the Muscle soleus, and sliding
down unto the Heel, is disseminated into the sole of the Foot; and the other
is branched forth into the outside of the Foot.

The Vena Saphena has no Artery to attend it, and there is not any nerve near
it, and therefore it may safely be opened.

The Nerves of the foreside of the Thigh are two, distinguished in their
original, The Nerves of the fore part. The first.
but so as they soon grow together and become one cord, which is carried entire
without any division, unto the Groin. Where it is distributed into five T. 24.
f. 6. B C D. etc.
branches, commonly wrapped up in a Membrane, which being dispersed on every
hand into the Muscles of the fore part of the Thigh, they are branched out as
far as to the whirlbone of the Knee.

Now the Rise of these Nerves is in the T. 24. f. 6. 3. 4. 5.
three lowest Vertebra's of the Loins, neither is it visible, unless the
Muscle Psoa be torn asunder, within which they lie hid.

Then besides those forementioned, you shall see another small Nerve, drawn ^e
second.
through the oval hole of the Os Pubis and spent upon the neighboring Muscles
viz. the Triceps.

A great and very thick Nerve does glide along the hinder part of the Thigh,
which Of the Hindpart. The first.
in its Original is made up sometimes of three, oftener of four portions, which
are bred out of three or four of the upper holes of Os sacrum, and being
carried along through the cavity of Os Ischii, which is seated between the
spines of the said Os Ilium through the internal and hindermost Muscles of the
Thigh, undivided, sometimes doubled and solitary without the society of a vein
and Artery, as is ordinary in other Nerves of the Body, it is carried into the
Ham; where being divided into two, sometimes into T. 24. f. 6. i. k l. etc.
four, it bestows little small twigs (considering its bulk) upon the
Neighboring Parts. b T. 24. f. 5. I I.
e T. 24. f. 6. E E.
f T. 24. f. 6. 6.


The other a Branch descends through the Calf of the Leg to the Heel, dealing
out Its Branches*
little Nervs in its passage, and being drawn through the Cleft of the inner
Anklebone, it is distributed into the sole of the Foot in as many Branches as
there are Fingers.

Another is carried into the b fore part of the Foot, fastened unto the Perone,
and so slipping down along unto the external ankle, and when it is come
thither, it is spread abroad into the upper side of the Foot, as was said of
the former.

This exceeding great and thick Nerve being ill disposed or diseased, a Bastard
A Bastard Sciatica what?
Sciatica is thereby caused, which consists wholly therein; there is a grievous
pain, which afflicts not only the Hip, but reaches into the Thigh, the ankle
and Foot, namely to all places whether the Nerve which comes from the diseased
Hip does reach. Fernelius in the 18. Chap. of the 6. Book of his Pathology. and
therefore in this bastard sciatica Causticks are to be applied, and Issues made
at the bending of the Buttocs, also those parts must be anoynetd and smeared
with an Epispastick or drawing Plaster.

You shall observe by the way in a bastard sciatica, that those nerves are
watered by the Hypogastrick veins and the Arteries above the same, and
therefore the nerves cannot be dried unless the Hypogastrick veins are
emptied, by many times letting blood in the Arms and Feet, and by Hors-leeches
often applied to the Veins of the Fundament.

Now Galen in the 8 Chap. of his 16. Book of the use of the parts of our Body,
shows the reason why this same Nerve is not mixed with other fore nerves as it
is in the Nerves of the Arm, but is carried behind the thigh; viz. Because the
joint of the Arm stands farther from the Vertebra's of the Neck, than the
joint of the Thigh does from the Vertebra's of the Loins and Os sacrum.

About the Beginning of this great Nerve, there is another adjoined, which
riseing The second.
out of the third hole of the Os sacrum, and being carried along above the
spine of Os sacrum, it is branched out into the Musculi Gloutij and the
Flexores Tibiae, as far as to the Ham.

The Medicinal Consideration.
Diseases of the Veins belonging to the Limbs, especially to the Leg and
Thigh, Varices what they he?
are the Varices which are knottie dilatations, in which the Blood is
collected, as it were into Certain Satchels. Now they are cured with
astringents with a close and Their Cure.
convenient ligature. Or the veins are pricked and the blood let out, or at
the beginning of the varix the largest vein which gives nourishment to the
rest, or the beginning Whether a vein cut off will grow again?
it self, is tied up and cut off. Many conceive that the veins cut off are
bred again; they bring for an example the veins which are seen in a very
great Sarcoma or fleshy Excrescence; but Fernelius has rightly observed, that
they are not veins, but channels between the Skin which nature has framed as
gutters to water and nourish the Sarcoma or fleshy Excrescence.

Many think that the veins which are cut, being tied together with a string
do grow again, which I do not believe.

Hippocrates calls the veins Spiracula Corporis, the vents of the body or the
breathing holes thereof, which being opened, the Body is aired: and he says
that when the Veins are dried, they draw sharp and choleric humors in burning
fevers. Also the same Author says, that the veins do draw more than the flesh
Lib. 1. de Morbis. Especially if they be more hot and dry than ordinary. ^
Bloody sweats whence they proceed?


When the Veins being debilitated through Sickness of the Liver, become
nauseant and inclined as it were to vomit, they suffer the Blood to run out,
not only through the mouths of the upper and lower veins, but also through
the Skin of the whole Body, in manner of a bloody sweat, which I have observed
two or three times.

A stoppage of the Veins and Arteries, does often happen in Pleth^ck bodies,
The motion of the vessels how abolished?
so that in all places in which the pulse is wont to be felt, the motion of the
Arteries is abolished; (...) which case Hippocrates commends blood letting, as
a means to put the vessels into motion again.

Sometimes the Pulle of all the Arteries is intercepted, not excepting the
Groine or crurall Arteries, the Motion of the Heart still remaining, which
disposition if it continue long it kills the Patient. But if the motion of the
Heart be perished likewise, the Patient dies suddenly. I have seen two that had
no pulse at all, only their Heart continued beating, who lived sixteen years,
but in extreme weakness. Balduinus Ronsaeus saw one in the same condition, as
he affirms in his medicinal Epistles.

Hereupon, a question may be raised, how the pulsation of the Arteries can be
How the motion of the pulse in the Arteries can be stopped, while the Heart
moves.
stopped whiles the Heart beats after its wonted manner, though slowly;
whether it be not necessary in such a Case that the Aorta be obstructed near
the Heart, and that the irradiation and influlx of the arterial blood be by
that means interce^^ped. And then the Blood of the veins approaches the
Heart, being drawn thither in the diastole or dilatation thereof, that it may
receive the seal of Vitality in the right ventricle; and being afterward
driven forth by the Systole or Contraction into the vena cava, the vital
spirits are forcibly carried into the length of the channel, and by the mutual
anastomoses of the veins and Arteries, they are communicated to the said
Arteries with the blood. I have in some persons observed that the motion of
their Arteries has been frequently intercepted or became very unequal for some
days together, afterward the impediment being removed which was near the
Heart, I found the same inequality in the Caeliac Artery, which did beat
vehemently, although the pulse appeared equal and well ordered in the rest of
the body. This, I conceive happened by reason of a little bit of flesh or fat,
which ascending to the Gates of the Heart did cause such a pulse so inordinate,
and being repelled or drawn back unto the Caeliac Artery which is a branch of
the Aorta, it did produce such an irregularity as aforesaid.

The Crural Artery, seeing that it is evident in the Groine, and subject to
our feeling, The Pulse is last felt in the crural Artery
the pulse thereof is easily discerned, being vehement in regard of the
greatness of the Artery, and the last which remains after the pulse is
extinguished in other extreme parts of the Body, wherein it is usually felt to
beat. And therefore when no pulse can be felt in the other usual places, it
must be sought for, e examined in this crural Artery, not only in Men but in
women also, provided the Rules of Honesty be not broken. And if when a disease
is at the Height, we can feel no pulse in this part, death is near at hand.

The Dilation or Section of an Artery happens chiefly in the external parts,
Aneurisma, what it is?
where the lesser Arteries reside which are branches of the great Trunk. And
this disease is termed Aneurisma. It is seldom seen in the trunk of the Aorta
because of its thickness.

The End of the Fifth Book.
THE SIXTH BOOK OF THE ANATOMY AND PATHOLOGY OF John Riolanus, THE KINGS
PROFESSOR OF PHYSIC.
A new Osteologia or History of the Bones.
Wherein he treates of the Bones, Ligaments and Gristles of the whole Body, by
which the frame of the Body is compacted together, the Muscles being removed,
handling all the Diseases and symptoms which happen unto the Bones.

CHAP. 1.
THe Scope of Nature and of the Physician about the Body of Man its Fabric,
are contrary, the one unto the others Nature intending to make up the Body of
Man, begins at the most simple parts, and so proceeds by little and little to
the more compounded ones, until she The Method.
finish her work. But the Physician, that he may attain unto the knowledge of
this workmanship of Nature, proceeds gradually from the more compound unto the
most simple parts; so that in his Analysis or Resolution, these parts are last
which were first in the Composition. So when we pull down an house, first we
throw off the Ceeling, then we demolish the walls, and Why we treat of the
Bones in the last place?
lastly we d^g up the foundation. We in like manner in our taking asunder
this House of Man's body by Anatomical Administration, do now in the last place
treat of the Bones which are the foundation of the whole Body, and placed
before al other parts. we shall consider of them in the way of a new kind of
Osteologia or History of the Bones, which is no less, ^ necessary than the
doctrine of the Skelleton of the Bones.

Having therefore explained and demonstrated the softerparts of the Body by way
of Analysis, I proceed to the last and more solid parts thereof, which
according to the Synthetick method, or order of composition, are the first,
such as are the Bones, which are now otherwise considered than when they are
boiled and dried and so demonstrated.

Chap. 2 Of the great Profit of this new Osteologie, or Doctrine of the Bones.
THere is a twofold Doctrine of the Bones; one is demonstrated in dried Bones,
The Doctrine of Bones demonstrated in a dead body, is better, and more
necessary.
which have been prepared by boiling; the other is showed in the Bones of the
Body, whiles they remain naturally fastened one unto another. Both these
Doctrines are useful in the Art of Healing, and for such as would have a
perfect knowledge in the Body of Man.

For in the dried Bones, in which commonly this Doctrine is taught, nothing is
learned, saving the external shape, posture, and composition or frame of one
with For the perfect knowledge of Man's Body.
another: But a diligent observation of the Bones, while they are knit and
fastened one unto another, is more conducing to practice. Because the
fastenings of the Bones one unto another by Gristles and Ligaments, also by the
several sorts of Articulation, or joynting, are in some dried Bones quite
different from what they are in such as be moist; for in dried Bodies you would
think that some Cavities are hollow, and Cup-fashioned, the Cavities being
empty, and bereaved of their Cartilages; which notwithstanding appear shallow
in a fresh Body, the Cavities being full of Gristles; and contrary-wise, you
would in a Skeleton say, that some Cavities And
are shallow, which are deep in a fresh Body, the hollowness being increased by
a Gristle brim.

Moreover, The external Conformation and Quality of the Bones, is more
evidently discerned in the Bones of a Carcass, which loses much in Bones that
are prepared by boiling: as for example, the Gristly incrustations of the
extremities, the Membrane which is about the Bones, and the Mucous, or slimy
substance lodged between the Bones; also the internal substance, or Marrow, or
Marrowish Juice, are manifestly discovered in the Bones of a fresh Body, which
are not at all in dry and withered Bones.

And therefore in respect to the Practice of Physic, and the Cure of vitiated
For the Practice of Physic
bones, and such as are broken, or out of Joint, it is necessary, diligently to
look into, and carefully to axamine in a dead Body, the Natural Conformation of
the Bones, and their conjunction one with another. I do not dislike the use of
dried Bones, to teach and demonstrate the vulgar Osteology, or Doctrine of
bones, at Than the Vulgar.
which we must begin, as we have done in this Treat^e; provided the
Demonstration of the bones in a dead Body, be afterward added to the former.

For by this Repetition, and Representation of the bones, we shall imitate the
Order Where notwithstanding we ought to begin.
and Design of Nature, which in the Generation of the Parts of our Body, is
wont in the first place to form the bones; but she finishes, and perfects them
after al other parts, for they grow as long as the body increases, according to
Aristotle. And if we believe Hippocrates in the Sixth Book of his Epidemicks;
Women have their Courses, til their bones have attained their utmost perfection.

Chap. 3. What is to be observed in the Bones of a dead Body not boiled. The
Natural Constitution of a Bone in what it cosists?

IN the first place, you shall observe the Natural Constitution of the Bone,
that you may discern the fault of a bone which is out of Order.

A bone in a living Body naturally disposed, ought to be, 1. Hard, to procure
the bodies stability. 2. It ought to be Oily without, because it is nourished.
3. It must be covered with the Periostean Membrane, that it may have sense; for
if it lose the Periostium, it becomes senceless. 4. It must be white tinctured
with a moderate redness, because it is a Spermatick part, and is nourished with
the dewy vapor of the blood. 5. It must be hollow, or spongy, that it may
continue the substance of Marrow, or a Marrowy Liquor to nourish it self
withal. 6. It must be at the ends crusted with Gristles 7. It must be anointed
as it were with an oily moisture, to facilitate its motion. 8. It must have a
continued and even substance. And therefore you shall know that a Bone is
misaffected, if it be soft, as Ruellius, In what the preternatural.
Fernelius and Hollerius have observed, that in some persons the Bones of their
Bodies were by sickness become so soft and flexible, that you might bend them
which way you pleased, like wax. Aristotle in the third book of his History of
Animals, says that bones are not flexible, neither are they apt to split, but
only subject to break. Scaliger in his commentary adds: I have seen the thigh
bone by reason of the venerious disease, or by use of I know not what
medicaments, bowed like an horn. Geographers write that in a Country of
Ethiopia, the inhabitants have naturally from their birth bodies so flexible,
that they can turn and wind them into any posture. I have red in Hippocrates
of a boy that was borne without bones, having the Principal parts of his body
otherwise distinct. Forestus saw a boy made after the same manner in some of
his members.

Wherefore if a bone shall be dry without, it declares a distemperature of the
part: if it be white it argues want of heat, if red, inflammation; if black,
rottenness and blasting. If a bone be sensible, there is some secret fault in
its substance, or in its periostean membrane. If it be solid and concrete
without cavities or parts* it renders the body heavy and sluggish, and can
contain no marrow. Pliny relates that there are some that lived having solid
bones and without marrow, which are very rare and are termed Cornei. The sign
of such a Constitution is never to thirst and never to sweat. They are called
Cornei from the Cornel or Dog-tree; because the male Cornel has no pith or
marrow. See Rhodiginus. Such a one the Syracusian Lygdamus is reported to have
been, who in the three and thirteth Olymp^ade was the first who at the Olympic
Games, became Victor at all Exercises and won the Paneratian Crown: his bones
were found to have no marrow in them, as Solinus relates in his 4 Chapter.
Antigonus in his Book of wonders Chap. 8 Writes that the bones of a Lion are so
solid that you may strike fire out of them as out of a flint; Howbeit Columbus
denies that such bones are void of marrow. Which Epicurus, contradicting
aristotle maintains, as possible in the 8. Book of Athenaeus his
Deipnosophists. Aldrovondus has observed that among Fowls the Estrich has
solid bones, void of marrow. But in case a bone should be deprived of its
Gristly Crust and of its periostean Membrane, it is moved with difficulty, and
has no feeling at all. If a bone become uneven and prominent so as to have
bunches upon it, it is termed Exostosis, which is an effect and concomitant of
the venereous pocks when it is of long standing and confirmed, howbeit it may
spring from some other cause. Finally being depraved and misshapen, or
disjointed, it hinders and mars the Action of the whole body or its parts; and
being divided in its substance, it argues solution of Continuity by some cleft
or fracture. and although a broken bone by the mediation of a Callus becomes
soddered together one the outside: Yet does it still remain divided within.

Chap. 4. Of the Nourishment, Sense, and Marrow of the Bones.
While the Bone did live and was nourished, it had a twofold sustenance, the
one The remote matter that nourishes the Bones.
remote, the other conjunct or immediate according to Aristotle, in his Book of
the parts of live-wights. The remote Sustenance of the Bones, is the thicker
and more earthy part of the blood. The next or immediate is the marrow, or
marrowy liquor, which is contained in the hollownes and porositie of the bones.
Hippocrates in his The immediate matter.
Book de Alimento, says that the marrow is the Nutriment of the bones, and
therefore it is that they are Joined together or soddered up by a callus. How
can it be Whether the Bones have Veins?
(may some man say) that the blood should nourish the bones, seeing they have
no veins, which are the channels to conveigh blood to all parts? Hippocrates
says in his book de Ossium Natura, that of all the bones, the lower Jaw Bone
alone has veins. Galen indeed in his 8. Book de Placitis, attributes unto
every bone a Vein greater or Lesser according to the Proportion of the Bones:
and in his Comment upon the first Book of Humors, he says that there is a
Vessel distributing blood allowed to every bone. But he confesses in the last
chapter of his 16. Book de Vsu Partium, that the veins of the Bones are so
small and fine, that they are not so much as visible in the larger sort of
Animals or Live-wights, because nature according to the Necessity and Indigence
of the Parts, bestows upon some greater, upon other lesser Veins, moreover
the little holes which are found about the extremities of the bones, Whether
they have Arteries?
do manifestly declare that somewhat there is which goes into the said Bones now
their is nothing goes into the bones but little Veins. If we believe Platerus,
the Arteries do no where enter into the bones, seeing the spirits can easily
penetrate Or Nerves?
into any of the bones without the service of the Arteries to carry them.
Neither do I conceive that there are little nerves diffused through the
substance of the Bones to give them the sense of feeling, because all the
feeling they are capable of, is by means of the periostean Membrane which does
incompass them. Nevertheles Nicolas Massa call's God to witness that he saw a
Man, who had an ulcer in his thigh, so that the bone was bare, in which bone
there was a sense of pain, so that he could not endure to have it touched with
a rough instrument in regard of the pains it caused, and it was freed from the
periostean Membrane. Yea and he bored the bone, and found that it had the sense
of feeling within the same, which he therefore thought good to declare, that
Anatomists might be moved to consider, whether some branches of nerves do not
Penetrate into the substance of the bones. ^ Threefold Marrow of the Bones.


We cannot look into the Cavities and Marrowes of the Bones; unles they be
first broken. I observe a threefold Cavity of the bones and a threefold marrow.

In the greater Cavites of the larger Bones, the Marrow is reddish; in the
lesser Cavities of the smaller bones the marrow is white; In the spungy bones
there is contained a marrowy Liquor.

In the mean while you shall observe, that the marrow within the Cavity of the
Whether the Marrow of the Bones be compast with a Membrane.
Bones is compassed with no membrane, neither is it made sensible by any little
nerves penetrating the substance of the bone, as Paraeus does imagine.
Hippocrates himself, in his Book de Principlis was the first that noted this.
The Marrow of the Backbone is not like that marrow which is in other Bones,
for it alone has membranes, which no other marrow has besides it.

Chap. 5. Of Articulations or Jointings of the Bones.
LET us proceed to the Joinings-together of the Bones. To the Articulation of
the Bones there concurs. an Head.


There does concur to the Articulations of the Bones, the Head, the Cavitie,
the Gristle, the Flegmatic moisture, and the Ligament.

Every Head is in its own nature and original an Epiphysis, but in process of
time it degenerates into an apophysis.

The Head is within of a Light spungie and porous substance, being filled with
blood or with a marrowy Juice, on the outside it is covered with a very hard
shell or bark, very thin and compact, which is crusted over with a smooth and
polished Gristle.

Now the Head of a Bone is T. 21. f 1. d d. f 4. a.
great and long, or short and flat, which is termed T 21. f 1. and 2. I I.
Candylos

The Cavity of the Bone which receives the Head, is also crusted over with a
Gristle, A cavity
which if it be deep, it is called in Greek T 21. f 4. B.
Cotyle, if shallow, it is called T 21. f 4 F.
Glene. It is sometimes increased with a Gristlie brim, lest the bones should
too easily slip A Gristle.
aside, and fall out of their places.

And in the Cavities themselves, there is contained a clammy, thick, and Oily A
phlegmatic Humor.
Pituitous Humor, to procure a more easy, and expeditious motion of the Bones,
so we grease the Axle-trees of Coaches and Carts, that the wheels may turn more
easily and quickly. Through want of the foresaid Humor in such as have the
consumption, and are extremely dried, while they go and stir their Limbs, one
may hear as it were their bones knock one against another, and rattle in their
Skins: As is proved by a memorable History, recorded by Symphorianus Campegius,
in the Medicinal Histories of Galen; and as I my self have often times seen.

Now that the bones might be so knit together, as to make a Joint, there is
need A Ligament.
of a Ligament or Band, whose substance is broad and round, its color white or
bloody, such as is the round Ligament which fastens the T 21. f 7. a a.
Leg, and the T 21. f 8. a
Thigh, and that which unites the T 21. f 5. A.
Astragalus with the T 21. f 5. B.
Pterna, and that of the Astragalus with the three Bones of the Tarsus, which
are termed T 21. f 5. E E E.
Aeneiformia. For these bloody, or bloodyish Ligaments, are always interposed
between the bones, and are very hard; but those which are drawn about the
Articulations, do always appear white. So the Nerve-Gristly Ligaments, which
are interposed between the Os Sacrum, and Os Ilium, are observed to be bloody
in a Woman newly delivered of her Child.

Now every Conjunction of the Bones is made by Nature, either for Motions Why
the bones are articulated.
sake, or for Perspiration, or for the Passage of some certain Substance, or
for the differencing of Parts, or for Security, and to preserve from violence.

Conjunctions of the bones for Motions sake, are seen in the Fingers, Wrists,
Elbows, Shoulders, Hips, Shanks, Ankles, Ribs, Spondyls; in a word, in all
movable Articulations.

For Perspirations sake, we see bones joined together in the Sutures of the
Skul.

For to give passage to some substance or other; we see the like conjunction at
the production of the Pericranium, and at the through-fare of some certain
Vessels, which go partly out, and partly in; to which intent the Sutures of the
Skull were contrived.

For Securities sake, and to avoid the violence of breaking, etc. we see the
said Conjunction* in all such bones as are compounded of diverse smaller ones.

For the differing of parts, certain conjunctions of bones seem to have been
contrived in the Bones of the upper Jaw.

Having laid this Foundation out of Galens 11. Book, de Vsu Partium, chap. 18.
it is an easy matter to prove the sorts and differences of Articulations, out
of the Doctrine of Galen himself.

The Bones are joined one with another, some by Articulation, or joynting;
others Twofold conjunction of bones. What a join is* Sorts of joints.
by Symphysis, or cleaving together.

A Joint termed Articulus, is a Connection of Bones, ordained either for motion,
or for some other Cause.

In respect of motion, there are two sorts of Joints* The one is contrived for
manifest and strong motion, which is called Diarthrosis: The other is ordained
for an obscure and difficult motion, or for none at all, and it is called
Synarthrosis.

Of the former kind of conjunction of bones, viz. Diarthrosis, there are three
Particulars of ea^^ sort.
sorts; Enarthrosis, Arthrodia, and Gynglymos.

Of the second kind of Articulation, viz. Synarthrosis, there are in like
manner three sorts, Enarthrosis, Arthrodia, and Gynglymos; because
Synarthrosis, and diarthrosis, do differ only in the quantity of the motion; as
Galen does teach in his Book de Ossibus, which also he manisestly declares in
his Book de Dissect* Muscul. Chap. 22. near the end. and in the 13. Book de
Ossibus.

But because a Synathrosis is ordained not only for motion, but for some other
cause, as namely for perspiration, the transmission of some substance, the
differencing of Parts, and to save from harm by stress and violence; it
comprehends three other sorts under it, viz. Sutura, Harmonia, and Gomphosis.

These six differences of Synarthrosis or joynting may be proved by sense and
by Examples of the sorts.
Example. The T. 10. f. 2. 1. 2. 3. etc.
Ribs are joined to the f. 2. A A.
Brest-bone by an Arthrodia, which in regard of motion may be referred to a
synarthrosis. The T. 21. f. 1. and 2. F.
Bones of the wrist are coarticulate with the bones of the f. 1. H H. f. 2. G.
Metacarpum (Galen de usu partium Lib* 2* Chap. 8.) but that synarthrosis is
made by the way of Arthrodia. The f. 5. A.
Astragalus is joined to the f. 5. C.
Scaphoides with an obscure motion, which is Enarthrosis* Lib. de Ossibus,
Chap. 24. Gynglymos is found in the Vertebras of the T. 10. f. 3.
Back, which is to be counted as a kind of Synarthrosis; the Gynglimos of the
other Vertebras, is a kind of Diarthrosis. Galen in his 26. Book de Compos.
Med. secundum locos, and in his 12. Book de usu Partium, calls the sutures T.
15. f. 1. a a. etc.
of the Head synarthroses. Also he calls the harmonia of the T. 8. f. 4. D.
inferior Jaw Bone, synarthrosis, in his Comment upon the Ninth part of the
second book de Fracturis. The bones of the Ste^^^n or Brest-blade T. 10. f. 2.
A A.
being immovable, are joined together by a synarthrosis. From Galen in his book
de Ossibus and other places of his Writings, I could prove, that the Jawbone
and the bones of the Brest-blade are Joined together by symphysis, because they
grow together as the Person comes to years, so that no marks are remaining of
their former distinction. So Galen in his Book de Ossibus, calls the
Conjunction of the inferior Jaw Bone with the Chin, Symphysis.

Symphysis is an immovable union of the Bones, which is performed either with
Symphysis, what it is? Its Differences.
somewhat intermediate or without.

In regard of the threefold Medium, some Symphysis is called Synchondrodis,
from the Cartilage Gristle which is the Medium of the Union* a second is termed
syneurodis, from the nerve which is the medium, a third is called Syssarcodi^
from the fleshy Medium. To which we may ad a fourth termed Neurochondrodis,
because the Union is made by a Medium which is of a mixed nature, being partly
nervy, and partly gristly. But more may be seen of this, in Galen his Doctrine
of Bones.

The differences of symphysis, do appear in the bones of the a lower Jaw, in
the Its differences exempli^ied
Bodies of the b Vertebras, in the bones of the c share one with another, and
in the conjunctions of the d ^l^an bones with the e Os sacrum, in the growing
together of the vertebras of Os sacrum one to another, and of the epiphysis;
and in the conjunction of the Os ^ Sphenoides with the Occiputs bones, and in
the conjunction of other bones, which in children were divided, but in persons
come to years, they are found growing together by Symphysis, sine Medio; such
as are described by Galen in his Book de Ossibus.

The Ligaments which knit the bones together and that phlegmatic humor
wherewith the bones are smeared, and the Gristles, both such as are common to
diverse bones articulated together, and likewise such as are proper to the
particular bones to crust the ends of each of them: al these shall be treated of
in our particular Muster and Surveigh of the Bones.

The Medicinal Consideration.
General diseases of the Bones-Caries
The General Diseases of the Bones are, Caries or Rottenness, and putrefaction,
which proceeds from a common, or extraordinary Cause, such as is the Venereal
Pox.

Exostosis, or a swelled knot upon a bone, which arises from the foresaid
Causes. Exostosis.


Kedmata, mentioned by Hippocrates, which are Chronical Diseases, proceeding
Kedmata.
from defluxions, common to al Joints, but especially infesting the Hip-bone.
Of these kind of Diseases, ^ead the Medicinal Definitions of Gorraeus, and
Foesius in his Oeconomia Hippocratis.

Of kin to this, is Paracelsus his Synovia, or Hydarthrosis, which is a
continual Hydarthrosis.
Flux of wheyish or blood-watry Humor, out of exulcerated Joints, especially if
the Nerves or Ligaments be Diseased. Hildanus in a peculiar Book on this
Subject, proves that this Disease Synovia (which was first so called by
Paracelsus) is the same with that Disease which is termed Meliceria, by
Cornelius Celsus, Lib. 5. Cap. 26.

A sure thing it is, that the bones being diseased, do drop blood, and Galen
observed as much.

The bones are likewise subject to Fracture, or breaking, and Luxation,
Dislocation, Fracture.
or disjoynting. Now a Fracture of a bone, is a Division made in a bone by some
external Cause, cutting, or bruising the same.

There are two sorts of Fractures, a straight one, and an oblique, or crooked
Its kinds.
one. The former is according to the length of the bone, or overthwart.

The latter, or oblique is (if we believe Galen) too curiously differenced by
the latter Physicians which have succeeded Hippocrates; for it is said to be
Nailfashioned, when the Fracture is partly straight, and partly circular;
another sort is called Alphi^^edon, when the bone is broken all to shivers.

Another sort there is, which is called Apotrausis, or Detractio, whereby a
Fragment of the bone is so taken away, that there remains a mark in the surface
of the Bone.

Another sort of Fracture, Hippocrates mentions, which he calls Apoclasma, and
Galen terms Hapagma, when a bone is broken there where it is joined with
another bone.

Luxation, or Disjoynting, is a Disease of the bone in Situation, when it is
removed Luxation.
out of its place.

There is a two fold Luxation, or disjoynting of a bone; the one complete, when
the Head of the bone is slipped out of its socket, and this is called Exarthrema,
a being out of Joint.

The other is Incomplete, and termed Pararthrema, when the bone is in some Its
sorts,
measure only removed, and lengthened as it were, which is mostly seen in the
subluxation of the Thigh. In an Exarthrema, the Leg seems shorter than it was
wont to be; in a Pararthrema it seems longer than usual.

The Causes of Luxation and Subluxation, that is to say, of perfect, and
imperfect Causes,
disjoynting of any Member, are external, or internal: The External are, a
blow, a violent distorsion, or wrenching, a fall, and extension of a Member.
The Internal causes are, a thin Humor, which does relax the Ligaments, or a
thick Humor which by little and little, fills the Cavity of the Joint, and at
last thrusts out the bone, by reason of an Anchylosis, which is bred.

Now Anchylosis, is a fault in the Articulation of bones, whereby the Cavity of
Anchylosis.
a bone, which ought to receive the Head of another bone, is filled up; be it
what kind of Articulation it may be, either Enarthrosis, Arthrodia, or
Gynglymos. Hereupon the bone thus diseased, either is held bowed in, or remains
stretched out, and stiff. And in case without the foresaid Anchylosis, the
Tendons of the one side shall in the Limbs be cut in sunder, the straight or
crooked bones do no longer serve to bend or stretch out the said Limbs.

Chap. 6. Of the Bones of the Skull.
HAving diligently considered the Articulations, or joyntings of the Bones one
Things to be observed principally.
unto another, let us now take notice what is observable in every particular
bone being fresh, which is not to be seen in the Skeleton, or in dried bones. I
will proceed from Head to Foot, according as I am wont to do in my Dissection,
and Demonstration of these parts. Now my Demonstration of the bones is
twofold; the one I call Osteotome, or Bone-Dissection, in which the bones are
separated each from other; the other I term Ossifragium, in which the bones are
broken, that their inner structure may be discerned.

And in the first place, let us contemplate the twofold Table of the Skull, or
Twofold plate.
the double Skul-board which is thinner in Women, than it is in Men.

The uppermore is thicker, and harder, and more smoothly polished than the
nether: but the lower is rough and furrowed as it were, that it might afford
place for those Vessels which creep along the Dura Matter, from which some
notable Vessels arise, which by the Ears do insinuate themselves between those
two plates, or boards of the Skull, for to irrigate the intermediate space.

Now that same intermediate space, is a certain spongy Substance, which
receives Intermediate space*
and contains a Marrowy Juice, serving for the nutriment of those bones. The
which Marrowy Juice is reddish, by reason of blood flowing out of the small
Veins situate in those parts; which is wont ^hen to flow out when the Skul of
a living man is boared through with a Wimble, or other boaring Instrument. Now
the Skull, according to Hippocrates in his Book de Vulneribus Capitis, is
double in the Why the Skull is double?
middle of the Head, that is to say, hollow between two plates and boards, that
it might contain a Marrowy Juice to nourish the bones. Hippocrates adds, The
whole Head, a small part excepted, resembles a sponge full of small Caruncles, or
little bits of flesh, which if you press, and squeeze with your finger, you
shall perceive blood to drop out of them: also you shall see small Veins running
up and down, which abound with blood.

Out of the foresaid Caruncles, being bruised with a vehement blow, the blood
is squeezed, which putrefying, does corrupt the bone, which in the mean while
appears sound on the out side: but the Sanies sweating out from the inner plate
or Skul-board, does corrupt and putre^^e the very ^rain it self. And if so he
when the Skul is razed, you see blood come forth, do not therefore conclude
that the Fracture: penetrates the inner plate; because that blood flows out of
the space which is between the two plates, or boards of the Skul.

That same spungy Hypersarcosis* or breeding of proud flesh, which grows up in
Proud flesh in Head-wounds, whence it* proceeds?
wounds of the Head, is bred out of the foresaid Duplicature of the Skul-bone;
as Hippocrates has observed. Touching the Fungous Excrescences of the brain,
whether they are bred from the broken bone, or from the Dura Matter, see
Sennertus in the first Book of his Practice.

But Hippocrates his Caruncles* are vainly sought for in this intermediate
space, whatever Fallopius pleads to the contrary in his Book of the Wounds of
the Head, unless a man would call the pungy substance of the bones Sarcia, or
Caruncles, in regard of their Function.

This intermediate space interpoled between the two plates of the Skul, is
called The space between the skulplates, how called.
by Hippocrates, Diploe. Howbeit, Galen contrary to the Opinion of the Ancient
Physicians, calls the second, and inmost plate of the Skul, Diploe, in the six
Book of his Method of Healing.

The Use of this Diploe, Duplicature, or spungy substance, is threefold* First
The use thereof.
to receive blood for the nourishment of the Skul Secondly, That the Fleshy
Excrescence in the Fractures of the Skul, might grow out of it: Thirdly, That
the Fumes of the Brain might more easily be exha^ed.

Sometimes an Humor is collected between the two plates by way of transcolation,
Why there are two plates.
which being in process of time corrupted, does cause most excessive pains,
which often happens in an ^iveretate Venereal Pox, when the Skul is knobbed,
and bunched with a certain Exostosis.

This double pla^e or board, of the Skul has been made by a wonderful
contrivance of Nature, lest in all blows upon the Head, the wound should
penetrate the whole substance of the bone. Hence it comes to pass, that sometimes
one plate is cleft while the other remains unhurt.

The Whore-masters Pox does oftentimes eat through the external plate, and
sometimes through both the plates, without killing the Patient, who lives a long
time after; as Palmarius avouches in Chap. 4. of his Book de Lue Venerea. The
like Example you may read in the 18. Chapter of Benivenius his Book de Abditis
Morborum Causis. And I my self have often observed the same.

The Sutures, although they are T 15. f 3. a a. b b* f 4 b b. etc.
very closely united in living Persons, yet are The Sutures.
they sometimes very a^t to gape, and to move pain, as Galen reports, toward
the end of his third Commentary in Officinam Hippocratis.

But they seem not at al inclined to any looseness, or gaping about the meeting
together Whether an Issue may be made in the Crown of the Head?
of the Sagittal and Coronal Sutures in Persons come to ripeness of Age, where
a Fontanel is a made; and therefore I have often found by Experience, that this
part may without any detriment have a Caustic applied thereunto. Which kind of
Practice, Fabricius commends in his Chyrurgery; others dislike it as dangerous,
viz. Mathaeus de Gradis, Vesalius, Lib. 1. Cap. 6. of his Anatomy. Baptista
Montanus in his 36. Counsel. Zechius in his Counsels. And Baptv^^a Carcanus in
hi^ Book of Head-wounds. See Claudinus his Counsels. I confess, that sometimes
in Children, this part being soft and gristly, is long ere it grow hand over
that it is in grown persons; and Galen has seen it in such Yonglings to move
and pant, Gal. Lib. 13. Method. Cap. 22. And in such a case to apply a Cautery,
were dangerous. The Africans did burn an Issue in the Crown^ of their Childrens
Heads; as Mercurialis shows from Herodotus. They did burn the Veins of the
Crown of their Heads, with scalding Oesypus, or Sheeps Grease* and in case any
Convulsion happened they did Remedy the same by the sprinkling of Goats piss
thereon.

It is written by Herodotus, Aratus, and Arrianus in the Life of Alexander the
Whether Blackmeers have Sutures in their Skuls?
great, that the Heads of the Aethiopians, and Egyptians had no Sutures, which
gave Pareus occasion to write, That the Aethiopians and Moors, and those which
inhabit hot Regions toward the South, and the Aequinoctial Line, have Skuls
harder than ordinary, having none, or very few Sutures in them. The falsity
where of did plainly appear, when I dissected a very swart^y Black-moor
publicly in the* Medicinal Schools* whose Skul was in all things like one of
ours.

In the Head there are many remarkable Cavities, which the Anatomists call
Cavities of the Head.
Sinus. These you shall diligently search for, that you may know whether they
are void and empty, covered with a thin Membrane, and what communion they have
one with another.

Now the Cavities are, on each side four. The Maxillary Cavity, which lies
concealed within the upper Jaws. The Frontal Cavity, seated in the Forehead, by
the Eyebrows. The Sphenoidean Cavity, which lies hidden under the Seat or
Saddle of the Sphenoides. The Mastoidean, which is contained within the
Mastoides. They are al empty, and covered over with a thin Membrane, only the
Mastoidean, is hollow indeed* but has no Membrane, but is distinguished into
seven, eight, or nine little Cells, as we see in a Bee-hive.

The Entrance of the Maxilary Cavity within the cavity of the Nostrills, is to
be seen on the side of Os Spongiosum.

The Entrance of the Frontal Cavity is seen in the highest and inmost pa^^s of
the Nostrills.

The Entrance of the Sphenoidean Cavity we find to be deep. Within the nostrils
the spongy bones being taken away.

The Ingress of the Maxillary Cavity, is evident without cutting the Bones. The
Ingress of the Frontal Cavity is evidently perceived, the Frontal bone being
cut in sunder above the Eyebrows: The Ingress of the Sphenoidean Cavity, is
discerned, as soon as the inner plate of the Sphenoides is taken away. The
entrance of the Mastoidean Cavity, is contained in the left side of the Concha,
near the Apophysis Mastoides, and cannot be seen unless the arched Vault of the
Concha be broken, or the porus auditorius pulled in pieces.

Sylvius conceives and demonstrates from Galen that phlegm being transmitted
through the little holes of the upper plate, is collected and heaped up within
the Whether phlegm may be collected within the Cavity of the Sphenoides.
Sphenoidean cavity, and thence conveyed into the Palate: which way of the
passage of Excrements, is by Vesalius, Columbus, Falopius, and Valverda
rejected: who contradict Galen in this point, and maintain that this excrement
is voided through the neighboring holes which rest upon the Sella Sphenoidea.

The reason of Gallen and Sylvius is, that it is better the excrements should
be strained, and kept up for a season in those Cavities, than that a man should
be continually spitting, and holding his mouth evermore open. For although the
Sphenoidean Cavities, are in the dissections of dead bodies empty, and appear
not to be full either of phlegm or serosities: probable notwithstanding it is,
that the serous humor which flows and distills out of the Choana, through the
sive-like plate of the Sella equina, is transcolated into the Cavities which
are beneath, and from them powered back by certain oval and sufficiently wide
Holes, and voided forth into the spungy bones of the Nostrils: neither do they
deny, that a part of the serosities, does sweat through the porosities of the
inferior table or plate, into the palate. But the serous humor received in the
spungy bones of the Nostrils, does by little and little sweat out and pass
away, when by its quantity or quality, it provokes nature to an exctetion. For
to what purpose think you has Nature framed The use of the sinus Sphenoides.
those cavities? Has she done it to make the scul so much the lighter? or that
they might be conduit heads or storehouses of air, which is of necessity
breathed in, for the Generation of animal spirits? But they cannot be
storehouses, because they are a fingers breadth distant from the frontal
Cavities, nor have they any continuation or conjunction with them. Again the
Air which is required to be exceeding pure, would be defiled by passing to and
fro through the spungy bones. Furthermore in the many dead bodies which I have
dissected, some of which might be snotty and phlegmatic, I never found the
mammillary Processes any larger than usual. But by those passages phlegm ought
to be derived unto the Os Ethmoides or Colander Bone; or fluctuating unto the
Basis of the brain, it ought of its own accord to flow unto that place, because
the foremost Ventricles of the Brain, are seldom perforated before, so as to
have a through* fare into the Nostrils.

Wherefore I conceive that all the snot and phlegm of the nostrils is not straind
By what ways the phlegm of the nose passes?
through the Colander Bone, but that it flows down into the Palate through the
four pipes or channels of the Choana, or that being collected in the Cavities
of Os-Sphenoides, if it pass through the little holes of the Plate of Os
Sphenoides, it may be derived into the Spungy bones of the Nostrills.

The said spungy bone is full of holes being distinguished, with bony Cells, in
which small Caruncles or bits of flesh are contained, which being swelled, the
disease Polypus is bred.

Afterward you shall consider the Passage of the Nostrils into the Palate, by
these The passages from the Nostrils to the Palate.
cavities which are distinguished by the Os T. 15. f. 6. 1.
Vomer. At the root of the pterygoidean Apophysis, there appears an hole
compassed with a Gristle, which is the extremity of that passage, which reaches
from the From the Ear to the Palate.
Ear to the Palate, by help whereof Deaf persons hear, it a man speak into
their mouth when it is wide open. Also by help hereof the Ear is most easily
purged with masticarories.

The Medicinal Consideration.
In the Skul, by reason of the space contained between the two plates thereof,
hard Primary disoases of the Scul. Tumors
tumors are bred, and almost of a bony nature; yea and some are truly bony,
such as are horns. An hard, full and oblong tumor is called Tesiudo, of kin to
which is the Tumor Talpa, which also is called Topinaria.

There is another tumor which is termed Natta, and grows sometimes chiefly in
the Back, which hangs by a small root. This threefold tumor, if timely care
prevent not, is wont to grow to a greater Bulk. Horns are wont to grow out in
the Skul, the forehead, and else where; yea and upon other bones. I have seen
an horn a finger long, which grew out of the lower part of the Leg, like a
spu^. Of these kind of Horns Sennertus has neatly treated, in the fist Book of
his Practice.

Besides these Tumors the Fracture of the scul is frequent, which proceeds from
Fracture
a Violent and external Cause. And it is either without or with Contusion.

There is a threefold fracture without Contusion, the first is termed diacope,
when an Arrow or dart falls upon the Head and peirces deep, the second is
called Aposcheiparnismos, which is a kind of planing or shaving as it were,
when a piece of the bone is pared away: the third is termed Hedra which is a
gap or ra^e made by the cut of a weapon.

A fracture with Contusion, if it be strait and in the bone smitten, and
immovable, Kinds of fractures.
it is termed Fissura or Rima, by the Greeks Rogme: if it be in another bone
besides that which was smit, it is termed apeichema, that is to say, a
resulting clest, like the Rebounding of an Echo. If the bone be moved and
broken, there is a threefold fracture reckoned; viz. engeisoma, which is a
depression of the skul to the Membrane or Meninx of the Brain; Ecpies^a which
is a depression of the said Scul divided into thinner and smaller bits:
camaroosis which is a vaulted Elevation of the broken Skul. Enthlasis so
called, is indeed a contusion but without fracture, being as it were a flexure
or bowing of the soft scul. Which kind of contusion is seen in brazen vessels,
as pans and kettles etc. when they are battered only and not broken.

In the Bones of the scul we often find a Caries and Exostoosis proceeding from
a Caries Exostosis
common Cause, but more often from the Whores Pox.

Chap. 7. Of the Inferior Jaw Bone.
The inferior T. 15. f. 3. L.
Jaw Bone is in such as are of years one continued bone, without Its
substance. Articulation.
any show of division, as far as to the Chin.

Its Articulation is very loose, being fastened with an orbicular Ligament.

A movable Gristle is spread over the knob thereof, to procure the freeer
motion*

Within the Jaw Bone there is a crease or Channel cut out, ordained to contain
the Vessels, which is separated from the cavity which contains the marrow,
that is might afford a small postion of the vessels to every tooth. Channel.


This Channel of the Vessels is situate in the middle of the Jaw Bone, and is
manifest; and therefore Hyppocaates writ in his book of the Nature of the
Bones, that of all bones only the lower jaw bone has veins.

Cahp. 8. Of the Teeth.
Afterward you shall with an Instrument made for that purpose, draw out by the
roots one tooth of every sort, that you may contemplate the Roots and Ligaments
of the Teeth, and the form of their holes or socke^s.

When the Teeth are broke, you shall find them stuffed with a slimy substance
and with threads, which are the vessels.

The Cavities are more evident in teeth which are withered and dried; it is the
best way to compare the fresh teeth and the dried ones together, and to observe
the difference.

But that you may discern your self and demonstrate unto others the
distribution The way to show the vessel appertaining unto the Teeth
of vessels, viz. of little veins, arteries and nerves into the Teeth: you
shall take this course. You shall take an Oxes or a Rams neither jaw (in which
these vessels are more apparent) and cut it on the inside, and open it until
the marrow and Nerve appear. The marrow being taken away, And the Membrane of
the nerve being torn, the Nerve comes in sight, being composed of many little
strings, from which certain fine threads and other things resembling veins and
Arteries, being wove together, do enter beneath into the Cavities of the Teeth
roots.

To the T. 15. f. 6. n n.
Dog-teeth and the T. 15. f. 6. m.
Cutters a nerve is carried which is more thick than ordinary. To the T. 15. f.
6. o o.
Grinders according to the quality of their Roots, there is a triple or
quadruple very small and exceeding fine nerve distributed.

Then drawing a Grinder or Cutter leisurely out of its hole, you shall see very
small sibres inserted into the roots of the Teeth, which you shall reckon to be
nerves.

The teeth being pulled up clean by the Roots, in the lowest part of the said
What must be observed in a Tooth that is drawn out?
roots, there appears a matter which is partly fibrous, bred of the vessels,
and partly clammie, which fastens the tooth into its hole as it were with Glue,
by the way of Syssarcosis. An Ox or Sheepes-tooth being cut asunder in the
midst, the internal substance being clammie, is manifestly interwoven with
vessels.

All these things may be evidently demonstrated in the teeth of an Oxes,
Calves, or Sheeps Jaw; they are not so clearly discernable in Man; nevertheless
you may perceive the roots of the teeth to be bloody and that a nerve creeps
closely into the Roots. But in dried teeth the roots are hollow.

Chap. 9. Of the Bone Hyoides, and of the Ligaments.
There is a Ligament placed under the Beginning of the Musculus Digastricus or
twibellie; which is produced from the Apophysis styloides as far as to the
Angle of the nether jaw.

The situation, colligation and structure of the T 15. f 11, 12, 13.
Os Hyoides ought diligently to The Situation of the Os Hyoides.
be observed in a dead Body, because they cannot be seen in a skeleton.

It is placed in the Throat under the lower jaw bone, hanging upon the
Apophysis of the Styloides by the help and assistance of Ligaments.

It is made up of five bones, the middlemost of which being the greatest and
the Its structure. Its fastening.
broadest, is termed Basis T 13. f 11, and 12. A A.
linguae, from which on either side there shoo^es forth a little T 13. f 11,
and 12. B B.
horn, which is for the most part gristly, seldom bony, being fastened to the
upper sides of the Cartilago* Thuroides, which two little horns are accounted
for the sixth and seventh bones.

It is worth our consideration which Galen observes in his seventh book of the
use Why it has many Ligaments?
of the Parts Chap. 19. How that this same bone is kn^^ and fastened not only
by Muscles; but it fastened by Ligaments and membranes unto the Apophyses of
the Styloides, and to the upper Horns of the Thyroides; least one Muscle being
palsied, that same counterpoise and equability in the motion of the Muscles
should be dissolved, whereby it should come to be drawn on one side more than
the other, or slip downwards, which would bring great detriment, and
discommodity not only to the voice, but also to the swallow.

Nature providing against this Inconvenience, has tied and fastened it by four
Ligaments to the Stoyloidean Apophyses, and to the Cartilage or Gristle which
is called Thyroides.

Howbeit, the Hyoidean Bone does in women appear smaller and thinner, and
consists of fewer little Bones, whose use is supplied by the suspensory
Ligaments, which in them are longer than in Men.

You shall likewise observe that only the Epiglo^^^^ is received in the Cavity
of Hyoides, the Tongue resting it self upon the upper side of the basis.

Chap. 10. Of the Heads Motion, and Ligaments*
THe Head is moved by a straight, or oblique motion upon the ^ second Vertebra,
Which Vertebra the Head is moved upon.
which in its hinder part is a fingers bread^h distant from the first b
Vertebra. And the first Vertebra is so closely and firmly fastened to the hind*
part of the Head, that it cannot be stirred, or agitated so much as with ones
Hand.

Also the Tooth-fashioned c Apophysis is so fastly united to the ^ody of the
second Vertebra, that in the bending, and oblique motion of your Head, you may
not hurt the Spinal Marrow.

Hence you may be assured of the verity of that Opinion of Vesalius, and other
Anatomists, touching the motion of the Head, how it is moved upon the second
Vertebra, both in its right, and oblique motions.

For seeing the Head cannot be moved with a circular motion upon the first
Vertebra, because such things as are moved with a circular motion, ought to
rest upon one single Bafis. Yet the Opinion of Galen might be confirmed, by
that Natural growing together of the two first Vertebra's of the Neck, which
were joined and fastened together in a certain Soldier, who having in the year
1611. killed a Man in a Tavern, was hanged, and his body brought into the
Anatomical Theater of the University: where while his bones were boiling to
make a Skeleton, it was observed that the two first and uppermost Vertebra's of
the Neck, did Naturally grow together; yet did he in his life time freely move
his head every way, as I have been informed by others. Celsus, before Vesalius
and Columbus, described the motions of the Head, in these words:

The upmost Vertebra does altogether sustain the Head, receiving the small
processes thereof through two a Cavities: whence it comes to pass that the head
is bunched above, beneath, on every side. The second is inserted into the
first, for as much as concerns the circuit thereof. The upmost part is
terminated with a smaller circle, and therefore the upmost incompassing the
second, gives way to the Head to be moved side-longs also.

In the Articulation of the Head, three Ligaments are observed; the one is
circular, The Ligaments of the Head.
which compasses the first and second Vertebra within, as far as to the
hindpart of the Head.

The other two do appertain unto the Tooth-fashion'd Apophysis: the one fastens
the said Apophysis unto the body of the first Vertebra; the other arising from
the top of the Apophysis Odontoides, is inserted into the Hind-part of the Head.

Chap. 11. Of the Inside of the Ear.
LEt us now approach unto the internal Cave of the Ear, which has been
inaccessible Three Cavities of the Ears.
to the ancient Physicians, and let us diligently surveigh the admirable
Architecture thereof.

There are contained three Cavities within the same, disposed in the sciruation
and order following. The first is the T 20. f 7. B. etc.
Concha, the second f 9. B B.
Labyrinthus, and the third is the f 9. A A.
Cochlea.

In the Porch of the Concha, is placed the f 4, 5. B.
Tympanum, which is not green as Why the Drum is placed obliquely.
Pauvius imagines, neither is it directly opposed to the external hole of the
Ear, but stretched out slantwa^es before the same, lest any small matters should
fall, or fly into the Ear, and finding the passage clear and open, should hurt
the Drum. Whether anything be fallen into the Ears, may in such as are living,
and have wide Ears, be seen in the Sun, or by holding a Candle near the same.

Now the whole structure of the T 8. f 6, 7, 8, etc.
Concha wherein three little Bones, the Timpanum; The Parts of the Concha.
the string annexed to the Tympanum, and a Muscle are contained, are to be seen
at one cast of the Eye in young Children and Infants: The Au^icular Apophysis,
which is then an Epiphysis, being plucked away with the point of a Penknife;
which must be done within the Skul.

But in grown Men, which are come to maturity, all these cannot so well be seen
The way to show the parts of the Ear.
and demonstrated, because whiles the Os Lithoides, is cut up toward the
hindpart of the head, it is impossible but that somewhat appertaining to the
internal structure of the Ear, should be pulled in pieces.

And thus you shall break the Os Petrosum, the Marrow of the Brain being taken
away, and the Ear plucked up by the Roots, and the circumjacent flesh being
removed.

The Os Lithoides, comprehending the Aedisice of the Ear, you shall cut asunder
with very wel-steeled, and extreme sharp K^ives, beginning at the external
passage.

Then having pulled back the vaul^ed roof of the Ear, that is to say, having
taken off the upper part of the Os Lithoides, you shall see the three little
Ear-bones, The Mallet, Anvil, and Stirrup.
viz. The Malleolus, or Mallet; the Incus, or Anvil; and the Stapes, or
Stirrup. f T 20. f 7. A.
g f 7. B.
h f. 7. C.


Then you shall see the a Drum with its string, and small Muscles fastened to the
little bones, both within and without the Drum; which are indeed more plainly
to be seen in other living Creatures, than in Men.

For in Men you can discern only one Muscle, which is seated on the left side
of the The Muscles
internal Ear toward the hind-part of the head, being fastened to the little
head of the Maller or hammer.

But there are found two Tendons, or rather Ligaments; one which stays the
tail the Ligaments.
or handle of the Mallet; and a second which is fastened tothe up per corner of
the Sti^^^p.

(...), or little Nerve, is stretched out upon the Mallet, that it may hold and
The Drum^^ring.
(...) Mallet upon the Drum.

Moreover, in a Skul newly boiled or dried, you may discern the three little
Earbones within the Concha. If you shall peep in fore-right into the external
passage, and hold your Eye close, with benefit of a clear daylight, or of a
Candle, you may draw the said little bones every one of them out with a pin.

Chap. 12. Of the Clavicula.
THe Clavicula in its d Articulation to the Sternum, has a soft Cartilage, or
The Gristle of the Clavicula.
Gristle interposed, that it might more easily give way, in motions of the Arm
and Shoulder Blade.

You shall observe why it is formed after the manner of an Italian S. The
Claviculae Its Ligament.
are tied and fastened together, by the Mediation of a strong Ligament.

Chap. 13. Of the Breast Bone.
THe Sernum, or Breast Bone, is in persons come to years, of a bony T 10. f 1.
A A. T. 8. f. 2. A.
substance, but different in Nature from the rest of the bones, because it is
of a reddish color. a T 20. f 4, and 5. B.
b T 21. f 1. B B. f 2. a.


Galen will have it compounded of seven Bones, so as that the several bones of
the Of how many particular bones, the Brest-bone is made up.
Breast do by way of mutual articulation, answer to the several true Ribs, which
Hippocrates seems to confirm. The Breast bone T. 10. f. 2 A A. T. 8. f. 2. A.
growing together in it self, has oblique discriminations, there where the
Ribs are fastened unto it. Howbe^t in persons grown up, there are three,
seldom four divisions remaining in the Breast bone.

Valverda says that the Brest-bone is compounded for the most part of six or
seven bones, which in elderly persons, do so grow together, that it seems
composed, only of two or three Bones.

Sometimes also, though very seldom, it consists of eleven bones, as I saw at
Rome in the year 1554. ^n a girl about seven years old, this bone divided
into six bones, of which the five last, were cut from the bottom to the top,
through the length of the Bone.

Bartholomew Eustachius ads, how that it many times falls out, which none has
yet observed, that the Bones of the Brest-bone, the first and last excepted,
viz. all the middle ones, or at least some of them, are divided by a most
evident line, sometimes straight and sometimes crooked, through the middle
longwayes: by which means it comes to pass, that the Breast bone is reckoned to
consist frequently of ten nine, seven, or eight bones.

Sometimes the Brest-bone is peirced through the middle with a large Hole, which
The Hole of the Breast bone.
was observed by Sylvius and Eustachius, being ordained for the transmitting of
Vessels. I have my self often observed the same, especially in women.

In one woman the hole was so large, on the inside of the Brestbone, as that a
man might put his little singer into it, and her Chest did consist of thirteen
ribbs on each side.

Nicolas Massa brags that he was the first observer of that Hole in the
Brestbone, that somewhat might thereby breath forth of the Mediastinum and the
neighboring parts of the Breast, or rather to give passage to the Vena Mammaria
which is spread and branched forth into the Duggs.

In large-dugd and corpulent women, their larg dugs being removed, I have
observed the Brest-bone to be sharp and the Breast narrow, which was the Cause
of shortness of Breath in such women, the which narrowness of Breast was caused,
(...) the weight of their Duggs.

That representation of the Breastbone as branched or jagged, is not true no^
natural: The Natural shape of the Brest-Bone.
for the Brest-bone according to Galen resembles a Dagger or sword, whereupon
the whole Bone, is by some termed Xyphoides or sword-like bone.

The Gristly T. 8. f. 2. C C.
Branches being taken away from either side, which are parts of the Ribs, the
Have of the Dagger or sword Handle, will be in the upper part, and its point in
the Cartilago T. 8. f. 2. B.
Xiphoides.

The figure of which Swordlike Gristle or Cartilago Xiphoides, by such as are
Of the Cartilago Xiphoides
diligent observers, is found to be various: for sometimes it is single and
triangular, sometimes it is double, and like the Herb Hippoglossum, Horsecongue
or Tongue wort it has the larger part resting upon the smaller: sometimes it is
tripartite and resembles a Trident; and other whiles it is bipartite resembling
a ^ork or Rake.

Nicolaus Massa says that the Barbarous writers call it malum Granatum, the
Pomgranate, as resembling the flower of that Apple.

Galen conceives that it is placed there to defend the stomach and the Septum
Its Use.
Transversum. But because the stomach is far distant there from, it seems to
be framed only for the midtifs sake, or rather to hold up the Liver, fastened
thereto by a ligament.

Amatus Lusitanus, in the 95. Cure of his fifth Centure, observes that the
Cartilago Its Hole.
Xiphoides is bored through for perspirations sake, that the filthy vapors of
the the stomach might by that hole breath out; which is a simple Conceit.

For unless the Cartilage is biparti^e, it is perforated to give passage for
the vena mammaria interna, and in wounds if there be no hole in the Brest-bone,
it is found in the Cartilago Xyphoides.

This Cartilage being pre^sed down and crooked in, does so hurt the Liver being
Its crooking
seated beneath it, that infants are by that means killed with an Atrophy or
Consumption, and in grown persons it ^au^es perpetual vomiting, until it is
reduced to a natural posture.

Chap. 15. Of the Ribbs.
Every Rib does consist of a twofold substance, the one of which is T. 8. f. 2.
1. 2. 3. etc.
bo^y, which Twofold substance of the Ribbs.
makes up the greatest part ^^ of the Rib; the other is T. 8. f. 2. C C.
gristl^e, of unequal length, which is joined to the Brest-bone, by that sort
o^ Articulation which is called Arthrodia, that in the ^^seing and falling of
the Chest, it may yield more easily. But they have another a^^^culation with
the vertebras of the Backbone which is twofold in every Rib.

Now there are seven, which are called true and perfect Ribs, because they are
The true Ribs
joined to the Brest-bone by way of Arthrod^a; unto which sometimes an eighth
is added, which has been found more than once in the dissection of some bodies,
being fastened to the Roo^e of the Cartilago mucro^ata.

And ^his is the Cause why Aristotle, whom Pliny thought it no disparagement
to imitate, has reckoned up sixteen true Ribs.

The five lower are called T. 8. f. 2. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12.
Bastard and Imperfect Ribs, because they do not The Bastard Ribs.
reach unto the Brest-bone, but are terminated in a long Cartilage which is
reversed upwards, and so grov one unto another. c T. 8. f. 2. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
7.


Chap. 16. Of the Backbone.
The Musculous flesh wherewith the Backbone is covered being removed, its
admirable The shape of the Backbone.
figure is e^sil^ discerned, which is partly straight and partly oblique,
sometimes bending inward and sometimes outward, which Hippocrates first
discovered, and Duretus, Hippocrates his Ghost has described in Coacis.

Every where between two vertebras, a thick cartilage is placed in the middle
The Gristles of the Vertebras^
like glue. Galen ^^ his Book de Ossibus, writes that it is an hard and in
some sort Gristlie Ligament.

All the vertebrae o^ turning Joints of the Back, are covered on the outside
with Their Membranes.
an hard membrane; and within they have a strong membranous ligament, drawn a
long from the hig^est vertebra as low as to the Os sacrum, which is there
placed and wrapped about (besides two other membranes) to defend and preserve
the spinal Marrow.

I have often found in bodies that were hanged and burnt, and have been
informed A fable of the Cabalists touching a bone which they call Luz.
by the Executioner, that it is a ridiculous fable, which the Cabalists relate
of a certain Vertebra, viz. that in the Back is found a certain Vertebra
which they have termed Luz. out of which as from a seed, the Bones shall be
regenerated and spring up at the General Resurrection. This Bone Luz ^o called,
Cornelius Agrippa and Vesalius will have to be in the foot.

Howbeit Hieronymus Magius in his sift Book de Exustione Mundi, relates that
Adrianus learned experimentally of Rabbi Joshua Ben Anime, that the foresaid
Bone is one of the Vertebra's of the Back.

For he found in the Back bone, one bone that a milstoneturning upon it would
not break, the fire could not burn it, the water would not dissolve it, and
at last being laid upon an Anvil and smitten with a sledge or smiths-hammer,
it was so far from being broken in the least, that the Anvil was cracked and the
sledge broken the Bone receiveing in the mean while no detriment. Which is as
false as false can be. For all the Vertebrae, may be broken in pieces, burnt
and reduced to ashes.

Whence we may judge what credit is to be given to the Cabalists, who in things
manifest, do so impudently mock and abuse us.

If Aristotle had observed the structure of the eleventh or twelfth vertebras,
he The structure of the Loins
would not have written in his third Book de part Anima, That the Back is
fleshy, but the Loins without flesh, because the Bending-places of al parts
are void of flesh.

But the Loins are more fleshy than the Back. But the Articulation of the
twelfth vertebra is different from all the rest, being the Cause of all Motion
which is performed thereupon, for both above and beneath, it receives, and is
not received, as is observed, in other Articulations of the Vertebrae.

From the Loins you shall descend to the Coccyx or Crupper-Bone, and you shall
observe its structure consisting of three bones, its spungy reddish substance
and Crupper bone.
triangular shape.

Which Part we read does in some Nations sprout out like a tail. Pliny records
in the 22. the Chapter of his seventh Book, that in India there is a race of
Men that have hairie tails, and are incredible swift. And Paulus venetus, in
the 28 Chap. of the fifth Book of his Travells, does avouch that in the Kingdom
of Lambri, there are men that have tails like dogs a span long: who dwell not
in Cities but in the Mountains.

The Nubiensian Arabic Geographie mentions a tailed Nation, in an Island of
the Eastern seas which is called Namaneg. Page 70. I suppose that it is but a
fable which Historians relate touching the Kentish-long-tailes in England, how
that God to revenge the Injury done to Tho. Becket the Archbishop of
Canterbury, caused Tails to sprout out of the Kentish Crupperbones.

When the Crupper-bone suffers a Luxation inwards, a man cannot (according to
Avicen) draw his Ankles, toward his buttocks, neither can he bend his Hams,
which is confirmed by the Experience of Ambrosius Pareus. This Impediment is
caused by compression of a very thick nerve seated on the hind-side of the Leg,
which creeps along near the Crupper-bone. The said bone is easily reduced, by
a man's finger put into the fundament.

In the next place you shall fall to dissect the Vertebras of the back, that you
may contemplate the admirable fabric of the spinal Marrow, wiz. how in the
extreem The way to dissect the ver^^a's of the Back.
parts thereof the nerves are parted, ending in the shape of an Horse-taile; by
reason of millions of little nerves woven together, which being agitated in
water and dishevelled, do express the shape of an horses tail.

Now you shall dissect the Vertebre in this manner; Having taken away all the
ribs at their joints, you shall fasten the Backbone to the table with two iron
hooks above and beneath your section, as ^oiners are wont to fasten their
boards. Then with your incision knives you shall forcibly cut on every side
about the conjunction of each Vertebra, in order cutting off every vertebra,
with their oblique apophysis which help their articulation, til you come unto
the Os sacrum. This is a painful work; but he that would eat the kernel, must
of necessity crack the shell.

Before the fistula ossea be cut off to discover the spinal marrow: a few
things are to be premised touching the natural constitution of the spinal
marrow, and the Origination of the Nerves.

The Spinal Marrow springs from the Brain and pettie*braine, and though it The
Natural constitution of the spinal marrow.
appear like the marrow of the Brain, yet is it in some things unlike,
because softer and besides its two membranes propagated from the Menings,
wherewith it is infolded, it is encompassed with a third membrane strong and
nervous, which hinders the spinal marrow from bruiseing or breaking, when we
stoop or any ways bend our Backs. I am not certain whether or no, that same
membrane which is propagated from the Crassa Meninx have any pulsation: nor
whether the spinal marrow be divided into two cavities according to the length
of the backbone as far as the loins.

Certain it is, that the spinal T. 18. f. 5. A.
marrow descending by the T. 2. f. 2. a. etc.
^istula ossea, grows continually harder, and smaller, til it come unto the
Loins, where it spends it self into little T. 18. f. 2. o.
cords, and springs resembling an horse-taile; that in that part where it
suffers violent motions, it might be out of danger of breaking.

The Nerves of the spinal Marrow are made up of diverse little threads, fastened
T. 24. f. 9. etc. 10* etc.
one to another, and contained in the tenuis Meninx: which little filaments or
threddy substances, do rise so much the higher, by how much more the spinal
marrow descends.

And that nature might by all means possible provide for the security of the
Nerves; Its Original.
when they come forth of the holes of the vertebras, she has compassed them
above with a thick substance, which does so closely and firmly knit and bind
together the sibres of the nerve, that they cannot be drawn asunder one from
another.

After which knot and egress, they are easily separated. But I beseech you
observe Progress*
the cunning Industry of Nature in the going forth of a nerve. Which that it
might be less subject to rupture, seeing that it is as yet clothed only with
the tenuis Meninx, she has not drawn it through that hole which is nearest its
original, but through a lower, which when the nerve has passed, it does not go
unto the next rib, but descends to a lower, which when it has reached, it is
divided into two, and turns back the lesser branch toward the spina, and
carries the greater to the fore parts.

It is a Question amongst Anatomists how the Animal faculty can with the
spirit How the animal spirit is carried through the Nerves?
be carried through the Nerves into the whole Body; because in none of the
Nerves except the optic, there is found any hole or pore or spungy substance;
but we find them all solid, woven together of many small threads according as the
Bulk and magnitude of every one requires.

Caesalpinus in his 5 Book of Peripatetick Questions, supposes that those
little threads are a multitude of small veins and Arteries, which make up one
body as it were a faggot, being continuations of the Branches of the Rete
mirable, which may be imagined, but cannot be demonstrated: or at least that
between the little membran^ Co^ry nerve, a very thin animal spirit is diffused
which runs swiftly to the utmost (...) the limbs.

But I see ^ot how Caesalpinus can demonstrate such a continuation of the Rete
mirabile with the Nerves of the spinal marrow.

Out of the spinal marrow T. 18. f. 1. D. I. K. etc.
28 pare of nerves do take their Rise, seven out of the How many Nerves proceed
from the spinal marrow.
Neck; twelve out of the Back; five out of the loins; four from the Os
sacrum, the branches whereof to search out, is a wearysome piece of work, and
must be done in a dead body provided for that intent alone, and with diligent
Inspection.

The medicinal Consideration.
The dignity of the spinal marrow with reference to the necessity of Life, is
equal The Dignity of the spinal marrow.
to that of the Brain, and therefore Hyppocrates termed it Aion, because he
believed that the vitality of the animal was placed therein: as Erotianus
proves in his Onomasticon and after him Foesius in his Oeconomia Hippocratis.

Plato in his Timeus does acknowledge the spinal marrow to be the foundation of
Life Beneath the Head. and Hippocrates himself teaches that men have most
grievous sicknesses and hard to cure a^iseing from the marrow of their Back:
for a fluxion thereinto causes a consumption, and its drying up and withering
is a grievous disease, and a Man dies if the marrow of his Back be wounded. In
a word, Hippocrates in the 2d of his Predictions says that if the spinall
marrow be diseased, either by reason of a fall or upon any other occasion, or
its own accord, the Patient becomes both ^ame in his Thighs, so that he feels
not when he is touched; and also in his Belly and bladder impotent, so that at
first he voids neither Urine nor dung, save upon mere necessity* but when the
disease grows older, both dung and Urine come away of themselves, without any
forcing of the Patient, and a short while after he dies the death.

From a flux into the Back-marrow an hidden and undiscernable Consumption
arises: but when it flows back into the Vertebra's and the flesh, a Dropsy is
engendered; so says Hippocrates in his Book de Locis in Homine. How the
consumption of the Back proceeds from the Marrow, the same Hippocrates does
accurately teach us in his ^ Book De Morbis. The natural figure of the
Backbone.


Before we declare the Diseases of the Ossea ^istula, I must show you the
natural figure of the spina or Back bone; which is Ithuscolios straight bowed
through the whole length of it: but in the Neck and Loins it is Ithu-lordos
straight bowed inward, in the back it i* Ithu-cuphis straight bowed outward,
and therefore it is easy ^asses of the Backbone.
to declare the disea^s which viciate the Backbone, such as are Lordosis,
Cuphosis, Scoliosis, and, Seisis.

Lordosis, is a disease of the Backbone, when the vertebras thereof, are out of
their Lordosis.
place, and turned inward or forward.

Cuphosis, is a disease of the Backbone, when its Vertebra's are dispointed and
Cuphosis
turned outward or backwards.

Lordosis happens in the Back, as Cuphosis in the Neck and Loins.

Scoliosis is a crooking or wreathing the Backbone to one side. Scoliosis.


Scisis is such a Commotion of the Vertebra's of the Backbone, as that they
remain indeed in their places, but so as their frame and fashion is
disordered. Scisis.


Scoliosis is the Inclination of the Backbone to one side or another, when we
go, depends upon some fault in the twelft Vertebra of the Back, where the
motion of the The cause of Scoliosis.
Backbone, is performed.

This Vertebra is received by its Neighbors above and beneath, and does not
receive, as all other Vertebra's do beside.

For it is Joynted not by way of Gynglimus but by way of Arthrodia; and
therefore if its Apophyses either upper or nether shall be depressed; it cannot
sustain the ^ru^ke of the body bolt upright in motion, but it must of
necessity lean to one side or another: and this fault comes to People when
they are Childr^ being brought into the world with them, or caused by ill
carrying, or b^ of the softnes of those Vertebra's while the Child is forced to
use its Legs, ^^oner than is fitting.

I have showed another Cause of halting according to Galens doctrine in my
Chapter of the Thighs. Those two Causes of halting are irreparable and
incurable. The Luxation of the second Vertebra of the Neck, causes a squinzie,
which in few hours does choke the Patient, because it cannot be restored into
its place.

The diseases of Os sacrum are of great Moment, whether they be tumors or
ulcers, by reason of its natural constitution, the whole Bone being in a manner
spungie, ^istulous, and perforated within and without: and therefore when this
Bone is Diseased, ^he Patien is in danger of his Life, as Hippocrates observes
in his Book de Glandulis.

In his third book De Fracturis he gives us to understand, that the Os sacrum
being exulcerated, is not cured without very great difficulty, which Galen also
con^s in his Comments. Langius in his Epistles, relates, that he saw two
gallant Gentlemen worn away with incredible raging pain, their Os sacrum being
putrified: so that in conclusion they consumed away and dyed.

Chap. 16. Of the Scapula.
Having diligently Viewed the trunk of the Body, you shall proceed unto the Its
Articultion with the Brachium.
Limbs* and you must principally observe the Articulation of the T. 21. f. 1.
A.
Scapula or Shoulder Blade with the T. 21. f. 1. C.
Arm, which is made by the way of Arthrodia, by the coming between a most
thick and nervous Ligament, which does round about embrace the whole Joint.

Also four muscles viz: the T. 22. f. 3. A.
Supraspinatus, T. 22. f. 3. B.
infraspinatus the T. 22. f. 1. and 3. C.
Rotundus minor, Its Muscles.
and T. 22. f. 1. D.
Subscapularis, do with their broad tendons incompass the said joint.

The Cavity of the T. 21. f. 2. c.
Head Omucopole, being not sufficiently proportioned to receive Its Cavitie.
the Shoulder: which was so contrived to make the motion more easy and free,
but it is augmented with a Gristle which crowns the Lips of its Cavity.

Then you shall discover under the T. 22. f. 1. A.
Deltoides a broad and remarkable Ligament, Its Ligament.
which reaches from the Shoulder-tip as far as to the Coracoides Apophysis,
that it may hold in the Arm aloft, to prevent Luxation upwards.

Afterward you shall observe the extremity of the T. 21. f. 2. ^
Clavicula articulated with Its ArtiCulation with the Clavicula.
the Shoulder-tip or Acromium, which is therefore termed Catapleis, although
Galen in the 12. Chapter of his Book of the dissection of Muscles, does call
the first upper Rib by that name, because its placed beneath the Clavis. Ruffus
Ephesius calls the Acromium, the coupling*band of the Clavis and Scapula: but
Eudemus says that it is a very little Bone, which in children is a most exact
gristle, which though in process of time it degenerate into a Bone, yet until
they be 18. years old, it retains much of the substance of a gristle contrary
to the nature of all the other bones. Some whiles it grows so highly together
with the spine of the Scapula, that in a person of middle age wrestling or
exerci^eing* it may easily be separated, which happened to Galen, as himself
tells us in his first Book de Articulis.

The like accident he observed in another, as he relates in Comment. ad Part.
1. Sect. 1. de Officina. Hippocrtes himself takes notice of the Luxation of
this Bone, in his Articulis: where he says that the Acromium or shoulder-point
is of a different nature in mankind, from that which it is in other Creatures.

Upon the Neck of the scapula rests an a Apophysis which in children is an
Epiphysis: The use of the Apophysis coracoides.
from the likeness to a Crows bil or an ancher, it is termed coracoides and
ancuroides. It prohibits the shoulder from slipping out on that side, according
to Galen in Com. in part 1. Sect. de Art; and therefore it was framed for the
security and strength of the Articulation.

For when the Actions of the Hand and arm are forwards, the shoulder would
easily be unjointed, unless it were retained by the coracoides: and therefore
the laxation of the shoulder is seldom toward the fore part; Hippocrates did
observe it once, and Galen saw it five times at Room, as himself relates in
his comment: ad Part. 4. Lib. 7. de Articulis.

Now the pars of the Scapula he thus distinguished: as much of the whole
Commissure The parts of Scaplua how named by Galen.
or Joynting, as is subject to the sight he caled Omos; and that part which is
under the knitting of the shoulder, he called Epome, which we term Acromion:
and that broad part of the Scapula which is situate behind, and is covered
with muscles, is by Galen termed Omoplatae.

From this place we may gather and fish out the Interpretation of an obscure
passage in Cornelius Celsus, in his eighth Book Again from the Neck two broad
bones on either hand do go unto the Scapulae, our Countrymen call them
Scoptula operta, the Greeks term them omoplatas, Celsus calls them Scopula
operta, because they stick out By Celsus.
like boughs of Trees, and are situate in the upper part of the Chest. For the
tops of Mountains were by the ancient Latins termed Scopula, which Tertullian
in his Book de Pallio, calls Montium Scapulas. Also the small branches of trees
were called Scopi, hence the phrase Vvarum scopi vine branches used by Varro in
his first Book de Re Rustica. Cato speaks of Scopulae myrti Myrtle branches.

It is worth observation which Women by long experience have learned viz. that
Whether broad shouldered Men beget large children.
broad shoulderd Men do for the most part beget great Children, because they
are very hot hearted. And Galen sais in his Arsparva, that by how much the
Heart is hotter, by so much the Chest is larger. And therefore Forestus his
wives Mother, would not marry her daughters to broad brested and broad
shouldered Men: for she was afraid least they should die in their travil by
reason of the largness of their Children, which Forestus says he had often
seen come to pass in the 70 Observation of his 28. Book.

The Cause of this is as hard to assign as of another inconvenience, with
which Why french maidens have their right shoulder higher than the left?
the young maids of France, especially the Gentry are infested: Whose right
shoulder is frequently higher and fuller than their left: so that among an
hundred virgins you shall hardly find ten that have well proportioned shoulders.

Whether it is caused by the more frequent and stronger motion of the right
arm, whereby the shoulder blade in widened, and raised up, by means of the
interjacent muscles lifting themselves up. Ad thereunto that in persons that
are grown up; their right shoulder is more heavy than there left, if we
believe Amatus Lusitanus in the last Cure of his 4 Centure.

Why is the right Hand stronger than the left? and why are there so few
Ambodexters Why so few that can use both hands alike?
that can use both hands alike? Is it because the Lungs and Liver do incline
more to the right side than to the left? Or is it because Nurses when they
teach children to go, do draw them on by their right hand.

Is it because Mothers would maketheire daughters low shoulderd while they
study to make them small and waspe-wasted? For as Terence long since said, if a
Girl have a good habit of Body and burnish a little, they say she is a
champion or wrastler, and therefore they pinch their bellies and withdraw their
food, and though naturally of good constitutions, they never leave tampering
til they make them like Bull-rushes; mere waspe-wasted Rush-Candles. Which is
done, not without manifest detriment to their Health; whiles by the overgreat
pinching in of the lower part of their Chest, the upper parts thereof are
enlarged, whence proceeds that same sticking out of their shoulders, or from
contorsion of the Backbone, its natural shape is vitiated and depraved.

Chap. 17. Of the Humerus, Cubitus and Radius.
In all shoulders about the middle and inward part toward the Ribs, there is a
The shoulderhole.
manifest open hole tending downwards, and evidently percing into the substance
of the Bone, through the which a remarkable vein does insinuate it self into
the Cavity of the Bone, that it may nourish the inner Marrow; whence it comes
to pass, that the whole marrow of this Bone appears bloody when the Bone is
broake.

The Articulation of the T. 21. f. 1. C.
Brachium with the T. 21. f. 1. D.
Cubit, is fastened and encompassed Its Ligament.
with a membranous and nervie Ligament.

The T. 21. f. 1. E.
Radius is adjoined to the Cubit, that it might direct the oblique motions of
Why the Radius is joined to the Cubitus?
the Arm, which are performed downwards and upwards, which motions, having
taken away the Muscles, you may observe, by turnning the Radius to and fro
backwards and forwards.

The T. 21. f. 2. c.
Cubitus and the T. 21 f. 2. d.
Radius, do in the middle way part one from another, Why they part one from
another?
that the Radius in a semicircular motion, might be more freely moved, and that
a larger seat might be afforded for the muscles, which in that part are many.

Between this space there is interposed a membranous T. 22. f. 2. e e.
Ligament, by help of Why a Ligament is interposed?
which the Cubitus and Radius are more nearely and straightly combined, and the
interior muscles are separated from the external. It helps also the equality
of their motion, that both might be bent, or stretched outright at one and the
same time.

These two Bones, are in their extremities fastened together, by a very
different Their Articulation with other Bones.
joint; above, the Cubitus receives the Radius, but beneath, the Cubitus is
received by the Radius, the Bulk and thickness of the substance being changed.
For the Radius is at the wrist thicker, that receiveing the greater part of the
wrist, it might more conveniently move the same by an oblique motion. But the
Cubitus at the Brachium is broader, because that bone alone is articulated with
the brachium; the Articulation of the Radius with the knob of the Brachium, is
thin.

Lastly you shall observe, whether or no the styloides T. 21. f. 1.
apophysis of the Cubit do touch the wrist, being fastened thereunto by way of
a joint. Hippocrates observed the external part of the Cubit to be dislocated,
in Lib de Artick. Which kind of Luxation Dalechampius observed, as himself
avers in his Comments upon the Surgery of Paulus Aegineta.

They who deny that the Cubit in a Man does touch the wrist, do allege that
there comes between them a thick and moveable Gristle, which fills that space;
and in very deed that same Cartilage or Gristle, seems to be adjoined by way
of a supplement.

Chap 18. Of the Wrist.
The T 21. f. 1. F F.
wrist and T. 21. f. 1 D. E.
Radius, are joined one to another by a nervous* Ligament, which infolds the
Articulation.

Moreover another e Nervous ligament, is observed, being shaped like a Ring,
which compasses the wrist round about, which conteines within it the tendons
which are carried through the cavity of the wrist, and which lie upon the back
of the wrist, saveing some particular ones: howbeit on the outside it seems
small.

The Wrist T. 21. f. 3.
bones are eight, disposed into two orders or ranks. Number of the wrist bones.


The first order consists of three bones.

The second is made up of four bones. The fourth bone is over and above, out
of rank and order; but we may with Sylvius refer it to the first order, Seeing
it rests upon the third bone of the first order. Howbeit Vesalius accounts it a
sesamoidean bone, because in this place it fills an empty space. But how can it
have the use of sesamoidean, seeing it is not interposed between Bone and Bone?
It hangs over another, that it might form that cavity, which is in the inner
part of the wrist, and to this bone the Muscle Cubiteus flex or carpi does
adhere.

The three wristbones of the first order, being joined together, do make a
cavity, Their Articulation.
which receives two Bones of the second order, which being joined one with
another, do make the joints Head: whence you may know that the first order is
obscurely moved with the second, and that c the articulation is by way of
Arthrodia, and in a dead body, having taken away the tendons, you may discover
this motion.

The rest of the wrist bones, being articulated with the Metacarpium, do cause
no motion at al, or a very obscure one. It is very rare to find nine bones, in
the wrist; howbeit some have found so many.

Chap. 19. Of the Metacarpium, Fingers and Sesamoidean Bones.
After the wrist follows the T. 21. f. 1. H H. f. 2. G.
Metacarpium which is framed of five bones, if we believe ^elsus and Rufftus,
whom Pliny does favor, when he attributes only two joints unto the thumb;
Lib. 11. Cap. 43.

Galen does better, who separates the first bone of the T. 21. f. 1. G G. f. 2.
H.
Thumb. from the Metacarpium, Of how many Bones the Metacarpium. consists?
because it is joined to the wrist by an Arthrodial diarthrosis, with evident
motion. But the bones of the metacarpium are articulated to the wrist by way of
synarthrosis, without motion. Ad hereunto, that this bone is shorter than the
bones of Metacarpium, is not conterminous to them; has a contrary situation and
a different motion.

For the Thumb is termed pollex a pollendo, because it alone is equivalent to
the The* Bones of the Thumb.
other four fingers. That it might be strong and substantial, it was requisite
that it should have three bones; and that it might perform manifest and strong
motions, it has peculiar muscles and they are affixed unto the first Bone. When
the Athenians would render the Aeginetae, their emulators, wholly unfit for
warfare and Navigation, they cut their Thumbs of. And we call such as are
casheired for their cowardice Polletrunci, thumb-les companions. They were by
the ancients in way of merriment termed Murci.

The Metacarpium therefore is compounded, only of four bones, two of which are
immovable, the other two which are under the ring finger, are manifestly moved.

In that same space where the Thumb is joined to the Brachialis, there is a
certain cavity, in which the Arabian Cautery was usually celebrated, which is
largely and elegantly described by Gesnerus in his Appendix to the Art of
Surgery.

And it is no wonder if some at this day undertake to cure the venereal pox, by
applying mercurial water to this part, which ea^es, through the skin, and
pe^ces so deep as to flux the patient.

In the hollw of the hand, a transverse ligament is observed, which connects
the The Ligaments of the Hand. The Sesamoidean Bones.
row of fingers to the bones of the Metacarpium.

Within the palm of the Hand you shall find diverse Sinewy-Ligaments.

There are a few sesamoidean bones found in the Inside of the Hand* There are
none in the outside. They are found hidden among the first jointings of the
fingers.

The Thumb in its second and third joint has some sesamoidean bones; in the
first joint it has none.

Now to find the sesamoidean Bones either in the hand or foot, you shall this
do. The way to find those Bones.
You shall so cut out the tendons that stretch out the fingers, that you be
careful not to take away the cartilages of the joints which are under them,
which may seem to be the sesamoidean bones.

Under these tendons, most frequently in the hand, especially in hard bodies,
you shall perceive a certain hardness sometimes gristlie, sometimes bony. Then
you shall cut crosswise the Ligaments of all the joints, until you make them
appear, their inside in the hand, their outside in the foot; in which side,
you shall find the sesamoidean bones; having first cut asunder the ligaments
wherewith they are infolded, or drawing them a little back, upwards toward the
roots of the fingers.

Chap. 20. Of the Os T. 2. f. 3. and 4. A. etc. T. 21. f. 2. A.
Ilium and T. 21. f. 1. K. f. 2. C..
Thigh Bone.
From the Arms you shall proceed unto the Inferior Limbs. Their Ligaments.


Between the Os sacrum and the Tuberous bunching out of the Ischium, there
intercedes a Great and strong Ligament.

Beneath the seame or growing together of the share-bone there is another
Ligament stretched out.

And a T. 21. f. 7. a a. T. 21. f. 7. b.
circular Ligament comprehends the Articulation of the Thigh with the socket of
Os Ischij, which being cut away, another d Ligament somewhat long and bloody
appears.

The said bloodyness is caused by reason of Certain little veins which creep
through the Acetabulum of the Huckle-bone.

That same Ligament which is brought out of the top of the thigh bone, is
fastened and strongly driven into a cleft which is in the foreside of the
Acetabulum: which being relaxed, and drawn from its place, there falls out such
an halting as is incurable: in which the Thigh, though perfectly put in Joint,
will still stip out again.

That same tabes Coxaria, P^^isis ischiadica, mentioned by Hippocrates in his
Consumption of the Hip.
Book De morbo Sacro, and elsewhere, it is worth your observation: when by
reason of an Impostume or a fluxion into the Hip-bones Cavity of Acetabulum,
the Ligaments cotrupt and putrify, and the Hip grows lank and lean. It was an
ingenious observation of Hippocrates: all Bones vitiated, cease to grow; if the
part containing be corrupted, it infects the part contained. wherefore if the
Hucklebone be corrupted, the Thigh Bone cannot remain untainted; which disease
I have often observed.

The oval hole of the T 2. f 3. and 4. B.
Huckle-bone called thuroides, from its resemblance of a The ovall hole of the
Huckle-bone
door, is ascribed unto the share. It was contrived for lightness sake, and is
exactly covered with an hard membrane, which does sever the Musculos
obturatores, which rest on either side thereupon.

That is false which Aristotle has written in his fourth Book of the
Live-wights Chap. 10. that no four footed Beast has Huckle-Bones. The natural
shape of the hip.


In the Thigh Bone you shall observe the T 21. f 1. K. f 3. G.
shape thereof, bunching out on the foreside, and saddle-fashiond behind, for
the convenience of sitting and firm walking. Which figure Hippocrates observes
in his Book of fractures, and advises when this bone is broken, that care be
taken to preserve the same.

For such whose Thigh Bone is streighter than it ought to be, are crook-legd,
and are same in their knee; and they cannot stand nor go, without trembling.

But they whose thigh-bones are very crooked, they stand more firmly either on
one Leg or on both, than they who have straight thigh-bones.

The Neck of the Thigh Bone, is somewhat long-fashioned and oblique, that it The
Neck of the Thighbone why longfashioned.
may pass along the tendon of the Rotator Infernus. But Galen supposes it was
made for that end, viz. to leave space for muscles, which were to be placed in
the lower part, and for great Veins, Arteries, nervs and kernels, which are
quartered near the divisions of the Vessels.

They whose Thigh Bone is shorter-necked than ordinary, have their groins
narrow and compressed, and when they walk are constrained to halt on one side,
and are termed Vatii. so sais Galen in his third Book de Vsu Partium.

For the Thigh Bone does contribute much to the rectitude and stability of the
Body, by that same oblique Longitude of its Neck; whence the cause may be given
why men naturally halt to the one side or the other, or to both sides, their
Feet and Legs being of equal length; which no man yet assigned, nor observed.

The lower end of the Thigh Bone Joind to the Leg is termed the Knee, which is
Ligaments of the Knee.
fastened by a twofold ligament. One of them is b circular, and compasses both
the Bones round about.

The other being c placed between the two bones, is somewhat Long-fashioned and
bloodyish, through neighborhood of such veins, as descend through the Ham into
the Leg: it arises, from the middle-space of the knobs of the Thigh Bone, and
is inserted into the middle Eminency of the Knobs of the shank. Sick people
often speak of this Ligament when they talk of a burning heat in their Knees.

Upon the Knobs of the shank-bone two semicircular Gristles are fastened, which
hold the same Knobs more stable, that they may not swerve, in violent motions
and contorsions of the thigh. See Galen touching the of the shank-bone, in its
Articulation with the Thigh Bone. Lib. 2. de fracturis.

That Part which is opposite to the knee behind, is termed Poples the Ham,
being The void space in the Ham.
empty and void. The Uessells which pass that way being removed, an empty space
is observed, interposed between the two knobs, which Pliny seems to have
understood in the 45. Chapt. of the. 11. Book of his Natural History. In the
knee it self, the conjunction of both, as well the right as the left, is on the
foreside double (it should be on the hinder side) there is a certain emptiness
like cheeks, which being perced, the spirit fl^es out as from a Cut Throat.

Wherefore I have always observed the wounds of the Ham to be deadly, not only
Why wounds in the Ham are deadly?
for the dissipation of the spirit, but also by reason of cutting assunder such
remarkable vessels, viz. Veins, Atteries and nerves, which creep through that
hinder part of the thigh, which being cut, inevitable death follows.

The society and sympathy between the knees and Cheeks is wonderful, which is
Whence proceds that sympathy which is between the knees and the* cheeks?
described by the Author of that Book De Ordine Membrorum, which is fal^ely
ascribed to Galen: How that the knees being affected and afflicted, the eyes
condole and weep, by reason of that old acquaintance of the knees and eyes, or
Eye lids in the womb, where the child touches its Eyes and Sustaines them with
its knees.

Chap. 21. Of the Patella.
Upon the Articulation of the thigh and leg a small bone is placed, which they
Its connection.
call T. 21. f. 1. LL.
Mola or Patella, the whirle bone of the Knee.

It grows unto the knee, not fastened by any Ligaments: but only being T. 21.
f. 8. d.
glewed to the tendons of the muscles of the shanke, it is so held close upon
the knee.

If you take a diligent view, you shall observe a Ligament somewhat bloody,
which Its use.
does firmly knit and b^nd the Patella to the hard fat which is palced beneath.

The office of this bone, is to defend the joint to guard the bowing and
bending of the Part, and to render the motion more facil: for it hinders the
extension of the leg from passing out of a right line; and when we sit with our
knees bent, it keeps the thigh from luxation forward. And because the whole
Body incl^nes forward, it hinders us from falling when we go down a steep Hill.

This Galen found by experience, in a certain young man that was a wrastler,
in whom, as he was wrestling, the Patella was disjointed, and did a^c^nd
toward the thighbone, whereupon two inconveniences followed, viz. a dangerous
bending in his knee, and a trouble in going down Hill: and therefore he could
not go down hill without a staf. Paraeus observes in the 22. Chapter of his 14
Book, that he never saw any that had the Patella broken, but they halted. I
have seen such whose Patella was luxated and drawn upwards, who could not so
easily go up hill and downhill as formerly.

Notwithstanding Vesalius in his Surgery denies that the Patella confers any
thing Vesalius his opinion touching the use of the Patella.
to the firmnes of the joint, and that a man does halt, when it is broken or
taken out, as he avers he had found by many examples, only he says it is
placed upon the knee for to defend and secure the joint.

And he goes not much from the same opinion in his Anatomy, where he says it
performs the same office in the knee, which the Sesemoidean bones do in other
joints.

Hippocrates in his book de locis in Homine, assigns another use of this Bone,
namely to prohibit moisture from descending out of the flesh into such a loose
joint as the knee is.

Seeing therefor the Necessity of the Patella is so graeat, I conceive it is
but a fable which is reported of the Thebans, who, that they might be able to
run more swiftly, took certain Bones out of their knees.

Yet there have bin found about Nova Zembla certain Pigmies or little Men, who
could bend their knees backward and forward, and were so swift of foot that
none could overtake them, if we give credit to the relations of seafaring Men.

Chap. 22. Of the Tibia and Fibula.
The Tibia has two Bones, the one T. 21. f. 1. M. f. 4. D.
larger and more inward, which ^ea^^s the The rason of these names.
name of the whole; the other is smaller and more external, called T. 21. f. 1.
N. f. 4. E.
Fibula. But Perone (which is rendered fibula) does signify two things in
Hippocrates, the whole Fibula, and appendix of that bone, as Galen expounds it,
in his Interpretation of the words of Hippocrates.

It is termed Perone from peiro, which signifies to boar or thrust through.
It Is called Fibula in Latin from the Greek word phible, which signifies small
and lank; howbeit in Latin writers of Architecture, certain beams or joices
of wood placed to give strength to other parts of the building, are termed
Fibule. For this Bone fibula does sustain the outer knob of the shanke-bone
unto which it is ^ixed, because the weight of the Thigh and of the whole Body,
does most of all bear upon that part.

The lower ends of the Tibia and Fibula are termed T. 21. f. 1. I. K. f. 4gh.
Malleoli Ankle-bones, both What the Malleoli are?
being fastened together by a a strong circular Ligament, through which the
tendons of the Muscles are drawn, as was said of the wrists.

Chap. 23. Of the Foot.
The Articulation of the T. 21. f. 5. A.
Astragalus with the T. 21. f, 5. C.
Scaphoides is very close, so that it seems altogether immovable, so that any
man would think, that the foot is not moved laterally by that Articulation.

Two Sesamoidean Bones are fastened behind the great toe, that they might give
The Sesamoidean Bones belonging to the Foot. The Ligaments of the Foot.
a secure passage to the tendon of that Muscle which bends the Great toe.

In the Sole of the foot, you shall find very many Ligaments, by which the Bones
are straightly united, that the foot might become hollow. You shall therefore
observe the Transverse Ligament, which binds up the Bones of the Metatarsus,
with the first rank of Toe-joints, like that which we find in the Hand.

Chap. 24. The number of Bones for a Sceleton.
Two hundred thirty and two Bones are required to make a sceleton, fifteen
being taken from the number, two hundred forty seven. Because the brestbone is
reckoned but for one, as also the Os sacrum and the Cocyx or Crupper bone,
because in the boiling and clenseing of the Bones, they do not separate Neither
will the T. 2. f. 5. and 6, b,
Coccyx, T. 13. f. 9. 10. etc.
Larynx, T. 13. f. 11, ii. etc.
Hyoides, nor T. 10. f. 2. AA,
Sternum endure boileing.

I omit the six little Eare-bones, the Os hyoides and the Larynx, because they
are not joined by way of Articulation with other bones. c T. 23. f. 3. N. etc.
h T. 20. f. 7. A B C.


Chap. 25. Of Breaking the Bones.
When you are sufficiently instructed in the number of the Bones, you shall
break in pieces every particular bone, that you may enquire into the inner
structure thereof.

The profit of this knowledge is evident in fractures. For hereby may be
collected in how long time a broken Bone may be soddered together again.
Hippocrates writes in his Book de Alimentis: that the nourishment of a Bone may
be known by the breaking thereof. The Nose bone requirs ten days to grow
together, the Jaw-bones and the claviculae and ribs twenty; the Cubit requirs
thirty, the Tibia and Brachium forty, and the thigh bone fifty, little more or
less as occasien servs.

Inasmuch therefore as the Quantity of a Bones norishment, and the space of
time requisite thereunto, does always hold proportion to the Bones thicknes:
to that if the Nose-bone, that is to say the Bone of the upper Cheek which
reaches to the Nose, do require ten degrees of nutriment: the nutriment of the
other Jaw Bone of the Ribs and Jugular, which are twice as thick as the
Nose-bone, must be double in proportion to the nutriment of the other, and will
require twice as long time to grow together which is known by their breaking,
or by the Cu^e of their respective fractures.

And therefore by how much thicker the Bones are, by so much the more
norishment, and the longer time they require to be soddered together; to that
suppose the Nose-bone require ten parts of nutriment, and the Nose being broken
shall need ten days time to grow together: the Aliment of the ribs, Jawbone
and Jugular, (which are twice as thick) must be double in quantity, and they
shall require tw^ce the time (being broken) ere they can grow together again.

And the Cubit-bone, because it is thrice as thick as the Nose-bone, therefore
it will need thrice as much nutriment, and thrice as long time to grow together.

The Tibia and Brachium because they are four times as thick as the Nose-bone,
will require four times as much nutriment and four times longer space to grow
together.

Finally, the Thigh Bone being five times as thick, will require five times as
much nutriment, and five times as much space to grow together, after they have
bin broken.

Celsus writes in his seventh Book, out of Hippocrates, that between the
fourteenth and twentieth day the T 15. f 3. L.
jaw bone, T 15. f 1 E.
Cheek-bones, the T 21. f 1 B B. f 2. A.
Jugular, T 10. f 2. A A. etc.
Breast bone the T 21. f 2. B.
Shoulder blades, the T 10. f 2. and 3.
Ribs, the T 13 f 19. T 10. f 2. and 3. T 2. f 1.
Backbone, the T 2. f 3. and 4. etc.
Hip-bones, T 21. f 5. A.
the anklebones, the T 21. f 5. B.
Heel-bones, the T 21. f 2. G ^.
Hand, and the T 21. f 4. G H.
Foot-^ole are healed. between the twentieth and thirtieth days the T 21. f 1.
M N.
Thighs and T 21. f 2. D E.
Arms: between the seventh and twentieth and fortieth the T 21. f 1. C C.
Arm-bones and T 21. f 1. K K.
Thigh-bones are healed. the sense of which place cannot be understood, but by
consideration of the threefold cavity and marrow of the Bones. A Threefold
Cavity in Bones. A Threefold Marrow.


For I find a threefold marrow contained in the Bones in three different
Cavities. The marrow of the greater bones as of the Arm and Thigh, is reddish:
the marrow of the middle^^z'd bones which are hollow in some good measure, is
white. The rest of the bones being of a spungy substance, or full of little
Cavities, are replenished with marrowy Juice, but not with red marrow.

Howbeit the inferior jaw bone is hollowed in the base, and in the Chin it is
of a stony ha^dness, it conteins red marrow, which does not fluctuate from one
end of the Iaw-bone to the other, because of the hardness and solididity of the
jaw bone in the Chin. Whence it is easy to be demonst^ated that the Maxilla is
a double bone.

The Clavicula, which Galen writes is fistulous, we find to be every where of a
spungy substance. The R^bs, the Vertebrae, the shoulder-blades, the Hip-bones,
the Tarsian and Metatarsian bones, also the wrist and afterwrist-bones, are
spungy and like Pu^ice-stones. The bones of the fingers are hollow and contain
a whitish marrow. In the Feet, only the great Toe is fistulous or hollow-bon'd.

Chap. 26. The Collection and ordering of Bones for a Sceleton.
But if you are not minded to break the bones, but desire to preserve and
prepare Two parts of this works.
them for a sceleton. You shall observe that there are two things required
thereunto; first the purifieing and clensing of the bones, secondly their apt
uniting and fastening together, which may be termed Sceleto-paeia. The
Clenseing of the Bones.


As for what concerns the clensing of Bones, Scaliger in his Exercitations
observes, that the stone termed Sarcophagus does in a short space eat off and
consume the flesh from the Bones. And so the bones remain bare and naked.

Pausanias in Eliacis relates that the Devil Eurynymus eats off the flesh of
dead People, so as nothing but the bones remain.

The Jews imagine that there is an internal Devil named Azazel; who in
Leviticus is named Princeps desertorum, and eats and devoures the flesh of the
dead, leaveing only the bones behind.

But we are not wont to use the stone sarcophagus, because we have it not;
neither are we acquainted with its operations. Neither do we use the assistance
of the Devil Eurynomus, because we defy and execrate those wicked spirits.

Wherefore having cut the Bones one from another and taken their flesh off,
you shall cast them into a large Kettle or Caldron, except the Brest-bone, the
Hyoides, and Coccyx. Then fill the Caldron with scalding water, so as to cover
all the Bones and set them on the fire and boil them four or five hours.

You shall be careful while they are boiling that no bone stick out, so as to be
fainted by the smoke.

Also you shall ever and anon take off the scum and fat which swims aloft, that
the Bones may be the more neat and clean.

Which that it may be more effectually performed, you shall perce the larger
bones that are full of Marrow, in the Head with an Awle that all the superfluous
marrow may flow and soake out.

You may throw away the first water and boil them in a second, that all the
marrow may be drawn forth.

Then take them out while the water is hot (for if it be cold they will be
greasy) and scrape and cleanse them with a small knife.

Some, while they are boiling, throw in a pound of Lime or Chalk, to make them
the whiter, but this eats off the Epiphysies and the Gristles which do crust
the extremities of the Bones; which you must take heed you pull not away, when
you scrape the Bones.

Then you shall put the Bones again into most pure water boiling hot, and boil
them for an hour, that all the marrow and fat may be separate and exhausted.
After that cast them into cold water, and take them out and wipe and rub them
well with course linen clothes.

When the Bones are thus prepared, many lay them two or three months in the
open air to bleach and grow white. Others put them into a wooden case, bored
full of holes and hang them in a running brook, or in the streams of a swift
River, that the rubbing of the stream may whiten them.

I had rather lay them under the falling of a Mil-stream for the space of ten
or twelve days.

Bellonius in his Book de Admirandis, relates that he saw in the shore of
Bononia in Picardy, an inumerable company of exceeding white bones of Bodies
which had been drowned and cast out upon the shore having been buried in the
Sea sand. He saw the like by the Red Sea, so that the bones so prepared, and
sticking and growing together by their nerves and Ligaments, are exceeding
neat, and clean and whiter then Snow. Such as were those two Sceletons which
Galen had to serve him in Anatomy. Bellonius observes in the same place, that
dead bodies are preserved from corruption if they be anointed with the Balm
that drops out of Cedar trees; also that bones moistened with the same juice
remain uncorrupted.

The Bones accurately cleansed and dried, you shall preserve in a Chest, or you
may fasten them together with brass-wire, and so keep them standing in a Case.
It is needful that you have bones both ways, viz. single and united. And the
truth is, as Vesalius has rightly observed, the Bones united serve more for
ostentation than Instruction.

Moreover by long boileing, first in water, and then in oil, all the Bones of
the The manner of fastening the Bones to make a Skeleton.
Head and of the upper jawbone are easily separated, as I have often observed:
and by this means you may have them severed one from another, that you may
view and measure the size and dimentions of every one. The manner of fastening
the bones together, depends either upon the Industry of the Artist; or it is
done by imitation of another Sceleton neatly composed. You may read more of
this subject in Vesalius and Columbus. Also Carolus Stephanus, has noted some
things upon those Authors, worthy of Consideration.

FINIS.
An Alphabetical Table.
A
ABdomen, Its Medicinal consideration, the swelling thereof, and its
constitution what it should be. Page 33 Abdomen, The diseases thereof Page 34
Its Muscles Page 248 Absurd Longings, whence they proceed, Page 55 Accelerator,
What Muscle so termed. Page 250 Amaurosis, What we are to understand thereby
Page 142 Anastomosis, Of the Veins and Arteries what it is, Page 255 Anatomy,
The consideration thereof twofold, towit, Phylosophical and Physical, both
which necessary Page 1 Anatomy, How far forth useful and profitable in Physic
Page 2 The Authors intent and method in treating thereof, ibid etc. The Method
of teaching it twofold Page 3 Anatomist, General Precepts for him to be first
acquainted with Page 26 Anchylosis, What to be understood thereby Page 266
Aneurisma, What it is Page 259 Angina, or Squinsy, What kind of tumor Page 201
Ankle, The wounds thereof Page 214 Annular Ligament of the Toes, what it is
Page 238 Animal Spirits, The place where they are made, according to our
Author, Page 128 Hofmans arguments to the contrary, answered Page 129, 130 How
they are carried through the Nerves Page 277 Anxiety, Whence it proceeds Page
55 Aorta Vein, Descending, its distribution, its great Artery called Lienalis,
its Use, Thickness of its Membrane, and its Vessels Page 67 Aphthae or Ulcers
of the Gums, their malignancy Page 204 Appetite, Want thereof whence it
proceeds, and likewise Dog-appetite Page 55 Apophysis, What it is Page 279
Apophysis Coracoides, Its Use ibid Apoplexy, What, and whence it proceeds Page
133 Apoplexy, And such like diseases, their cure ibid Arm, The nine Muscles
thereof, Page 225 Arteria aspera, Or Windpipe, its Use etc. And whether the
wounds thereof are curable Page 208 209 Artery, Its definition Page 27
Arteries, What they are, whence they have their original, a large discourse
hereof by the Author, Page 115 116 Arteries, Whether they may and which of them
may be opened Page 217 Arteries, Of the Head before they be opened a profitable
experiment of Alxander Benedictus to be put in practice Page 218 How the motion
of their Pulse can be stopped while the Heart moves Page 259 Ateries Crural,
The Pulse is last felt in them Page 259 Arteries Carotides, Or sleepy Arteries,
whether or no the obstruction of them do cause deep sleep, Communion of them
and the spinal Marrow Page 115 116 Articulation Of the bones, what concurs
thereto Page 263 etc. Asthma, What it is, its kinds Page 103 Atrophy, What it
is, and whence it proceds Page 59 Auditory Passages of the Ear Page 193
Axillary Kernells, their diseases Page 211
B
Back and Breastbones, Their Vertebrae, Fallopius his observation touching them
Page 23 Back, Properly is not moved Page 231 How it is bowed by the Quadratus
ibid Its various Muscles, Page 231 232 Backbone, Its shape gristles,
Membranes, and the way to dissect the Vertebras thereof Page 275 276 Baldness,
Whence it proceeds, Page 120 Belchings and Hiccupings, Whence they proceed Page
55 Belly, The Muscles thereof, their number, figure, largness, original; the
whiteline, connection, action, use, etc. Page 40 41 their medicinal
consideration Page 42 Belly, The division of its parts Page 44 the two notable
veins thereof, and what is to be considered in them, Page 50 51 52 the
Caeliacal Artery thereof Page 52 the Nerves thereof, and what diseases rise
therefrom Page 67 Its Muscles ten Page 232 Benedictus, His experiment, before
the Arteries of the head may be opened Page 218 Blackmoors, Whether they have
any sutuers in their Sculls Page 268 Blindness, Whence it proceeds, and the
causes thereof. Page 142 Bladder, Its Muscles and the office thereof Page 232
251 Blood, Where and how made, and how distributed from the liver, a double
circulation thereof Page 57 58 105 how necessary the circulation of it is to
continue the motion of the heart, and whether the blood do pass from the right
ventricle of the heart unto the Lungs, Page 108 Blood, what kind of it is
circulated, in what vessels, after what manner, and how necessary the
circulation is, Page 109 difference of blood in Vena Cava and Porta Page 108
whether the blood pass through the Septum Medium of the heart or no Page 110
the circulation thereof intercepted by obstruction of the ventricles, or of the
veins, Page 111 The conditions of that which is good, and how the Fibers, are
bred therein, the natural temper thereof, the quantity sometimes congealled
Page 66 Whether it may be lessend otherwise than by blood-letting Page 66 Body
Of man, how to be considered by Anatomists, its Parts, its solid parts, how
manyfold, its similar parts, what and how many. Page 26 Its natural and
legitimate conformation, and the necessariness of it, Page 29 Body Of man, its
division, Page 31 Bone, its definition, Page 27 Bones, the history of them,
otherwise termed Ostology Page 4 Four consider ations of them ibid Bones,
Doctrine of them double Page 5 Why there are many of them in man. Page 6 Bones
Of men, in what particulars they differ from those of Women Page 18 The number
of them in a Man's Body Page 19 Bones Of Infants, the history of them, ibid
Which is both Ancient and profitable Page 20 The number of them in Insants,
Page 25 Bones, A new history of them, Page 260, etc Why they are last treated
of Page 261. The Doctrine of them demenstrated in a dead body very necessay for
the perfect knowledge of Man's body, for the practice of Physic, ibid Bones,
Their general diseases, Page 265 etc. Bone, Called Luz the fable of the
Cabalists concerning it Page 275 A threefold cavity in them, and a threefould
marrow Page 286 Bones, The remote matter that nourishes them Page 263 The
immediate matter of them, and whether they have Veins, Arteries, and Nerves
ibid Bones, the collection and ordering of them for a Sceleton Page 287 The
manner of fastening them to make a Sceleton Page 288 Brains, Their substance,
division, their Coats, Pipes, and principal diseases Page 121, 130 Brain, Full
of windings and turnings, Page 122 Brain, Whether it has any motion, and
whether it cools the heart Page 124 Whether or no and how the blood is
circulated therein, and what blood it is nourished with Page 124 125 Brain, The
manner of dessecting of it, and history of it is parts. ibid Breast, or Chest,
What it is, fourfold Page 14 Its form what it ought to be Page 30 Breasts, What
to be chosen in Nurses, ibid Breast Bone, Of how many particular bones it is
made up, the hole thereof, and the Natural shap thereof. Page 274 Bronchocele,
what it is Page 201 Buboes, where they arise Page 76 Buccinator, what muscle so
called. Page 220
C
Cabalists, their fable touching the Bone Luz, Page 275 Cachexy, what it is,
and whence it proceeds, Page 59 Cacochimie, what it is, and whence it proceeds
Page 65 Call, what it is, its situation, original, diseases thereof, similar,
organical and common Page 45 46 Cancer in the gums, what it is, and whence Page
204 Caries of the Skul, what it is Page 270 Cartilage, its definition Page 27
Cartilage xiphoides its figure. Page 274 Its use and hole ibid Its crooking
Page 275 Carunculae Myrtiformes, what, and where they are Page 81 Catalepsis
and Carus, what diseases they are Page 133 Catarrhs, what they are and whence.
Page 135 Cheeks, their description Page 195 Cheeks, whence that sympathy
between them and the knees proceeds Page 284 Chest its bounds, shape, parts,
and medicinal consideration, and diseases, Page 94, 95, 96, 97 Its Muscles
proper and common. Page 230 Child, its conception Page 87 its posture and
accommodation in the Womb, its natural birth: Sometimes drawn out with a hook.
Page 88, 89 Childbed purgations, what they are, retained how to be evacuated.
Page 89 90 Chin, described Page 194 Choler, what it is, the passages thereof,
two sorts thereof in the Liver Page 59, 60 Choler, diversity of it proved by
the different sorts of Jaundice. Page 60 Chorda of Hippocrates, what it is.
Page 237 Choroides plexus, t^ause thereof. Page 122 Circocel^, what kind of
tumor, and where bred Page 78 Clavicula, what it is, its gristle and Ligament
Page 273 Clitoris in women, what meant thereby Page 82 The Muscles thereof Page
233 Coccix or crupper bone, what it is, and the Muscles peculiar thereunto in a
Woman Page 250 Cods, their coats, cavities, vessels. Page 77 Columella or
Uvula, inflamed. Page 205 Coma or dead sleep, whence it proceeds Page 132
Concha, what it is, and its parts. Page 273 Conorium, what it is, Page 123
Convulsion, what it is, and whence. Page 134 Corus, their original Page 213
Cough, whence it proceeds Page 104 Courses, in letting blood to move them what
to be observed Page 86 Cremaster Muscle, what it is Page 76 How it is known
Page 249 Crupperbone, what it is, and the Muscle peculiar thereunto in man and
woman, Page 250 Its structure, etc. Page 276 Cubitus, what it is, and why the
Radius is joined thereunto, Page 280 Cubit, the Muscles thereof Page 225
Cuphosis, a disease, and where Cynicus spasmus, what, and whence. Page 196
D
Dandrif what it is, and whence it proceeds Page 120 Deafness, whence it
proceeds. Page 193 Diabetes, what it is, and whence it proceeds Page 68
Diaphragme, its original, motion, and use Page 231 see midrif Diastole, what
it is, and where. Page 107 Digestion, how it is caused Page 53 Dropsy, how
defined, and whence it proceeds Page 59 Drum of the Ear, what it is Page 193
Dugs of Women, their substance, scituatiod, magnitude, shape, the teats, and
the circle about them, their diseases. Page 95 96 Dugs and Womb, their consent
how caused Page 97
E
Ears, the passage of them, and the Bony Circle, 21. Their parts, windings,
Nervs, and diseases Page 191 192 Ear external, its Muscles common and proper
Page 219 Inside thereof; its three Cavities, and why the drum thereof is placed
obliquely Page 272, 273. Its Mallet, anvil, and stirrup, Muscles, Ligaments,
and drumstring. ibid Ears, Noises in them, their cause and cure, Page 193 The
passages from them to the palate, Page 269 Egyptians, their operation in
cutting out the stone not to be approved Page 72 Eyes, their Situation, Parts,
Membrane, Muscles, Kernels etc. Page 136. 137 Eyes, their diverse Diseases, and
their names Page 138, etc. Eye, the Orbitary bones thereof how many Page 12
Picolominus, his error touching their number ibid Their Muscles are six Page
219 Eye-holes, the bones thereof Page 22 Eyelids, their Muscles four Page 218
Elephantiasis of the Arabians what it is Page 213 Empyema, what we are to
understand thereby Page 96 Emphysema, what dstemper of the eye Page 139
Epididymis, what it is, Page 78 Epiglottis, what is meant thereby Page 207 Its
diseases Page 208 Excretion of Blood, Choler, Serum, Quittor, etc. Page 194
Exostosis, what it signifies Page 266 Exostosis of the Skul, what it is Page
270
F
Face, what it is, And its Parts Page 11 Its description and diseases. Page
194, 195 Fallingsickness, whence it proceeds. Page 134 Falx, a partition so
termed. Page 122 Fat, its definition and division Page 27 Fevers, continual
and intermittent seated in the trunk of the Vena Cava Page 64 Fevers different
either in respect of their Cause, matter, or manner, etc. Page 111 Fiber, its
definition and description. Page 27 Fingers, their Muscles. Page 228, 229 Their
pappy ends Page 212 The best way of dissecting them Page 247 Phlegm, whether or
no it may be collected within the Cavity of the Sphenoides Page 269 By what
ways the phlegm of the nose passes Page 269 Flesh, its definition and
description. Page 27 Proud Flesh in head-wounds whence it proceeds Page 267
Foot, its division into Tarsus, Metatarsus, and Toes Page 18, etc. Its Muscles
and Motion. Page 236, 237, etc. The Sesamoidean bones belonging thereto, and
its ligaments. Page 285 Forehead Muscles, should rather be they called the
Eyebrow Muscles Page 218 Forinx, what meant thereby Page 123 French Maidens,
why they have their right shoulder higher than the left Page 280 Frontal
Muscles, two of them Page 228 Fundament, in what order to be dissected, Its
Name, Muscles, and their use Page 76, 77 Its diseases, sometimes closed up ibid
G
Gall, The Bladder thereof, its name, substances situation, bottom, neck
sinews, bigness shape, communion, vessels, diseases, Page 59 60 Gargareon,
Uvula, or mouth-palat Its Muscles Page 223 Gelding, How it may be made
insensible Page 76 Genitalls, Of a man, and first of the yrad, its parts, skin,
foreskin, bridle, membrane vessels, muscles, the hollow ligaments, their
internal substance, the Nut there of, and its diseases Page 73. 74 see Yard
Gongroni, What kind of Tumor, Page 201 Gonorrhea, Virulent, theseat thereof,
Page 79 What vein to be opened in the cure thereof Page 80 Greensickness, What
it is, and the cause thereof, Page 195 Groyns, What to be observed therein,
Page 76 Gullet, Its membrane, kernels, and obstruction Page 209 Gums, Their
natural and preternatural constitution, Page 204 Their Ulcers, or Aphthae, Page
204 Guts, Their substance, situation, longitude, general division, and
specialy their cavity and use, Page 46 Their names, ^ments, fat, shutters,
connection, and Medicinal consideration Page 46 47 48 Gut Duodenum, The Biliar
pore thereof Page 46 Gut Ileum Its descent, Page 76
H
Ham, Why the wounds therein are deadly Page 284 Hairs gray what kind of
Symptom Page 120 Hallucination, What meant thereby Page 142 Hand, Its division
into three parts Page 16 The two muscles thereof Page 227 228 The Void space
therein, Page 283 Head, What it is, and its division, Page 8 The sutures
thereof Page 21 The form thereof, Page 30 Why placed in the highest Place, its
size shape, division, and the general diseases thereof Page 118 119 Its Muscles
proper and common Page 218 223 Whether an issue may be made in the crown Page
268 Its mo^^^n and ligaments Page 272 Head Dropsy, What it is, and whence it
proceeds, Page 121 Head, Which Vertebra it is moved upon Page 272 Heart,
Whether it be the original of vena cava, and whether it and the Arteries are
moved at the same time Page 108 109 Heart, The Nobility thereof, its substance
situation, bigness, shape, vessels, Ears, pulse, and the cause thereof
according to our Author. Page 107 How necessary the circulation of the blood is
to continue the motion of the heart Page 108 Whether the blood do pass from the
right ventricle of the heart unto the Lungs, and what kind of blood is
circulated Page 108 Its right and left ventricle, their vessels and valves Page
109, 110 Heart, Its usual diseases, Page 110 Heart, the Septum medium of it
what it is Page 110 Heartburning, Whence it proceeds Page 55 Heart, Eaten by
worms bred in the blood Page 66 Heart, The original of Vena Cava Page 108
Hemorrholds, What they are, and where, Page 77 Hermaphrodites, Who so to be
termed Page 75 Hildanus, His way of taking out the stone not to be approved of
Page 72 Hip, The consumption thereof, Page 283 Its natural shape ibid
Hippocrates, Certain places in him expounded Page 92 Hoatsness Whence it
proceeds Page 208 Hofmans Arguments touching the breeding of the Animal spirits
answered, Page 128 etc. His tenent disturbs the practice of Physic Page 130
Huckle bone, The Oval hole thereof, Page 283 Hydrocele, What kind of rupture it
is Page 78 Hymen In Virgins what it is Page 81
I
Jaws Two; the bones thereof Page 11 12 22 The lower Jaw, its Muscles on either
side six Page 221 Iliacus Muscle its original, Page 234 Ilium, The bones
thereof, its parts Page 17 How its motion is performed Page 42 Ilium and os
sacrum, Joined together, their motion, and by what Muscles they are moved
forwards and backwards Page 232 282 Indigestion, Ill digestion, and Slow
digestion, from whence they al proceed, Page 55, Infants, What diseases are
proper to them Page 90 Intercostals internal what they are, Page 230
Interosseans, what Muscles they are Page 29^ Joints, Gallens doctrine
concerning them Page 8 Ischuria, What it is, and whence it proceeds Page 68
Issues, in what places they are commonly made Page 214 Isthmus defined, its
diseases. Page 205
K
Kibes where bred, and whence they arise Page 213 Kidneyes, The substance of
them, their temper, Situation, greatness, number, shape, color, and vessels
Page 67 68 Kidneyes, How shaped in children Page 68 Their internal structure
admirable, its Basin, teats, sieve, and infirmities ibid The falling down of
them, their swelling stoppage, alter, vein opened, action hurt etc. Page 69
Stones bred therein, when cureable by incision ibid Kidneyes, Their
consumption, and who most subject thereunto, etc ibid Kidneys Weakness, when a
dropsy proceeds therefrom, how it is to be cured, ibid King's Evil What it is,
and how its swellings differ from Bronchocele, Page 201 Knees, Whence that
sympathy between them and the Cheeks proceeds Page 284 Its ligaments Page 283
L
Labor hard in Childbearing, helps to further it Page 89 Larynx, Or head of
the Windpipe, its situation, Gristiles, motion, muscles, and diseases Page
207 208 222 Leg, The two bones thereof Page 17 Its several Muscles, and motion
Page 235 etc. Lethargy, What it is, and whence, Page 133 Ligament, its
definition, Page 27 Ligament Why it is interposed between the Radius and the
Cubitus Page 280 Limbs (being the third part of the Sceleton) how to be
considered Page 15 their division ibid, etc. and 211 Limbs, upper and inferior,
Page 24 Method of handling them, and parts of which they are compounded, and
their several diseases Page 212 etc. Veins, Arteries, and Nerves, belonging to
them Page 254 etc. Linea Candida, which is the true one, Page 249 Lips, Their
description Page 194 Lips, Their Muscles are two, common to both Page 220 Their
use and diseases, Page 196, 197 Liver, Its substance, color, situation,
bigness, lobes or laps, regions, vessels, and diseases Page 57 58 Its
communion with other parts Page 58 Its action, and symptoms, Page 58 59 Liver,
whether the roots of Cava and Porta are united therein Page 58 Liver, Not the
original of Vena Cava, Page 64 It is the original of Vena Porta Page 108
Lordosis, A disease, and where Page 278 Lousie Evil, what kind of Symptom it is
Page 121 Loins, The parts thereof, name, with its etymology, parts bordering
upon them Page 90* 91 Loins, Their pains, the special causes thereof, the
Authors method in treating thereof, Page 91 92 Loins, their structure etc.
Page 276 Lungs or Lights, Their Substance, Vessels, Situation, Motion,
Division, ^shape, Membrane, Peculiar manner of nourishment, and diseases Page
102 103 Lungs, their excellency, and why they are so subject to fluxions, in
the diseases thereof whether blood-letting be approveable Page 104 Lungs, their
consumption, and some causes thereof ibid Lungs, why distinguished into lobes
or laps Page 105 Luxation or Disjoynting, what kind of disease it is Page 266
Luz a bone so called, and a fable of the Cabalists touching the same, Page 275
M
Maidens French, why they have their right shoulder higher then the left Page
280 Maleoli, what they are Page 285 Man well formed, how many things to be
consideerd in him Page 29, 30 Massa carnea what it is, and its use, Page 239
Masseter or Chaw Muscles, what they are Page 221, 241 Men broad shouldered
whether they begen large children Page 279 Men, why so few that can use both
hands alike Page 280 Marrow of the Bones threefold, and whether it be compast
with a membrane. Page 263 Marrow spinal, its natural constitution, original,
progress, and dignity, etc. Page 276, 277, Meatus Hepaticus and Cysticus, what
they are Page 59, 60 Meazles and small Pox, whence they proceed Page 90
Mediastinum, what it is, its Cavity and diseases Page 98, 100 Melancholy, its
definition Page 132 Membrane, what it is, its Names, Substance, Original,
Temper, Situation, Number, Figure, Color, Connection, Communion, Action, Use.
Page 27, 36, 37 Membrane, its Medicinal consideration, Page 37, 38 Membrane
common of the Muscles. Page 38 Meninges, what they are Page 121 Mesenterium,
what it is, its situation, Structure, Vessels, Use, Diseases. Page 48, 49 How
the milkie Veins thereof are affected Page 49, 50 Metacarpium, what it is, and
of how many Bones it consists Page 281 Midrif, or Diaphragme, its Situation,
Substance, Shape, Vessels, Motion, how it moves in resptration, and its
diseases, Page 101, 192 Its Original from the Circumference of the bastard
Ribs, and its Use. Page 231 The Muscles thereof Page 231 Mouth-palate, the
Muscles thereof. Page 223 Muscle in the general, what it is, its definition,
Substance, Temperature, Original and insertion, Quantity, Number, Figure,
Belly, Head, Tendon, Color, Connection, Communion, Action, Diversity, how it is
known Page 38, 39 Muscles particular of several parts. Page 218 219, etc.
Muscular dissection, an Introduction thereunto, showing an accurate Method to
cut up the Muscles of the whole Body. Page 239, 240, etc. Muscles of the
Radius, Wrists, Fingers, and Thumb; the best way to dissect them Page 248
N
Nails, their diseases Page 212 Navil what it is, Its vessels, use, and
Medicinal consideration Page 44 45 Neck, Its use, length, parts, vessels
kernels, and medicinal consideration Page 200 201 The Muscles thereof eight
Page 224 Nerve, its definition Page 27 Nerves, or sinews, contained within the
Chest, eight remarkable ones, their names Page 116 117 Nerves, how many of them
proceed from the spinal marrow Page 277 Nightmare, what Affect so called, Page
132 Nose, Its situation, magnitude, shape, cavities, bones, gristles,
membrane, Muscles, and diseases Page 197 198 Its muscles common and proper Page
220 Its diseases Page 198 Nose-bleeding, the causes thereof, and cure Page 198
199 Nostrills, The passages from them to the palate Page 269 Nympha in young
women, what it is Page 81
O
Oesophagus, or Gullet, its membrane, kernells, and obstruction Page 289
Omentum what it is, it is situation, original, diseases 45 46 see Call.
Ophiasis, what kind of disease it is Page 120 Osteologia nova, or a new history
of the bones, Page 260 etc. Os Hyoides, Its situation, structure, fastening,
and why it has many ligaments Page 271 Os Hyois, What it is, its parts, Basis,
and Horn, Error of Anatomists concerning it, and its Muscles Page 12 13 221 Os
Sacrum, and Os Coccyx, what they are Page 23 How the motion of the Os Sacrum is
performed Page 42 Oscheocele, What kind of rupture, Page 78
P
Palate, Its structure, and rottenness Page 204 Its Muscles two Page 223 Palsy,
what it is, and whence it proceeds, Page 134 Pancreas, What it is, its
substance, situation, vessels, new channel, use, 50, see Sweetbread. Parotis,
what it is Page 192 Its constitution Page 241 Parts of the Body sollid how many
fold, similar what and how many Page 26 etc. Parts, Organical what, how many,
what to be observed in each of them Page 28 Patella, What its connection, use,
and Vesalius his opinion touching the same Page 284 Pectorall Muscle described
Page 245 Pelvis and glandula pituitaria, what they be Page 124 Pericardium,
What it is, how inflamed, full of humor, deficient of humor, worms bred therein
Page 100 Pericranium and Periostium, What they be. Page 119 Perineum opened,
and in what manner Page 72 Peritoneum, what it is; its temperature, substance,
original, situation, quantity, figure, color, connection, communion, use, and
Medicinal consideration Page 42 43 The process thereof Page 76 Peripneumonia,
Whether there may be any or no, how it is caused according to our Author; it is
difference from a Pleurisy Page 99 100 Pharinx, What it is, and its Muscles
Page 209 222 Phymosis, and Paraphymosis, what diseases Page 74 75 Piss-bladder,
Its substance, coats, magnitude, shape, holes, Muscles, vessels diseases Page
70 71 Its key, an instrument so called Page 72 Piss-bladder perforated, its
ulcers cleansed ibid Plethory, What it is, and whence it proceeds Page 65
Pleura, What it is, Its thickness Page 97 98 Pleurisy, How the pains of the
sides are known from it, and how they differ in their situation and matter
Page 98 99 Differnce of it from a Peripneamunia Page 100 On which side the
blood is to be-taken away in a plerisie ibid And out of what vein ibid
Pneumatocele, What kind of rupture it is, Page 78 Polypus in the Nose, the
cause thereof Page 198 Priapismus What disease it is Page 74 Processus
vermiformis, Where it is placed Page 123 Psoas Muscls, what, and where it is
Page 234
R
Radius, what it is, and its Muscles. Page 226 The best way of dissecting its
Muscles Page 247 Why it is joined to the Cubitus. Page 280 Respiration, or
fetching of breath, the necessity thereof, it is either free or forced, its
Organs, wherein natural respiration consists, whether perspiration may supply
its use Page 105, 106 Respiration unnatural, the differences thereof, it is
sometimes needful in healthy persons Page 107 Rete Mirabile, what it is Page 124
Rhagosis, what kind of laxity it is. Page 78 Rheumatism, an experiment of
Alexander Benedictus, for it. Page 218 Rheumatismus, what Catarrh so called.
Page 135 Ribs, the true and bastard ones, their two fold substance Page 275
Rhomboides, what kind of Muscle it is Page 244 Rumination, what kind of disease
it is and from whence it proceeds Page 56
S
Saphena vein, what and where it is Page 257 Sarcocele, what it is, and why so
termed Page 78 Scapula or shoulder blade, its articulation with the Arm, its
Muscles, Cavity, Ligament, etc. Page 278,279 The parts of it how named by
Galen. and how by Celsus ibid Sciatica, the bastard one what it is. Page 258
Sciatica gout, where it is bred. Page 213 Seed, the matter of it threefold, how
it is voided Page 79 Seed suppressed, whether hurtful to Women Page 86 Seed
vessels and Seed bladders, why wrinkled, from whence the texture of veins among
them, they are the seat of a virulent Gonorrhea Page 79 Scoliosis, what it is,
and the cause thereof Page 278 Sceleton, what it is, and its division. Page 8
Septum or Speculum Lucidum, what so called, and why Page 122 Sesamoidean Bones,
which they are. Page 282 The way to find them ibid and 285 Shoulder blades, The
Muscles thereof four Page 224 Shoulder, the extremities thereof. Page 15
Shoulder, why the french Maidens have the right higher then the left Page 280
Siriasis or dog day madness, what it is. Page 131 Smelling Lost, Diminished,
depraved, the Causes thereof Page 198 Sneezing, whence it is Page 199
Sphenoides Sinus, its use. Page 269 Sphincter of the mouth, what Muscle it is
Page 220 Skin, its division, Searf skin its substance, Original, Figure, Color,
Connection, Use, and how beautified Page 34, 35 Its diseases Page 211 Skin
called Derma, or the true skin, its Substance, Temperature, etc. whether lost
can be regained Page 35, 36 Skul, what it is, its natural Figure. Page 8 The
number of the Bones thereof Page 9 The holes and pits thereof Page 10, 11 What
is principally to be observed therein, and why it is double Page 267 The
Primary diseases thereof Page 270 Spawling, or Salivation, whence it proceeds
Page 56 Spinal Marrow, the natural constitution thereof, its Original and
Progress, and how many Nerves proceed from it, together with its dignity. Page
276, 277 Speech abolished, the cause thereof Page 206 Spirits Animal, how they
are carried through the Nerves Page 277 Squinsie, what kind of tumor it is.
Page 201 Squinzie, an horrid Symptom, sometimes killing a man within fifteen or
twenty hours Page 208 Spleen described, its Substance, Color, greatness, Parts,
Situation, Temper, Shape, Connection Page 61 and 62 Its Actions controverted,
and diverse opinions thereof Page 61, 62 Sternum, what it is, Fallopius his
observations concerning it Page 23 Sterility, whence it proceeds Page 87
Stammering, whence it proceeds. Page 286 Stisis, what disease it is, and where
Page 278 Stomach, the Membranes thereof, its Situation, Size, Figure,
Orifices, its Bottom, inner Surface, Action, digestion, Communion with other
Parts, great sympathy with the Kidneys, communion with the whole body, and
medicinal consideration Page 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57 Stone, ease for old men
that have it Page 72 Stone sucked out, and cut out of the bladder ibid The
french and Italion way the best. Page 73 Stones, their Coats, Substance,
Situation, Figure, Action, Diseases. Page 77, 78 Their several Muscles Page
232 Suffusion, what we are to understand thereby Page 141 Sutures, what they
are, and how manifold Page 9 Whether Blackmoors have any in their Skuls Page
268 Sweetbread or Pancreas, what it is, its Substance, Situation, Vessels,
Use. Page 50 Systole, what to be understood thereby Page 107 Sweats bloody,
whence they proceed. Page 259 Symphysis, what it is, and its differrences Page
265
T
Taste Vitiated and depraved, the cause thereof Page 206, 207 Temples, the bones
thereof Page 21 Teeth and Gums, their Nature, Parts, Basis, and root Page 13
Their Number and Order. Page 13, 202 At what time they appear Page 22 Where the
hinder Teeth lie, and when they first break out, their generation ibid
Teeth-sickness Page 90 Whether they breed in all ages and whether they may be
fastened in the place of those drawn out Page 203 Teeth, the way to show the
Vessel appert aining unto them, what must be observed in a Tooth that is drawn
out Page 271 Toothache, the cause thereof Page 203 How the spungy Excrescence
is taken out of the Tooth-hole Tendon, what it is, and its Original. Page 40
Tenesmus, what disease so called Page 77 Testicles, or Stones, their Muscles.
Page 232 Thigh, and the bone thereof, Knee, Ham, Knee-pan etc. Page 17, 282 Its
motion, and various Muscles. Page 233 etc. Thigh Bone, the Neck thereof why
long fashioned Page 283 Thumb, its Muscles Page 229 The best way of dissecting
its Muscles Page 247 The bones thereof Page 282 Tibia and Fibula, the reason of
their names Page 285 Tonsils, their diseases Page 205 Tongue, its Substance,
Situation, Magnitude, Vessels, Kernels, Muscles, and diseases Page 205, 206
Whether its Substance will grow again Page 206 Tongue-tyed, who they are. Page
206 Toes, their proper Muscles. Page 238, 239 Trunk, being the second part of
the Sceleton, of what it consists Page 13
V
Varices, what they be Page 258 Their cure ibid Vena Axilaris, Thoracica,
Basilica, Merdiana, Salvatella, what and where they are Page 254, 255 Vena Cava
inflamed, Cure of the diseases thereof twofold, a valve therein, its use, Page
66 Heart the Original thereof Page 108 Vena Cava and Aorta, within the lower
Belly Page 64 Vena Cava, Divided into trunks, it is the Seatof Fevers
continual and intermiting ibid The Liver is not the Original thereof ibid Why
it has a thick coat Page 65 Vein, its and definition description. Page 27
Veins contained within the Chest, at large discoursed of by the Author. Page
113, 114, 115 Veln Jugular, in what case it may be opened Page 114 Veins, which
of them are most usually opened Page 215 Whether the Foot vein may be opened,
and how Page 216 Veins, whether they have fibers, and why they are called the
bodies wind-doors. Page 65 The retentive faculty of them being lost, what
follows Page 66 Vena Porta, the Liver, the original thereof Page 108 Veins,
their valves, with the Use of them. Page 55 Vein cut off, whether it will grow
again. Page 258 Ventricles, what meant thereby. Page 33 Why the dissection
begins at the lower, its Substance, Temperature, Original, Situation, Quantiy;
Parts containing, Common, Proper, Diverse; Parts contained, Figure, Color,
Connection, Use, Action Page 32, 33 Vertebrae, What they are, and the parts
thereof Page 13 Vertebrae of the Neck, Back, Loins, Os Sacrum, or boly bone,
and the Crupper bone Page 14 Vertebrae, their Gristles, and Membranes Page 275
Vertigo What it is, and whence it proceeds Page 134 Vesalius his opinion
touching the use of the Patella, Page 284 Vessels their motion how abolished
Page 259 Vomits warily to be used, not to be given to persons very weak Page 56
57 Vomiting of choler and blood, whence is proceeds Page 55 Vomica, What kind
of Impostume it is Page 103
Ureters, their description, substance, length situation, wideness, original,
Nerves, Obstruction, stone Page 70 Urethra, or piss-pipe, Page 73 Its
obliquation in the Perineum, impostumated hard to cure Page 74 Urine let out
with a knife Page 72 Uvula, Its use, Muscles, ligaments, and diseases etc. Page
204, 223
W
Warts, From whence they arise, Page 195 Wesand, or Windpipe, Its use,
gristles, Membrane, and diseases Page 208 209 Whether the wounds thereof are
curable Page 209 Woman, Her Genital parts, which are either external, or
internal, their diseases Page 81 82 Parts, internal which serve for generation,
two fold, the way of showing these parts Page 83 Woman childing, Why some
sickly, others not Page 87 Woman big-bllyed whether she may be let blood Page
88 Whether in the disease Cholera she may bleed ibid Women beg-bellied, whether
in them the womb grows thinner ibid Women never changed into a Man Page 75
Womb, Its substance, coats, temper, sctiuation, greatness, shape, cavity,
action, infirmities Page 84 85 Worms, how they breed in the blood, Page 66
Heart eaten by them ibid Worms bred in the Pericardium, which feed on the
heart Page 100 Worms, in the Ears termed Eblai, Page 194 Wrist, The two Muscles
thereof Page 227 The best way of dissecting its Muscles Page 247 VVrist bones
their number, and articulation Page 281
Y
Yard of a man, Its parts, Skin, foreskin It Is bridle, membrane, vessels,
muscles, Its hollow ligaments, their internal substance, Its obliquation in the
Perineum, the Nut thereof, impostumated hard to cure, Page 73 74 Yard, the
medicinal consideration, and diseases thereof Page 74 Its muscles are four Page
233
Z
Zecchius, His vain brag Page 72 Zygomaticus, What Muscle so called Page 220
The Names of several Books printed by Peter Cole at the sign of the
Printing-press in Cornhil near the Royal Exchange.
Eleven several Books by Nich. Culpeper, Gent. Student in Physic and
Astrology.
1 The Practice of Physic, containing seventeeu several Books. Wherein is
plainly set forth, The Nature, Cause, Differences, and several sorts of Signs;
Together with the Cure of al Diseases in the Body of Man. Being* Translation of
the Works of that Learned and Renowned Doctor, Lazarus Riverius, now living;
Councellor and Physician to the present King of France. Above fifteen thousand
of the said Books in Latin have been sold in a very few Years, having been
eight times printed, though all the former Impressions wanted the Nature,
Causes, Signs, and Differences of the Diseases, and had only the Medicines for
the cure for them; as plainly appears by the Authors Epistle. 2 Riolanus six
Books of Anatomy and Physic, containing the Foundation of Physic and
Chyrurgery; wherein all the Body of Man is in such sort Anatomically dissected,
as that the Causes and Natures of al Diseases are demonstrated from the Fabric
and use of the Parts affected. 3 Veslingus Anatomy of the Body of Man, Wherein
is exactly described, the several Parts of the Body of Man, illustrated with
very many larger Brass Plates than ever was in English before. 4 A Translation
of the New dispensatory, made by the College of Physicians of London. Whereunto
is added The Key to Galens Method of Physic, 5 The English Physician enlarged.
being an Astrologo-Physical Discourse of the vulgar Herbs of this Nation;
wherein is showed how to cure a man's self of most Diseases incident to Man's
Body, with such things as grow in England, and for three pence charge. Also in
the same Book is showed, 1 The time of gathering al Herbs, both Vulgarly and
Astrologically. 2 The way of drying, and keeping them and their Juyces. 3 The
way of making and keeping al manner of useful Compounds, made of those Herbs.
The way of mixing the Medicines according to the Cause, and Mixture of the
Disease, and the part of the Body afflicted.
6 A Directory for Midwives, or a Guide for Women. Newly enlarged by the Author
in every sheet, and illustrated with diverse new Plates. 7 Galens Art of
Physic, with a large Comment. 8 A New Method both of studying and practicing
Physic. 9 A Treatise of the Rickets, being a Disease common to Children;
wherein is showed, 1 The Essence, 2 The Causes, 3 The Signs, 4 The Remedies of
the Disease: Published in Latin by Dr. Glisson, Dr. Bates and Dr. Regemorter,
translated into English, And corrected by N. Culpeper. 10 Medicaments for the
Poor, Or Physic for the Common People. 11 Health for the Rich and Poor, by
Diet without Physic.
Twenty one several Books of Mr. William Brid^e, Collected into two Volumns.
Viz.
1 Scripture Light the most sure Light: Compared with, 1. Revelations and
Visions 2. Natural and Supernatural Dreams. 3 Impressions with, and without
Word 4 Light and Law within. 5. Divine Providence. 6. Christian Experience. 7.
Humane Reason. 8. Judicial Astrology. Delivered in Sermons, on 2 Pet. 1. 19. 2
Christ in Travel: Wherein, 1. The Travel of his soul. 2. The first and after
effects of his Death, 3. His Assurance of Issue. 4. And his satisfaction
therein* Are opened and cleared in Sermons, on Isa. 53 11. 3 A Listing up for
the Cast-down, in case of, 1. Great sin. 2. Weakness of Grace. 3. Miscarriage
of Duties. 4. Want of Assurance, 5. Affliction. 6 Temptation. 7. Dissertion. 8.
Unserviceableness. 9* Discourage ments from the Condition it self. Delivered in
thirteen Sermons, on Psalm; 42. 11. His Four Sermons concerning, 4 Sin against
the Holy Ghost. 5 Sins of Infirmity. 6 The false Apostle tried and discovered
7 The good and means of Establishment 8 The great things Faith can do. 9 The
great things Faith can suffer. 10 The Great Gospel Mystery of the Saints
Comfort and Holiness, opened and applied from Christ's Priestly Office. 11
Satan's power to Tempt, and Christ's Love to, and Care of his People under
Tempta^on 12 Thankfulness required in every Condition. 13 Grace for Grace. 14
The Spiritual Actings of Faith through Natural Impossibilities. 15 Evangelical
Repentance 16 The Spiritual Life, etc. 17 The Woman of Canaan. 18 The Saints
Hiding place, etc. 19 Christ's Coming is at our Midnight. 20 A Vindication of
Gospel Ordinances 21 Grace and Love beyond Gifts The Cause of our Divisions
discovered, and the Cure propounded.
Twelve Books of Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs lately published; also the Texts of
Scripture upon which they are grounded.
1 Gospel Reconciliation, Of Christ's Trumpet of Peace to the World. Wherein is
Opened Gods exceeding willingness to be Reconciled to Man ^ And Gods sending
his B^^b^ssadors to, that End from. 2 Cor. 5 19, 20, 21. 2 The Rare Jewel of
Christian Contentment, on Phil. 4. 11. Wherein is showed, 1 What Contentment
is. 2 It is an Holy art and Mystery. 3 The Excellencies of it. 4 The Evil of
the contrary sin of Murmuring, and the Aggravations of it. 3 Gospel Worship, on
Levit. 10. 3. Wherein is showed, 1 The right manner of the Worship of God in
General; And particularly, In hearing the Word, Receiving the Lords supper, and
prayer. 4 Gospel-Conversation, on Phil. 1 17 Wherein is showed, 1 That the
Conversations of Believers must be above what could be by the Light of Nature.
2 Beyond those that lived under the Law. 3 And suitable to what Truths the
Gospel holds forth. The which is added, The Misery of those Men that have their
Portion in this Life only, on Psalm. 17. 14. 5 A Treatise of Earthly-mindedness:
Wherein is showed, 1 What Earthly-mindedness is, 2. The great Evil thereof, on
Phil. 3. part of the 19. verse. Also to the same Book is joined, A Treatise of
Heavenly-mindedness, and walking with God, on Genesis 5. 24. and on Phil. 3. 20. 6
An Exposition on the fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh Chapters of the
Prophecy of Hosea. 7 An Exposition on the eighth, ninth, and tenth Chapters of
Hosea. 8 An Exposition on the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth Chapters of
Hosea, being now complete. 9 when Evil of Evils, or the exceeding sinfulness of
sin, on Job 16. 21. 10 Precious Faith, on 2 Pet. 1. 1. 11 Of Hope, on 1 John 3.
3. 12 Of Walking by Faith, on 2 Cor. 5. 7. Eleven Books made in New England, by
Mr. Thomas Hooker, and printed from his Papers, written with his own hand; are
now published in three Volumns, two in Quarto, and one in Octavo, viz. The
Application of Redemption by the effectual work of the Word, and Spirit of
Christ, for the bringing home of lost sinners unto God. The first Book on 1
Pet. 1. 18, 19. The second on Matthew. 1. 21. The third on Luke, 1. 17. The
fourthon 2 Cor. 6. 2 The fifth on Matthew. 20. 5, 67 The sixth on Revel. 3. 17. The
seventh. on Romans 8. 7. The eighth on John, 6. 44. The Ninth on Isa. 57. 15. The
Tenth on Acts, 2. 37. The Last, viz. Christ's Prayer for Believers. On John, v7.
A Godly and Fruitful Exposition, on the first Epistle of Peter. By Mr. John
Rogers, Minister of the Word of God at Dedham in Essex. The Wonders of the
Loadstone. By Samuel Ward of Ipswich. An Exposition on the Gospel of the
Evangelist St. Matthew. By Mr. Ward. Clows Chyrurgery. Marks of Salvation.
Christians Engagement for the Gospel, by John Goodwin. Great Church Ordinance
of Baptism Mr. Loves Case, containing his Petitions, Narrative, and Speech. Vox
Pacisica, or a Persuasive to Peace. Dr. Prestons Saints submission, and Satan's
Overthrow. Pious Man's Practice in Parliament time. Mr. Sympsons Sermon at
Westminster Mr. Feaks Sermon before the Lord Major. Mr. Phillips Treatise of
Hell. -- of Christ's Genealogy. Eaton on the Oath of Allegiance and Covenant,
showing that they oblige not. A Congregational Church is a Catholic Visible
Church. By Samuel Stone in New England. A Treatise of Politic Powers, wherein
seven Questions are answered, 1 Whereof Power is made, and for what ordained. 2
Whether Kings and Governors have an Absolute Power over the People. 3 Whther
Kings and Governors be subject to the Laws of God, or the Laws of their
Country. 4 How far the People are to obey their Governors. 5 Whether all the
People have, be their Governors. 6 Whether it be Lawful to depose an evil
Governor. 7 What Confidence is to be given to Princes. The Compassionate
Samaritan. Dr. Sibbs on the Philippians. The Best and Worst Magistrate. By
Obadiah Sedgwick. The Craft and Cruelty of the Churches Adversaries. By Matthew
Newcomin. A Sacred Penegrick. By Stephen Martial. Barriffs Military Discipline.
The Immortality of Man's Soul The Anatomist Anatomized King Charles his Case, or
an Appeal to al Rational men concerning his trial. Mr. Owens stedsastness of
the Promises. A Vindication of Free Grace: Endeavoring to prove, 1. That we are
not elected as holy, but that we should be holy; and that Election is not of
kinds, but persons. 2. that Christ did not by his death intend to save all men,
and touching those whom he intended to save, that he did not die for them only,
if they would believe, but that they might believe. 3. that we are not
justified properly by our believing in Christ, but by our Christ, believing in
him. 4. that which differenceth one man from another, is not the improvement of
a common ability restored through Christ to al men in general, but a principle
of Grace wrought by the Spirit of God in the Elect. By John Pawson.
Six Sermons preached by Doctor Hill. Viz.
1 The Beauty and Sweetness of an Olive Branch of Peace, and Brotherly
Accommodation budding. 2 Truth and Love happily married in the Church of
Christ. 3 The Spring of strengthening Grace in the Rock of Ages Christ Jesus. 4
The strength of the Saints to make Jesus Christ their strength. 5 The Best and
Worst of Paul. 6 Gods Eternal preparation for his Dying Saints.
The Bishop of Canterbury's Speech on the Scaffold. The King's Speech on the
Scaffold. The Magistrates Support and Burden. By Mr. John Cordel The Discipline
of the Church in New England: By the Churches and Synod there. A Relation of
the Barbados. A Relation of the Repentance and Conversion of the Indians in
New England: by Mr. Eliot, and Mr. Mayhew. The Institutes of the Laws of
England, by John Cowel. Octavo. A Description of the Grand Signiors Scraglio;
or the Turkish Emperors Court. By John Greaves. Octavo. The reigning Error
arraigned at the Bar of Scripture, and Reason. By Francis Fulwood. Octavo. The
state of future Life. By Thomas White. twelves.
FINIS.
AN EXPLANATION OF THE TABLE OF THE FIRST BRASS PLATE IN THIS BOOK.
The first Figure shows the Effigies of a living Man, in which, not only the
external parts of the Abdomen, but also the Veins under the Skin which are
conspicuous are represented.
A The right Hypochondria. B The left Hypochondria. CC The Epigastrium. DD The
Bowels. EE The Hypogastrium. F F The Groyns. G The Region above the Privities.
H The Vein of the Forehead. I The Vein of the Temples. K The external Jugular
Vein. L The cephalic vein of the right Arm. M The basilick vein of the right
Arm. N The middle or common Vein, which is not in the same place in all Bodies.
O The cephalic vein of the left Hand. P The vein of the left Hand, called
Salvatella. Q Q The Vein Saphaena descending. R R The Vein Saphaena in the Foot
it it self. S S The Sciatick Vein.
The Second Figure expresses the common coverings of the Body of Man, and the
Muscles under them laid open.
A A The Scarf-skin. B B B B The Skin. C C C C The Fat. D D D D The fleshy
Membrane. E E Part of the pectoral Muscles laid open. F F F Certain beginnings
of the Muscles called Serrati antici majores. GG HH II The Muscles of the
Abdomen obliquely descending. G H H Their toothed beginnings. I I I I The
tendon of the oblique descending Muscles, under which the right Muscles of the
Abdomen with their Nervous inscriptions appear. K K The white line of the
Abdomen.


THE TABLE OF THE SECOND BRASS PLATE IN THIS BOOK, OPENED AND EXPLAINED.
This Table lays open the Bones of the Abdomen in seven Figures: two others,
to wit, the eighth and ninth shows the Muscles of the Abdomen: The tenth gives
you a clear sight of the Parts, the Peritonaeum being removed.
FIG. I. Expresses the five Vertebrae of the Loins, as they are observed on
the fore part. a a a a The Transverse Process.
FIG. II. Lays open to your view, the Vertebrae of the Loins, as are presented
on the back Part. a The hole for the Marrow of the Back. b b The transverse
Process. c c c c The oblique Process. d Th^^acute Process.
FIG. III. Represents the internal face of the Os Coxae, as it is united in
such as are grown up. A Os Ilium. B B Os Coxendix. C Os Pubis.
FIG. IV. Demonstrates the external face of the Os Coxae. A Os Ilium. a a The
Spine of the Os Ilium. B Os Coxendix. C C Os Pubis.
FIG. V. Gives the internal view of the Os Sacrum divided into six parts. a a a
a The holes which give passage to the Nerves. b The three parts of the Coccyx.
FIG. VI. The same Bone externally to be seen. a The hole for the Marrow of the
Back. b b b Lesser holes for Nerves. c Os Coccyx.
FIG. VII. The Figure which deciphers the Os Coxa, as it is observed to be
distinct in Children. A Os Ilium a little taken from the rest. B B Os Coxendix.
C C Os Pubis. a a The clest distinguishing the Os Coxendix and Os Pubis.
The connexure of all the Bones of the Abdomen, see in the Table to Chapter 17.
FIG. VIII. A The Muscle of the Abdomen obliquely descending, in which a a Are
the toothed beginnings. b b The Tendon sticking to the white Line. B The Muscle
of the Abdomen obliquely ascending, in which c c c Its beginning. d d A portion
of its tendon which covers the right Muscle. e e The right Muscle of the
Abdomen.
FIG. IX. A The transverse Muscle loosed about the beginning, in which a a a
The beginning. b b A portion of the Tendon. B The right Muscle of the Abdomen,
in which c The Beginning. d d d The Nervous inscriptions. e The end. C The back
part of the other right Muscle, in which d Shows the Vein and mammary Artery
descending. e The Epigastrick vein and artery ascending. f The Anastomosis of
the veins. g g The Peritonaeum laid bare from the muscles. D D The Pyramidal
Muscles. E E The Process of the Peritonaeum descending to the Cods.
FIG. X. A Part of the Pectoral Muscle detected. B The Sternum. C The Stomach
being something hid by the Liver. D The Liver. E The Omentum in its Situation.
b A portion which sticks to the Liver. c c A portion which is knit to the
bottom of the Stomach. d d d The remainder of the Omentum as it lies upon the
Bowels. F F The Bowels in their situation. G The Navil Vein. H The Ligament of
the Bladder composed of the Urachos, and the two Navil arteries. I The bottom
of the Bladder. a a a a The Peritonaeum divided.



AN EXPLICATION OF THE TABLE OF THE THIRD BRASS PLATE IN THIS BOOK.
The Omentum and Mesenterium, figure I. The Gula with its Muscles, figure II.
and III. The Stomach and Bowels under it, figure IV. The Tunicles of the
Bowels, figure V. and VI. The Muscles of the right Gut, figure VII. The Nerve
of the sixth pair, figure VIII.
FIG. I. A A A A. The Mesenterium with the Guts adjoined. a a a a. The
Glandulae of the Mesenterium. B B B. The Vessels of the Mesenterium diffused to
the Guts. C C. Part of the Colon stretched out. D D. Part of the Omentum drawn
abroad upwards.
FIG. II. A A. The first pair of the Muscles of the Gula, called
Cephalopharyngaeus. B B. The second pair of the Muscles of the Gula, or
Sphenopharingaeus. C C. The third pair, Stylopharingaeus. D D. The Sphincter of
the Throat. E E E. A backward view of the Gula. F The left external Nerve of
the sixth pair. G. The right external Nerve of the sixth pair. H. The superior
Orifice of the Stomach. I I I. The bottom of the Stomach. K. The inferior
Orifice of the Stomach with a portion of the Duodenum annexed to it.
FIG. III. A A. The Muscles Caephalopharyngaeus conspicuous on the fore part. B
B. The Muscles Sphenopharyngaeus. C C. The Muscles Stylopharingaeus. D D. The
Sphincter of the throat dilated. E. The internal face of the Gula. F. The
descending part of the Gula.
FIG. IV. A. The superior Orifice of the Stomach knit together within a thread.
B. The inferior Orifice, or Pylorus. C C. The common tunicle of the Stomach
separated. D. The middle tunicle of the Stomach. E. The inner tunicle of the
Stomach. F. A portion of the Duodenum. G G. The gut called Jejunum. H H H. The
gut Ileum as it lies in its foldings. I. The Gut Caecum. K K K. The Gut Colon.
L. The shut, being opened in the beginning of the Colon. M. The beginning of
the right Gut, knit with a thread.
FIG. V. P P. The common tunicle of the guts separated. Q. The middle tunicle
of the Guts, which is the first proper one.
FIG. VI. R. The rugged tunicle of the Guts which is the second proper*
FIG. VII. M. The right Gut cut off. N N. The two muscles called Levatores. O.
The Sphincter of the Fundament.
FIG. VIII.. The Nerve of the sixth pair on the right side, in which A A The
external and greater Branch. a The branch which is carried to the Neck. b A
branch of the seventh pair, joined to this sixth pair which is carried to the
Neck. c A Nerve of the seventh pair joined to the sixth under the skull. d A
branch of the seventh passing to the muscle of the Os Hyois. e A branch from
the seventh to the tongue. f f A Nerve from the external branch of the sixth
pair, which is carried to the internal muscles of the Larynx. g g The right
Nerve called Recurrens. h h Many Nerves distributed to the Lungues and wind
pipe. i i i The branches of the right Stomachical, stretched out. B B B The
internal, or costal branch, laid open with its bunches. The Nervous plexure of
the Mesenterium guarded with certain callous Bodies. l l The branch which is
carried to the Omentum, Duodenum, and Liver. m m The branch which is carried to
the right Kidney. n n n n The branches distributed in the Mesenterium and Guts.
o The branch which goes to the Os Sacrum. p p The extremity of the internal
right branch, which is distributed to the Womb and Bladder. q r The branches
from the internal right side, which make the plexure on that side. The Nerve of
the sixth pair on the left side; in which, the signification of the Letters is
the same, save only G Is the Nerve from the left Recurrens, which is
distributed to the Pericardium, and Heart it self. * * The Nerve which from the
external left stomachical is carried to the Liver. l l The Nerve which is
carried to the Spleen and Gut Colon. m m The Nerve of the left Kidney. The
remainder are the same with the former.



AN UNFOLDING OF THE TABLE OF THE FOURTH BRASS PLATE IN THIS BOOK.
The fourth Table lays down the Situation of the Sweetbread, Liver, and
Spleen, and the Delineation of the Vena Porta.
FIG. I. A The hollow part of the Liver. ^ The round unequal, or bowing part of
the Liver. ^ The Umbilicar Vein drawn upwards. C The Gall in its Situation. D
The Spleen in its natural place. EE The Sweetbread in its proper place. FF The
Vena Porta descending by the Sweetbread under the Liver. G The superior
Mesenterical Artery. aaaa The branches of the Vena Porta, extended by the
Mesenterium. bbbb The branches of the artery distributed by the Mesenterium. HH
The Mesenterium it self dismantled of its superior Membrane. II The Splenical
Vessels laid open, the Pancreas being cut.
FIG. II. AA The Body of the Sweetbread deciphored in its Natural form.
FIG. III. The back part of the Sweetbread, together with the Spleen turned
downwards. AA The substance of the Sweetbread, its Membrane being taken off.
BBB The channel of the Sweetbread newly found out. C The biliar pore joined to
the channel.. DDD A portion of the Guts Duodenum and Jejunum, cut off. E The
common Orifice, by which the biliar pore and channel of the Sweetbread, open
themselves into the Duodenum. FFF The internal face of the Spleen. GGG The
veins and arteries distributed in the Spleen.
FIG. IV. AA The unequal or bowing part of the Liver. B The skin of the Liver
separated from it. CC The Ligament of the Liver called Septale. DD The large
branches of the Vena Cava within the Liver.
FIG. V. AA The hollow part of the Liver turned upwards. B The Lobe of the
Liver by which it joins it self to the Omentum. C The cleft of the Liver, out
of which the Umbilicar vein descends. E The Umbilicar vein turned upwards. F
The Gall placed under the Liver. G The channel of the Gall. HH The biliar pore,
with the channel stretched outward, together with a part of the Duodenum,
noted by M. I The trunk of the Vena Porta descending from the Liver. K The
right Caeliacal artery. L A Nerve arising from the plexure of the costals.
FIG. VI. The Vena Porta whole, distinguished into branches, as it is publicly
showed. AAA The trunk of the Vena Porta; A the inferior portion, descending
from the Liver. A A the deduction of it to the right and left with an infinite
number of small branches. B The Splenical branch, divided first into great,
afterward into very many small branches, and distributed like strings about the
Spleen. C The right Mesenterical branch. D The left Mesenterical branch. aa The
Umbilicar vein, b The vein of the Gall. c The vein of the Sweet-bread^ dd The
vein called Gastrica dextra. eee The greater Gastrica sinistra. fg The lesser
veins called Gastricae sinistrae. h The vein called Vas breve. ii The vein
called Gastroepiploica sinistra. KK The vein called Gastroepiploica dextra. ll
The Uemorrhoidal veins produced here from the right Mesenterical branch of the
Vena Porta. m The vein of the Duodenum.
FIG. VII. A The unequal part of the Spleen laid open. BB The Membrane of the
Spleen separated. CC The black substance of the Spleen.
FIG. VIII. AAA The hollow part of the Spleen which receives the Vessels. B The
Splenical vein with its three branches. C The Splenical artery divided in like
manner before it enter the Spleen.



AN EXPLANATION OF THE TABLE OF THE FIFTH BRASS PLATE IN THIS BOOK.
The present Table lays open the Reins with their Glandulae, the Emulgent
Vessels, Bladder and Vreters. Also the rise and progress of the Spermatick
Vessels.
FIG. I. AA The Glandulae of the Reins, or the Capsula of Melancholy. B The
right Kidney uncovered of the Membrane. C The left Kidney. D The descending
trunk of the Vena Cava. E The descending trunk of the great artery. FF The
right Ureter. GG The left Ureter. HH The right Vessels preparing the Seed. II
The left Vessels preparing the Seed. K Part of the Bladder, besides which, the
Vessels carrying the Seed are turned in the Abdomen. L Part of the right Gut
cut off.
FIG. II. AA The common Membrane of the Reins which is bespread with fat. BB
The Glandulae of the Kidneys. C The right Kidney. D The left Kidney. E The
proper skin of the Kidneys partly separated. F The trunk of the Vena Cava
descending. G The trunk of the great artery descending. H The left Emulgent
Vein. II The right Emulgent Vein. aa The right Emulgent arteries. bb The left
Emulgent arteries. c The left Spermatick artery. d The left Spermatick Vein. e
The right Spermatick Vein. f The right Spermatick artery. g The Fatty Vein
arising from the Emulgent. h The fatty artery. KKKK The Ureters on both fides.
LLLL The Vessels preparing the Seed. MM The Scrotum with the testicles in it.
NN The Vessels carrying the Seed. O The Bladder stripped of his external
tunicle.
FIG. III. A The Capsula, or right Glandula Renalis. BB A Vein from the trunk
of the Vena Cava coming into it.
FIG. IV. A The Capsula dissected. BB The hollowness of the Capsula somewhat
laid open.
FIG. V. AA The internal face of the dissected Kidney. BB The Emulgent Vein
with his branches distributed in the Kidney. C The Emulgent artery in like
manner distributed.
FIG. VI. AA The Kidney dissected. B The Sinus of the Ureter about the Kidney.
C The round form of the ureters descending from the Kidneys. DD The narrow
passages of the ureters. EEE The fleshy Knobs called Papillares.
FIG. VII. AA The common tunicle of the Bladder drawn back. BB The middle
tunicle and bottom of the Bladder. C The inner tunicle which appears when the
Bladder is cut. D The Orifice of the bladder by which the Urine passes out. EE
The Neck of the Bladder which seems swelled by reason of the Prostatae joined
to it. FF Part of the Ureters that come to the Bladder.



AN EXPLICATION OF THE TABLE OF THE SIXTH BRASS PLATE IN THIS BOOK.
This Table shows the Spermatick Vessels, the Testicles, the Membranes of the
Scrotum, the Yard, the Reins and Bladder.
FIG. I. A The right Glandula renalis. B The left Glandula renalis. CC The
Reins on each side. D The left emulgent Vein. E The right emulgent Vein. FF The
right and left emulgent Arteries. G The right Spermatical Vein. HH The trunk of
the Vena Cava descending. I The left Iliack branch of the Vena Caya. K The
right Iliack branch. L The right Spermatical Artery. MM The trunk of the great
artery descending. N The right Iliack branch of the great Artery. O The left
Iliack branch of the same. P The left Spermatical artery. Q The left
Spermatical vein. RR The left Ureter. SS The right Ureter. TT The Vessels
preparing the Seed. tt The same Vessels, in what place the Pampiniformia begin.
VV The Vasa deferentia passing behind the Bladder. XX The Scrotum with the
Testicles in it. Y The Bladder. Z The neck of the Bladder. aa The two Muscles
erecting the Yard. bb The two Muscles dilating the Urethra. c The Body of the
Yard. d The Praeputium.
FIG. II. AA The skin of the Scrotum separated. BBB The Membrane called Dartus.
CC The external part of the membrane Elytroides. DD The Cremaster arising under
the transverse Muscles of the Abdomen. EE The internal or membranous part of
the Elytroides. FF The proper white tunicle of the testicle separated. f The
same joined to the testicle. G The Glandulous substance of the testicle. H The
Vessel called Pampiniforme or Pyramidale. II Epididymis. K The Parastate.
FIG. III. oe A portion for the preparing Vessels. AA The Pyramidal Vessels. BB
Epididymis. CCC Parastates. D The testicle covered with its proper Membrane E A
portion of the Vasa deferentia.
FIG. IV. AA The contexture of the veins and arteries in the Pyramidal Vessel.
BB Epydidymis. CC Parastate. DD A portion of the Vasa deferentia.
FIG. V. A The Bladder laid bare from its outward tunicle. BB A portion of the
Ureters. CC A portion of the Vasa deferentia. DD The Capsulae. dd The end of
the Capsulae. EE The Seminal Bladders. FF The Glandulae Prostatae. GG The
Urethra. HH The Muscles which erect the Yard. II The Muscles which dilate the
Urethra. KK The two Nervous bodies of the Yard. L The Preputium drawn back. M
The Glans with its Bridle.
FIG. VI. A The internal tunicle of the Bladder being open. BB Part of the
Vreters. CC The Orifice of the Ureters as they are diducted into the Bladder.
DD The beginning of the Capsulae. EE The Seminal Bladders. GG The Glandulae
Prostatae divided. L The hole in the Capsulae passing into the beginning of the
Urethra, which is covered with a shutter.
FIG. VII. A The Membrane of the nervous body of the Yard separated. B The
blackish marrow of the same body. C The Glans laid naked.



AN EXPLICATION OF THE TABLE OF THE SEVENTH BRASS PLATE IN THIS BOOK.
This Table shows the Genitals of Women: First of all in their Natural
Situation; then their several Parts out of their Situation; Lastly, the Hymen
and Zone.
FIG. I. a The right preparing Vessels. b The left preparing Vessels. c A
portion of the right Gut. d The bottom of the Womb sticking up above the
Bladder. t The Bladder.
FIG. II. A The right Glandulae renalis. B The left Glandulae renalis. CC The
Kindneys on both sides. DD The right emulgent veins. EEE The right emulgent
arteries. FF The trunk of the Vena Cava, divided into the right and left Iliack
branches. G The left emulgent vein. H The left emulgent arteries. II The right
Spermatical vein. K The right Spermatical artery. L The left Spermatical
artery. M The left Spermatical vein. NN The trunk of the great artery divided
into the right and left Iliack. OO Women's Testicles. PP A portion of the broad
Ligament. QQQQ The Tubae of the Womb, depressed on both sides with the
Ligament, that so the Testicles may appear. R The bottom of the Womb. SS The
round Ligaments of the Womb cut off below. T The neck of the womb. V In the
right side, the Hypogastrick vein V In the left side, the Hypogastrick artery
distributed in the Womb. X In the right side, the Hypogastrick artery
distributed in the Womb. X In the left side, the Hypogastrick vein distributed
in the Womb. Y The passage of the Womb. Z The Bladder depressed above the
Privities. aa A portion of the Ureters cut off about the Bladder. bb A portion
of the Vreters descending cut off about the reins. cc The preparing Vessels
dilated about the testicles. dd The Vasa deferentia.
FIG. III. AA The bottom of the Womb dissected closs. BB The cavity of the
bottom. C The neck of the Womb. D The hole in the neck of the Womb of a Woman
which has brought forth. EE The wrinkled face of the passage of the womb. FF
The round Ligaments of the womb cut off underneath.
FIG. IV. A The right testicle. BB The right Tubae depressed. C The left
testicle. bb The passages of the testicles of the womb. DD The left Tubae of
the womb. E The bottom of the womb. FF The round Ligaments of the womb cut off
below. G The Bladder inserted to the passage of the womb and stretched upwards.
HH Portions of the Ureters. II The two musculous parts of the Clytoris. K The
body it self of the Clytoris.
FIG. V. A The head of the Clytoris slicking out under the skin. BB The
external Lips of the Privities drawn aside. CC The Alae or Nymphae drawn aside.
D The Caruncle of the passage of Vriue besides (a) EE The two fleshy
productions like Myrile Leaves. FF The Membranous containing of the chink.
FIG. VI. A The Membrane drawn cross the Privities vulgarly taken for the Hymen.
FIG. VII. A The Privities of a young Girl, in which the signification is the
same as in the fifth figure.



AN EXPLANATION OF THE TABLE OF THE EIGHT BRASS PLATE IN THIS BOOK.
The Fruit in the Womb being often helped by Physical Remedies, requires no
less diligent observation than the Body it self of Man: therefore we have given
you the representation of it in two Tables according to the Method of
Dissections. The first of which, lays open to your view the Umbilicar Vessels,
and the Sccleton: The other the Deliniament of the Bowels.

FIG. I. Shows the Child ready to be born, as it lies in a sit posture for
extramission. AAAA The parts of the Abdomen dissected and distracted. BBBB The
body of the womb divided into four parts CCCC The Charion and Amnios joined
together, and dissected into four parts. D The child turning its head
downwards, which is the natural way of Birth.
FIG. II. Shows the Child taken out of the Womb, the Umbilicar Vessels, and
Membranes separated about the beginning. A The Umbilicar vein distended from
the liver. BB The two Umbilicar Arteries rising to the Navil. C The Urachus
knit to the Navil. DDD The Navil produced even to the Placentum. EE The Amnios
separated from the Chorion, under which a portion of the Navil appears. FF The
Chorion divided into four parts. GGG The Umbilicar veins and arteries,
distributed in the Placenta which are extended above the Chorion, but very
lucidly appear under it.
FIG. III. Explains the Secundines, in what part they cleaye to the womb. AA
The unequal part of the Placenta. BBBB The Chorion under the Placenta.
FIG. IV. Shows the Bones pertaining to the Head. AA The bone of the Forehead
distinct from the Suture. BB The two bones of the fore part of the head. C The
Crown as yet Membranous by reason of the distance of the Bones. D The inferior
cheek divided into two parts.
FIG. V. Shows the ring-like bone of the Infant, to which the Membrane of the
Ear called Timpanum is knit. FIG. VI. The bones of the Ears, removed a little
from their Natural Situation. A The Malleus. B The Incus. C The Stapes. D The
little bone annexed to the Ligament of the Stapes, first found out by D.
Sylvius.
FIG. VII. Exactly represents the Labyrinth and Cochlea of the Ears perfect in
all parts. A The Oval hole in the Tympanum, which looks toward the Labyrinth. B
The round hole in the Tympanum between the Labyrinth and the Cochlea. CCC The
three bony Cavities of the Labyrinth. DD The Cochlea.
FIG. VIII. Shows the internal face of the Cochlea with the Labyrinth. A The
oval hole. B The round hole. CCC The three circles of the Labyrinth something
opened. DD The Cochlea broken, showing the little inward porous circle.
FIG. IX. The Vertebra of the Infant in three distinct parts. A The first back
part. B The second back part. C The third fore part.
FIG. X. Shows the Vertebrae of the Neck, the bones of the Breast as they are
seen on the forepart. A Denotes only the upper part of the Sternum, the rest
are under it.
FIG. XI. Shows the back, and its Vertebrae, wanting their Processes. FIG. XII.
Shows the Vertebrae of the Loins with the bones that make the Pelvis. A The
five Vertebrae of the Loyus, whose Processes are yet cartilaginous. B The Os
Sacrum composed of six parts. CC The bones called Ilium. DD The bones of the
Pubis. EE The bones of the Coxendix.
FIG. XIII. Expresses the bones of the whole hand. abd The Appendices of the
bones, yet cartilaginous. c The bones of the wrest all cartilaginous.
FIG. XIV. Represents the bones of the whole Foot. abd The Appendices of the
bones which are cartilaginous. c Certain Cartilaginous bones of the Instep.



AN EXPLANATION OF THE TABLE OF THE NINTH BRASS PLATE IN THIS BOOK.
This Table comprehends all the Bowels which are found in the Abdomen, and
Breast of the Infant.
FIG I. Singularly expresses the Lacteal Veins, as they are represented at a
single view. AAA The hollow part of the Liver. B The Gall. CC The umbilicar
vein bowed upward. DD The Stomach turned upwards. E Its lower Orifice tied with
a string. F A portion of the Jejunum cut off near the Pylorus. GGG The Pancreas
of a famous bigness. H The Spleen. II The right Kidney covered with the common
Membrane. K The left Kidney in like manner covered. LLL The Mesenterium
stretched abroad. MM etc. The Guts knit to the Mesenterium. aaaa Certain
Lecteal veins stretched from the Sweetbread to the Liver, whereof few, and
those the least of them are here expressed. bbb etc. Lacteal veins distributed
from the Sweetbread to the Guts, and those bigger. ccc etc. The Meseraick
branches of the Vena porta. dd etc. Branches of the Meseraick arteries.
FIG. II. A The right Renal Glandula. B The right Kidney. C The left Glandula
of the Reins. D The left Kidney. E The Vena Cava descending. FF Its internal
Iliack branches. GG The external Iliack branches of the Vena Cava. HHH The
great artery with its external Iliack branches. II The internal branches of the
great artery. KK etc. Both umbilicar arteries bent downwards. L The bottom of
the womb compressed. M The neck of the womb. N The bladder turned downwards. O
The Urachos. P The node of the Navil cut off. a The vein of the right Renal
Glandula. b The artery of the right Renal Glandula. c The right emulgent
artery. d The right emulgent vein. e The right spermatical vein. f The right
spermatical artery. g The left artery of the Renal Glandula. h The left vein of
the Renal Glandula. i The left emulgent vein. k The left emulgent artery. l The
left spermatical vein. m The left spermatical artery. nn The Vessels preparing
the Seed. oo The testicles of a great magnitude. pp The broad Ligaments of the
womb. qq etc. The Tubae of the womb bowed down. rr The round Ligaments of the
womb cut off below. ss Portions of the Vreters cut off.
FIG. III. AA The Lungues diducted on both sides. B The Heart whole. C The trunk
of the great artery coming from the Heart. D A portion of the same artery
passing downwards. E The Vena Arteriosa stretched from the Heart. aa The
channel between the Vena Arteriosa and the great Artery. b The beginning of the
right subclavian artery. c The beginning of the right Carotides. d The
beginning of the left Artery Carotides.
FIG. IV. AA The Lungues diducted. B The Heart cut toward the right Ventricle.
C The Vena Cava opened near the Heart. D Anastomosis between the Vena Cava and
Arteria Venosa. E The shutter in the Anastomosis.
FIG. V. A The Corpus Thymium separated from the Vessels of the Heart.



AN EXPLANATION OF THE TABLE OF THE TENTH BRASS PLATE IN THIS BOOK.
This Table represents the Muscles and bones of the Breast, its Membranes and
Diaphragma.
FIG. I. A The Pectoral Muscle in his situation. B The same Muscle out of his
situation. C Serratus major anticus in its situation. D The same a little
removed out of it. E Serratus anticus minor totally in its situation. F The
subclavian Muscle in its situation. ^ The Clavicula bowed back under the
pectoral Muscle. gg Platysma myodes in the neck with their right strings. GG
etc. The external intercostal muscles without their situation. HH etc. The
internal intercostal muscles in their situation. II A portion of the
Diaphragma in its situation. K Part of the great artery descending. L The hole
for the Gula passing the Diaphragma. M The hole for the Vena Cava descending.
NN The square muscles of the loins in their situation, of which Chap. 12. OO
The muscles called Psoas in their situation, of which Chap. 19.
FIG. II. Shows the bones of the breast as they are to be seen forwards. AA The
Sternum. B The Mucronata, or sword-like Cartilage. CC etc. The cartilaginous
part of the Ribs. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. The true Ribs. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. The
bastard Ribs.
FIG. III. Shows the Ribs, Vertebrae and processes on the back part. FIG. IV.
The Breast opened, in which AA The Mediastinum drawn to the side. BB The
tunicle of the Mediastinum diducted under the Sternum. C The right lobe of the
Lungues.
FIG. V. AA Part of the Pleura drawn at one side from the Ribs. BB The Ribs
laid bare from the Pleura. CC The Ribs clothed with the Pleura.
FIG. VI. Shows the Diaphragma separated from the Ribs and Vertebrae. AAA The
fleshy part of the Diaphragma covered with its Membrane. BB The Phrenical
arteries. CC The Phrenical veins. D The passage of the Vena Cava. E The passage
of the Gula. FFF The membranous part of the Diaphragma. G The hole between the
fleshy portions of the descending of the great artery.
FIG. VII. A The left nerve of the Diaphragma. B The right nerve of the same. C
The superior membrane of the Diaphragma separated. D The fleshy substance of
the Diaphragma. E The hole for the Gula. F The hole for the Vena Cava. GGG The
Membranous part. HHH The fleshy parts between with the great artery descends.



AN EXPLANATION OF THE TABLE OF THE ELEVENTH BRASS PLATE IN THIS BOOK.
This Table chiefly represents the Heart, its Membranes, Vessels, Ventricles
and shutters, then the Lungues and the Aspera Arteria separated from them.
FIG. I. A The Pericardium compassing the Heart. BB The Lungues embracing the
Heart in their Natural Situation. C The Vena Cava ascending above the Heart. D
The beginning of the vein without a fellow. E The right subclavian vein. F The
right Jugular vein. G The left Jugular vein. H The left subclavian vein. II The
right and left Carotis Artery. KK The right and left subclavian Artery. LL The
Nerves of the sixth pair descending to the Lungues. M The beginning of the great
Artery descending.
FIG. II. Shows particularly the vessels passing from the Heart to the Lungs;
which are showed you separated in the third and sixth figure of the following
Chapter. A The Pericardium taken from the Heart. B The Heart with the Coronal
veins and arteries. C The trunk of the great Artery passing out of the Heart. D
Its descending part turned upwards. EE The left branch of the Arterial vein
distributed to the Lungues. F A channel between the arterial vein, and the
great artery. G The right branch of the arterial vein. HH The right and left
branch of the venal artery. I The Ear of the Heart. KK The Lungues about the
Heart. L The proper tunicle of the Lungues separated.
FIG. ^. The Heart of an Insant whole. A The proper Membrane of the Heart
separated. B The substance of the Heart bare. CC The right and left Ears of the
Heart. D The great Artery sticking out of the Heart. E A portion of the Vena
Cava.
FIG. * A Part of the Heart transversly cut. B The left ventricle. CC The right
ventricle conspicuous. DD The Septum of the Heart.
FIG. III. Shows the Vena Cava dissected with the right Ventricle. A The
Orifice of the coronal Vein. B The Anastomosis between the Vena Cava and the
venal artery. CCC The shutters called Tricuspides. DDD The right Ventricle of
the Heart opened. aa The passages between the Membranes ending in the Septum.
FIG. IV. A The arterious vein dissected in the right ventricle. BBB The
shutters called Sigmoides in the arterious vein. CCC The right Ventricle of the
Heart opened.
FIG. V. A The great Artery diffected near the Heart. BBB The semilunar
shutters of the great artery. CC The left Ventricle of the heart. D Part of the
left Ventricle turned back.
FIG. VI. A The Venal artery dissected. B The beginning of the Anastomosis
between the venal artery and the Vena Cava. bb The passages between the
Membranes ending in the Septum. CC The two mitral shutters. DD The left
Ventricle of the Heart opened.
FIG. VII. Shows the backward part of the Lungues and windpipe, as they are
joined to the Heart. A The right Nerve of the sixth pair which comes to the
Lungues. B The left Nerve of the same. C The middle branch between each Nerve.
D The branch which is carried to the Pericardium, EE The two greater branches
of the windpipe which are Membranous behind. FF The hinder part of the Lungues.
G The proper Membrane of the Lungues. HH A portion of the Pericardium left. I
The heart left in his Situation.
FIG. VIII. A The windpipe cut off under the Larynx. B The right branch
thereof divided first into two parts. C The left branch thereof divided into
greater and lesser branches. ddd etc. The extremity of the branches ending in
membranous channels.



AN EXPLANATION OF THE TABLE OF THE TWELFTH BRASS PLATE IN THIS BOOK.
FIG. I. Shows the Vena Cava. A The beginning of the Vena Cava, with his large
orifice about the Heart. BB The rise of the subclavian branches. C The
beginning of the descending trunk. DD The right and left Iliack branches. aaa
etc. The branches of the Azygus distributed to the Ribs. bb The superior
intercostal. cc The internal mammary. * The Mediastina. dd The Vertebral Vein.
ee The internal Jugular cut off under the skul. ff The external Jugular, from
which the inferior branch rises to the Organ of speech, and the Subcutaneus by
the face and Temples, and backwards by another branch to the Ears. gg The
Cervical Vein. hh The progress of the subclavian branches. ii The internal
scapular vein. KK The external scapulars. 3.3. The vein carried to the Muscle
Deltois. ll The superior Breast-vein. mm The Cephalic vein cut off. nn The
basilick vein cut off. oo The inferior Breast-vein. p The left phrenical vein.
q The right phrenical vein. rr A famous branch distributed in the Liver. ss tt
etc. The sprigs thereof distributed in the right and left side thereof. uu The
Venae musculae, or superior Lumbals. yy The veins of the Renal Glandulae. xx
The right and left emulgent. zz The right and left spermatical. aa The
beginning of the Lumbals. bb The Vena muscula of the interior Lumbal. gg The
Vena sacra. DD The external Iliack branch. EE The Epigastrick vein. ^^ The
internal Iliack branch. ^^ Vena Glutea. eses The Hypogastrick veins. ^^ The
veins of the Privities. thth The inguinal veins. KK etc. The branch of the
crural vein. iii The Saphena. ll The vein Ischias.
FIG. II. Particularly describes the coronal vein of the heart. FIG. III. Show
the Arterial Vein of the Heart. A The beginning by which it passes out of the
right ventricle. BB Its branches which pass to the right part of the Lungues.
CC Its branches which pass to the left.
FIG. IV. Shows the great Artery. A Its beginning rising out of the heart. BB
The beginning and progress of the subclavian branches. C The trunk descending.
DD The right and left Iliack branches. aa The artery Carotis. bb Its external
branch distributed to the Jaws, Face, and backwards to the Ears. cc The
internal Carotis cut off under the skull. dd The vertebral artery in like
manner cut off. ^^ The cervical muscula. ee The internal Mammary. ff The
branches of the superior intercostal artery. gg The internal scapular artery.
hh The external scapular artery. ii The superior breast-artery. kk The inferior
breast-artery. lm The arteries distributed to the muscles of the Shoulder. nn
The inferior intercostals. oo The phrenical arteries. p The famous artery
called Coeliaca. q Its right branch divided into three parts; of which, the
superior and inferior is distributed to the Liver, and the middle to the Gall.
r The left branch of the Coeliacal. s The right Gastrical artery. t The
splenical artery divided in small branches to the spleen. u The artery called
Epiploica. ur The Gastroepiploica. x The artery carried to the Renal Glandula.
yyy etc. The superior Mesenterical artery distributed into branches. zz The
emulgent arteries. aa The rise of the Lumbal arteries. bb The spermatical
arteries. gg The inferior Mesenterical artery derived into many branches. ^ The
Arteria sacra. DD The external Iliack artery. ^^ The internal Iliack. ^^
Arteria Glutaea. eses The Hypogastrick artery distributed to the right Gut and
Privities. The Hypogastrick artery distributed to the womb distinguished from
the former. ^^ The umbilicar artery. EE The Epigastrick artery. thth The
Arteria Pudenda. ii The Ischias. kk The inferior Arteria Muscula. ll The artery
which goes to the internal Iliack muscle.
FIG. V. Shows the Coronal Artery of the Heart. FIG. VI. Shows the Venal Artery
arising from the left Ventricle of the Heart. A Its Orifice. BB Its branches
distributed to the right side of the Lungues. CC Its branches distributed to
the left.



AN EXPLANATION OF THE TABLE OF THE THIRTEENTH BRASS PLATE IN THIS BOOK.
In this Table is laid open to view, the Cartilages of the Larynx with their
Muscles; the Os Hyois with its Muscles; the Tongue, its Nerves and Muscles; the
Uvula with its Muscles; the Tonsils, the Vertebrae of the Neck and its bowing
Muscles.

FIG. I. The external face of the Buckler-like Cartilage. FIG. II. The internal
face of the Buckler-like Cartilage. FIG. III. The hinder view of the Ring-like
Cartilage. FIG. IV. A view of the foremost part of the same Cartilage. FIG. V.
VI. The Cartilages called Arytaenoides. FIG. VII. The Epiglottis. FIG. VIII. A
The Buckler-like Cartilage. BB The pair of Muscles Hyothyroides. CCCC The pair
of Muscles Sternothyroides. DD The small Muscles called Cricothiroides.
FIG. IX. A The external part of the Epiglottis joined to the Larynx. BB The
Muscles Thyroarytaenoides. CC The lateral Muscles Cricoarytaenoides. D The
Ring-like Cartilage. EE The fore part of the windpipe.
FIG. X. A The internal face of the Epiglottis. aa The sticking out of the
cartilages Arytaenoides. BB The Muscles Arytaenoides every where loosed. CC The
Muscles Cricoaritaenoides postici. D The broad part of the Ring-like cartilage.
EE The hinder and membranous part of the windpipe.
FIG. XI. A The Basts of the Os Hyois. BB The horns of the Os Hyois. CC The two
cartilaginous Appendices.
FIG. XII. A The internal face of the Basts of the Os Hyois. BB The internal
face of the horns. CC The two cartilaginous Appendices.
FIG. XIII. A The sides of the Os Hyois. BB The muscles Geniohyoides turned
downwards. CC The internal Geniohyoides commonly called Genioglossi. DDDD The
muscles Sternohyoides. EE The muscles Styloceratohyoides. FFF The Muscles
Coracohyoides. ff The middle tendinous part.
FIG. XIV. A The inferior part of the top of the Tongue. BBBB The muscles
Basioglossi. ssss The nervous substance between the muscles. CC The muscles
Ceratoglossi. DD The muscles Styloglossi. EE The muscles Myloglossi. aa The
Nerves of the Tongue from the fourth conjugation. bb The Nerves of the Tongue
from the seventh conjugation.
FIG. XV. A The Gargareon or Uvula. BB The external pair of Muscles. bb Its
tendon which passes the chink. CC The internal pair of muscles something
compressed. D Part of the Pallat from which the Uvula hangs.
FIG. XVI, and XVII. Shows the Glandulae called Tonsillae. FIG. XVIII. AA The
long muscles bowing the neck. BB The muscles bowing the neck called Scaleni. aa
Part of the Nerves tending to the arms. CC The muscles bowing the Head with the
Mastoides.
FIG. XIX. Shows the seven joints of the neck. FIG. XX. The first joint of the
Neck, in which aa The two holes holding the hinder part of the Head. bb The
holes on the sides which gives passage to the arteries to ascend.
FIG. XXI. The second Vertebra of the Neck. a The tooth-like process. b The
Spina Bifidia.
FIG XXII. a The Spine: the rest is like the other joints.



AN EXPLANATION OF THE TABLE OF THE FOURTEENTH BRASS PLATE IN THIS BOOK.
It contains the Muscles which are conspicuous about the Shoulders, Back,
Loins, and Neck, the Carcass being turned over upon the Belly.
FIG. I. AA The muscles Trapezii in their situation. BB The Rhomboides laid a
little to view. CC DD The broadest muscle of the back, in which CC Shows its
fleshy part. DD Its membranous beginning.
FIG. II. AA Trapezius pulled out of its situation. BB The Rhomboides laid
open in its situation. C The same drawn out of his situation, as yet joined
to the basis of the Scapula. DD Both the Levators of the Scapula. E Serratus
posticus minor in his situation. F Serratus posticus major in his situation.
G The same muscle out of his situation. HH The greatest part of the Musculi
Splenii conspicuous in their situation. II A portion of the Musculi complexi.
KK The Mastoides somewhat separated above. LL The Sacrolumbi not removed out of
their place. MM The longest muscles of the back not separated. NN The
beginnings of the Sacrolumbi and longest muscles united. OO The muscles
Quadrati somewhat laid open.
FIG. III. AA The beginnings of the muscles Sacrolumbi and the longest united.
BBBB The Sacrolumbi something moved out of their place and distinguished in
their tendons. CCCC The longest muscles of the back somewhat removed, and
distinguished into their tendons. DD The Musculi Spinati not separated. E The
Muscle Complexus in its situation. F The same separated from the Head, that so
the rest may come to view. GG The Muscles extending the neck in their
situation. H The fore part of the Mastoides loosed. I The greater right muscle
of the Head, drawn a little out of his place, that so the lesser right muscle
may appear. K The superior oblique muscle of the Head. L The inferior oblique
Muscle.
FIG. IV. AA etc. The Musculus Spinatus pulled out of his place, that so the
tendons may be beheld in their order; they are described at the biggest. BB The
muscles of the Loins called Sacer in his place. CC A porrion of the muscles
Quadrati in their place. DD The muscles Spinati in their place. EE The
transverse muscles of the neck deciphored greater and longer than they should
be, that so the tendons may be the better seen. FF The Mastoides separated from
the Sternum, and turned back. GG The inferior oblique muscles of the Head. HH
The superior oblique muscles of the head. II The greater right muscles of the
head something drawn aside. KK The lesser right muscles of the head in their
place.



AN EXPLANATION OF THE TABLE OF THE FIFTEENTH BRASS PLATE IN THIS BOOK.
This Table contains the Muscles of the Face and inferior Jaw; also the bones
of the Skull, and of both Jaws.
FIG. I. AA The skin of the Head detracted. BB The fleshy Pannicle separated.
CC The Pericranium detracted. DD The Skull bare. E The muscle of the Forehead.
FF The muscle that shuts the Eyelids. G The first muscle of the Nose. H The
second muscle of the Nose. I The muscle dilating the wings. K The muscle of the
first pair lifting up the Lips. L The muscle drawing the Lip upwards. M The
muscle drawing the Lip downwards. NN The muscle shutting the Lips. O The
Buccinator. PP The temporal muscle in his place. Q The muscle lifting up the
Ear. R The muscle drawing the Ear obliquely. S The muscle Masseter in his
place. TT The muscle Digastricus moved from his beginning.
FIG. II. AAA The temporal muscle out of his place, the Jaw^ being dissected.
aa Its acute insertion into the process of the Jaw. BB The Masseter separated.
CC The Digastricus loosed at the end, and drawn aside. DD The internal
Pterygoides. EEEE The external Pterygoides. F The Musculus Quadratus, or
musculous Expansion separated.
FIG. III. A The bone of the forehead. aaa The Coronal Suture. a The hole of
the bone of the forehead for the Nerve of the third pair. B The right bone of
the sore part of the Head. bb The Sagittal Suture. C The left bone of the sore
part of the Head. D The bone of the Temples. cc The false Suture. d The Duglike
process. e The process of the Os Jugalis. E The first bone of the upper Jaw. F
The Jugal process. G The second bone of the Jaw hid with the shadow of the
former. H The third bone. I The fourth bone of the Jaw. i The hole in it for
the Nerve of the third pair. K The fist bone. L The lower Jaw. l The hole in it
for the Nerve of the fourth pair to pass out. M The sharp process of the
inferior Jaw. N The blunt process of the inferior Jaw.
FIG. IV. A The left bone of the sore part of the Head. aa The sagittal Suture.
B The right bone of the fore part of the Head. bb The Suture Lambdois. C The
bone of the hinder part of the Head. D The triangular bone. PH A portion of the
bone of the Temples with the Duglike process.
FIG. V. AA The cavity of the bone of the hinder part of the Head within the
Skull, in which the Cerebellum lies. B The internal face of the Os Sphenois. CC
The Os Ethmois. D The cavity of the bone of the forehead above the Nose. aa The
first hole in the wedglike bone. aa The second hole. bb The third hole. cc The
fixed hole. The seventh hole. dd The fifth hole. ee The first hole of the bone of
the Temples. ff The rocky process of the bones of the Temples. gg The third
hole of the bones of the Temples. hh The fourth and ^f^ hole of the hinder part
of the Head.
FIG. VI. AA The lower part of the hone of the hinder part of the Head
conspicuous. aa The process by which the hinder part of the Head is joined to
the first Vertebra of the Neck. BB Part of the bone of the Temples. CC The
duglike process. DD The bodkinlike appendix. EE The jugal process. F The
External face of the Wedglike bone. G H G H The winglike processes. I The bone
which distinguishes the Nostrils. KK The sixth bone of the upper Jaw. kk The
hole which passes the Nerve of the fourth pair to the Pallat. LL Part of the
fourth bone of the superior Jaw. m The four Teeth called Cutters. nn The two
dog teeth. oo The rest of the Teeth called Grinders.



AN EXPLANATION OF THE TABLE OF THE SIXTEENTH BRASS PLATE IN THIS BOOK.
This Table shows, the Brain laid bare from the Skull, with the Dura and Pia
Matter; also its Cavities and Processes.
FIG. I. AA The Dura Matter covering the Brain. aa The Veins and Arteries
distributed on it. B The Brain covered only with the Pia Matter. bb The
Circumvolutions of the Brain. ccc The Vessels distributed to the Pia Matter from
the third Cavity. C The Dura Matter drawn backwards.
FIG. II. AA The longer Process of the Dura Matter called Falx, turned out of
its Situation. aa The third cavity of the Dura Matter open. bb The lesser
inferior cavity of the same. BB A portion of the callous body laid to view.
CCCC The brain deduced a little to the sides. cccc The vessels in the fourth
cavity, stretched over the callous body. DD The Dura Matter hanging down on each
side.
FIG. III. AA The substance of the Brain. BB The callous body drawn a little
outward. bb The two Legs of the Vault something uncovered. C The hooklike
process drawn backwards. DD The right fore ventricle opened on the upper part.
EE The left fore Ventricle opened on the upper part. FF The Plexus Choroides. G
Part of the Speculum Lucidum. HH The Dura Meninx detracted on each side.
FIG. IV. AA The brain explained by equal Section. B The Fornix taken up and
bowed downwards. CC The superior part of the right fore ventricle deducted. DD
The superior part of the left fore ventricle in like manner explained. E The
chink designing the third Ventricle. FF The Dura Matter. a The Glandula
Pinealis. bb The Protuberances, called Buttocks. cc The Protuberances called
Testicles d The Protuberance likned to a woman's Privities. These are better
expressed in the first Figure of the following Table.
FIG. V. AA. BB. CC. The brain and foremost ventricles explained in their upper
part. f A portion of the Plexus Choroides stretched upwards by the foremost
ventricles D The shorter process of the Dura Matter. EEE The longer process
thereof. F The Torcular of Herophilus. G The Dura Matter detracted. a The first
cavity of the Dura Matter. b The second cavity of the Dura Matter. ccc The third
cavity of the Dura Matter. ddd The lesser cavity in the hooklike process. e The
fourth cavity of the Dura Matter.
FIG. VI. AA BB CC ff signify the same they did in the fifth Figure. DD The
Cerebellum conspicuous in his natural place. E The wormlike process of the
Cerebellum. FF The Dura Matter hanging down. GG The same with the cavities
rolled downwards.



AN EXPLANATION OF THE TABLE OF THE SEVENTEENTH BRASS PLATE IN THIS BOOK.
This Table presents in larger Figures the Cavities both of the Brain and
Cerebellum, as they are showed by the Dissections of the Ancients.
FIG. I. Shows the inferior Cavity of the foremost Ventricles of the Brain, the
original of the optic Nerves, the fourth Ventricle with its Protuberances, the
Legs of the Vault, and whatsoever Arantius compared by the Seahorse, or
Silkworm. AAAA The Dura Matter detracted. B The Process of the sieve-like Bone
like a crist. CC Part of the Os Sphenois, showing it self under the membrane,
the Brain being taken away. DD The foremost process of the Os Sphenois, making
the Cavity of the Saddle. EEEE A portion of the Brain left. F The foremost leg
of the Vault bowed forewards. GG The hinder legs of the Vault. HH The
Seahorse, or Silkworms of Arantius. IIII The inferior Cavity of the foremost
ventricles. K The extremity of the callous body sticking out like Buttocks. L
The Glandula Pinealis. MM The Protuberances called Testicles. NN The cavity
between the Brain and Cerebellum commonly called the fourth ventricle. OOOO
Part of the Plexus Chorois bowed backwards, which is carried by the superior
cavity of the ventricles. PP The foremost portion of the Basis of the Brain. Q
The bottom of the third ventricle in which behind is the hole likned to the
Fundament; it tends to the beginning of the marrow of the back; before is the
hole compared to the womb, and is carried to the Funnel. RRRR A portion of the
Plexus Chorois turned backwards, which is extended to the fourth inferior
cavity. SS The roots of the optic Nerves. T The uniting of the optic Nerves.
VV The optic Nerves again severed and passing toward the Eyes.
FIG. II. This Figure shows the proper Ventricle of the Cerebellum, which the
best Anatomists call the fourth Ventricle. AAAA Each lobe of the Cerebellum
whole. BBBB The internal face of the Cerebellum laid open by incision. CC The
worm-like Process of the Cerebellum whose superior and round part is taken
away. DD The proper Ventricle of the Cerebellum, with its two cavities. E The
prominence conspicuous between the two cavities. F The passage from the third
ventricle to the marrow of the back. G The Cavity of the marrow of the back
like a pen. H The chink in the said cavity. I^ The descending trunk of the
marrow of the back cut off.



AN EXPLANATION OF THE TABLE OF THE EIGHTEENTH BRASS PLATE IN THIS BOOK.
This Table shows the rise of the Nerves within the Skull, also the principal
branches of the third and fourth pairs, the Glandula Pituitaria with the
Funnel, the Rete Mirable, the fourth Ventricle and the most special Veins
arising from the marrow of the Back.
FIG. I. Shows the Brain a great portion of it being taken away above with the
Cerebellum diducted to the side. A The Nerve of smelling. a Its process called
Mamillaris. B The Optic Nerve or first pair. CC The Nerve of the second pair.
DD The Nerve of the third pair. EE The Nerve of the fourth pair. FF The Nerve
of the fifth pair. GG The Nerve of the sixth pair. The Nerve of the seventh pair
by reason of its deep rise appears not.
F. I G. II. The side of the skull being broken off, together with the Eye
whole, and the cheek divided, is showed. A The Nerve of the third pair. B Its
branch which goes out at the hole of the bone of the forehead. C A branch of
the same pair which goes out by the hole of the fourth bone of the upper Jaw. D
The Nerve of the fourth pair. E Its branch which goes to the teeth and gums of
the upper Jaw. F Its branch which is carried to the Tongue. G Its branch which
enters the lower Jaw. H The same branch which passes out at the hole of the
lower Jaw.
FIG. III. The Brain with the Marrow of the back being turned, these things
come to view. AA The Nerves of swelling. aa Their Dug-like processes. BB The
two legs of the Nerves of the first pair. CC The greater branch of the Artery
Carotis, the interior being joined to the Vertebral Artery OO D The* Glandula
Pituataria. E The Funnel. F The Protuberances of the Brain, set before the
passage which carries the slegm to the Funnel. GG The Nerves of the second pair
cut off. HH The beginnings of the Nervs of the third pair. II The beginning of
the Nervs of the fourth pair. KK The beginning of the Nerves of the fifth pair.
LL The beginning of the Nervs of the sixth pair. MM The beginning of the Nervs
of the seventh pair NNN The beginning of the marrow of the back, between the
skull and the first Vertebra. OO The common branch of the Vertebral artery,
which being divided after its union with the Carotis artery CC makes up the
Rete mirabile with it, about the seat of the wedg-like bone. PPPP Small branches
of Arteries called the Rete mirabile.
FIG. IV. AA The Cerebellum and his globes. B The wormlike process of the
Cerebellum. CCCC The process of the Cerebellum, called the bridge. DD The
beginning of the marrow of the back. E The cavity of the marrow of the back,
called the pen. F The fourth Ventricle laid open.
FIG. V. A The trunk of the marrow of the back descending as it may be
publicly showed being taken out of the body. BB The branches arising from the
three pairs of Nerves of the Neck, and two of the Breast, to be distributed to
the hands. bb The small branches running to the muscles of the shoulder. CC The
first pair of Nerves of the hands. DD The second pair. EE The third pair. FF
The fourth pair. GG The fifth pair. HH The sixth pair called Subcutaneus. IIII
The pairs of intercostal Nerves, the two lower most of which pertain to the
Loins. K The first pair which is carried to the Foot. LL The second pair. MM
The third pair. NN The fourth and greatest pair. O The small Nervs of the marrow
of the back, which are carried to the bladder and muscles of the Fun dament,
and to the Genitals of both Sexes.



AN EXPLANATION OF THE TABLE of the ninteenth Brass Plate in this Book.
This Table comprehends the Eyelids with the Muscle called Levator; also the
proper Muscles of the Eyes; the Membranes and the Humors included in the
Membranes.
FIG. I. AA The Levator muscle of the superior Eyelid. B Its tendon thinly
opened. CC The Cartilages of the Eyelids. DD The Caruncle in the internal
angle. dd The Puncta Lacrymalia. E The external angle of the Eyelid.
FIG. II. AA The Fat behind the Eyes. BBB The muscles of the Eyes not
separated. CC Part of the Eye covered with the tendons of the muscles.
FIG. III. A The right muscle lifting up the Eye. aaa etc. Small Nerves
carrying motion, sense, and spirit. B The right muscle depressing the Eye. C
The right muscle drawing to the Eye. D The right muscle drawing the Eye from. E
The inferior oblique mascle, whose tendon is but only separated from the part
of that which follows. F The superior oblick muscle. G The Trochlea of the same
muscle. H The Sclerotes covering the hinder part of the Eye. II A portion of
the Optic Nerve inserted into the Eye.
FIG. IV. Shows a Sheeps Eye, and in it the seventh muscle which Man needs not.
A B C D The four right muscles. E The inferior oblick muscle, which here is
large. F The superior oblick muscle which is slender. G The Trochlea of the
superior oblick muscle. H The seventh muscle of Brutes drawing the Eye to. I
The hinder part of the Eye covered with the tendon of the seventh muscle. K A
part of the optic Nerve included in the sevent^h muscle.
FIG. V. ABCD Show the ame with the former, the oblick muscles being removed.
aaaa The common membrane called Innominata. bb The Iris transparent through the
Corns.
FIG. VI. AAA The Membrane Sclerotes dissected. B The Membrana Cornea. C A part
of the optic Nerve.
FIG. VII. A The Membrana Uvea. a The hole in the Uvea or Pupilla. BB The
Ciliar Ligament with its strings. CC The Membrana Choroides looking black.
FIG. VIII. AA The Net-like Membrane. aa A Rupture in it upon the Vitrial,
which by reason of its softness is unavoidable in a Dissection. BBB The
Membrana Choroides not yet separated. CCC The thickness of the Membrane
Sclerotes. D Part of the optic Nerve.
FIG. IX. The three humors of the Eyes received in a Vessel. A The Crystalline
Humor posited in the Cavity of the Vitrial. BB Some appearance of the Ciliar
strings. CC The Vitrial humor. DD The aqucal humor, being but little, and
placed round about the Vitrial.



AN EXPLANATION of the TABLE of the twenteth brass Plate in this Book.
This Table represents the external Ear with his Muscles and Cartilages, as
also the internal or chief Organ of Hearing, its Cavities, Bones, Passages and
Nerves, as they are found out by Dissection of such Bodies as are grown up.
FIG. I. Shows the external Ear whole, with its muscles and Cavities. AA The
Helix of the Ear. BB The Anthelix. C The Tragus, or beard of the Ear. D The
Antitragus. E The external lobe of the Ear. FF The external Concha of the Ear.
GG The cavity between the Helices called Innominata. H The muscle moving the
Ear right upwards. III The three-sold muscle with his tendon moving the Ear
oblickly upwards, divided into so many parts.
FIG. II. Shows the external Ear con spicuous behind. AA The skin with the
Membrane stretched upwards and downwards. BB The Cartilage which makes the Ear.
C The hole for the passage of heaving. D A portion of the Ligament of the
external Ear. E Part of the Lobus of the Ear.
FIG. III. Shows the fore part of the interna! Ear. A Part of the bone of the
Temples containing the rocky process. B The passage of hearing. C The beginning
of the passage or hive. D The duglike process. E The bodkinlike process broken
off.
FIG. IV. The bone of the foregoing Figure is showed, in which the passage of
hearing is cut off, that so the membrane of the Timpanum may be seen. AA The
beginning of the passage of hearing. BB The membrane of the Timpanum. C The
little foot of the Mallcus transparent by the membrane. D The duglike process.
E The bodkinlike appendix.
FIG. V. Shows the Muscles of the internal Ear. A The muscle moving the
membrane and Malcolus outward. B The membrane of the Timpanum. CC The muscle
moving the Malleolus and membrane inwards. E The head of the Malleolus.
FIG. VI. A Part of the passage of Hearing passing to the Timpanum. BC The
cavity of the Timpanum, in which B The oval hole. C The round hole.
FIG. VII Shows the rocky process with the small bones of the Timpanum in their
situation. A The Mallcolus. B The Anvil. C The superior part of the stirrup
conspicuous. DD The bowing of the Cochlea.
FIG. 7. Shows the three small bones out of their situation. A The Malleolus
with its two processes, its short and long. B The Anvil applied to the
Malleolus. C The Stirrup. D The small bone joined to the Ligament of the
stirrup.
FIG. VIII. Shows the inferior face of the bone of the Temples. AA The
extremity of a quil thrust through that passage of Hearing which is carried to
the pallat. BB Shows the same passage broke off from the next part.
FIG. IX. AA The cavity of the Cochlea, whose broader part goes to the
Labyrinth. BB The cavity of the Labyrinth, in which the oval hole is
conspicuous: also four other holes which open themselves in the circles are
obumbrated by a black color: the fifth in the extremity of the circle of the
Cochlea, is broken off. If you would see how they are in Insants, look the
eighth Table, and the seventh figure.
FIG. X. AA The beginning of the passage of the first hole of the bone of the
Temples, into which the Nerve of Hearing passes. BB The rocky process of the
bone of the Temples, in which the cavities are contained.
FIG. XI. A B C D The end of the passage into which the Nerve of Hearing
proceeds laid open, the bone being taken away. B The cavity in which the softer
portion of the Nerve of Hearing lies in the Center of the Cochlea. C The
process between* each portion of the Nerve standing up like a bridge. D Another
cavity called Caecum by the Ancients, Aquaeductus by Fallopius, by which the
harder portion of the nerve of hearing obliquely descends. EE Two footsteps of
the circles in the Labyrinth, which you may see whole, Table 8. figure 7, 8.
FIG. XII. Contains a portion of the bone of the Temples, in which the Timpanum
being taken away, and the passage which contains the Nerve of Hearing there
appears. AA The softer portion of the nerve of Hearing. BB The harder portion
of the nerve of Hearing, obliquely descending under the Timpanum, being thicker
about the place it goes out. CC A small Nerve from the fourth pair ^oyning it
self to the harder nerve of Hearing.



An EXPLANATION of the TABLE of the one and twentieth Brass Plate in this Book.
This Table exactly presents the Bones of Man to your view, so that the
Composition of the Bones we mentioned before in the Abdomen, Breast, and Head
are here seen, especially the Bones of the Hands and Feet are seen both before
and behind; also the Ligaments of the Thigh and Tibia; lastly, the Bones called
Sesamoides are curiously represented.

FIG. I. Shows the Sceleton of a Body grown up. AA The internal side of each
Scapula. BB Both the Claviculae. CC The bone of the shoulder, otherwise called
the bone of the arm. aa The head of the shoulder produduced from the appendix.
bb The external bunch of each shoulder. cc The internal bunch of the shoulder.
DD The bone of the Cubit called Radius. EE The bone of the Cubit called Ulna.
FF The eight bones of the Carpus. GG The thumb composed of three bones. HH The
Metacarpus composed of four bones. II The four fingers composed of three bones.
KK The thigh which some call Crus. LL The Mola, or Knee-pan. dd The head of the
bone of the thigh, or superior appendix. ee The neck of the bone of the thigh.
ff Trochanter, or Rotator major. gg Trochanter, or Rotator minor. hh The
appendix, or infertor head of the thigh. MM The Tibia. NN The Fibula. ii The
internal ancle. kk The external ancle. OO The seven bones of the Tarsus
conspicuous before. PP The five bones of the Metatarsus. QQ The bones of the
toes, of which the great toe has two, and the rest three apiece. ** etc. The
appendices of the shoulder, Radius, Thigh, Tibia, distinguished by a small line
from the rest of the bone.
FIG. II. Contains the Scapula with the Clavicula, to which the bones of the
Shoulder, Cubit, and Hand are joined. A The left Clavicula, in which a The head
which is lightly finewous where it is committed to the Sternum. b The other
extremity of the Clavicula, whereby it is joined to the process of the Scapula.
B The Scapula. c The short process of the Scapula receiving the shoulder. d The
process of the Scapula called Coracois. e The process of the Scapula called
Spina. f The superior angle. g The inferior angle. bh The basis of the Scapula.
C The notable hinder bone of the shoulder. f The greater or backward cavity of
the bone of the shoulder. g The crooked process of the bone of the Ulna. D The
bone Ulna. E The Radius. F The external face of the Wrest. G The Metacarpus
consisting of four bones. H The Thumb consisting of three bones. II The orders
of the fingers.
FIG. III. Contains the eight bones of the Wrest expressed largely, that so
they might be the better distinguished. FIG. IV. Shows the Os Ischium, Illium,
and Pubis, and under them, the thigh leg, and Foot. A The external face of the
Os Ilium B The Acetabulum which receives the head of the thigh. C The thigh
conspicuius behind, in which a The superior appendix. b Trochanter major. fire
The rough line of the thigh. c Trochanter minor. d The posterior cavity of the
inferior appendix. ee The heads of the inferior appendix. f The protuberances
distinguishing the cavities of the Tibia. D The Tibia conspicuous behind. g The
internal ancle. E The Fibula. h The external ancle. ** The appendices of the
Tibia. F The Tarsus. G The Metatarsus. H The great toe consisting of two bones.
FIG. V. Propounds the bones of the Tarsus distinctly, in which A Os Astragali.
B Os Calcanei. C Os Cymbiforme. D Os Cubiforme. EEE The three other Wedlike
bones.
FIG. VI. Show the four greater and four lesser bones called Sesamoides. FIG.
VII. Shows the superior part of the thigh with the Acetabulum. aa A broad
Ligament compassing the joint of the thigh dissected. b A round Ligament
arising out of the Acetabulum.
FIG. VIII. The inferior part of the Thigh and superior part of the Leg is
showed. a A broad Ligament compassing the Joyat. b A Ligament produced out of
the Sepiment. cc The cavities of the Tibia receiving the thigh. d The knee-pan
with a portion of the tendon joined to it.



AN EXPLANATION OF THE TABLE of the two and twentieth Brass Plate in this Book.
This Table comprehends the Muscles which move the Shoulder, Cubit, and Hand:
of which the greater part stick to their beginnings and ends.
FIG. I. A Musculus Deltoides separated from the beginning B Infrascapularis
separated. C Rotundus minor. D Rotundus major. E The pectoral muscle separated
from the breast, vide Chap. IX. F The fleshy portion of the broadest muscle of
the back, vide Chap. XII. G Musculus Biceps. H The lesser muscle lifting up the
shoulder in his Situation. II The Brachiaeus under the Biceps. K The muscle
Palmaris hanging from its original. L A portion of the Supinator. M The
external bower of the Wrest. N The internal bower of the Wrest. O The bower of
the second Internodium of the fingers. P The bower of the third Internodium of
the fingers. Q The bowers of the first Internodium of the thumb in their first
situation. R The bowers of the second Internodium of the thumb in their
situation. S The Abductor of the little finger. aa The internal face of the
Scapula. b The tendon of the muscle Palmaris. c A portion of the tendon which
bows the third Internodium of the thumb. d The Ligament of the urest in its
situation.
FIG. II. A The lesser muscle lifting up the shoulder. B The muscle Brachiaeus
whole. C The round Pronator of the Radius. D The bower of the third Internodium
of the thumb out of his situation. E The square Pronator of the Radius. F The
bowers of the first Internodium of the thumb out of their situation. G The
bowers of the second Internodium of the thumb out of their situation. aa The
internal side of the Scapula. b Os Humeri. c Os Radii. d Os Ulnae. ee The
membranous Ligament of the Ulna and Radius. ffff The muscles commonly called
Adductors. h The Abductor of the little finger.
FIG. III. A The first Suprascapularis removed out of his place. B The second
Suprascapularis. C Rotundus minor. D Rotundus major. E The long muscle
extending the Cubit. F The short extender of the Cubit. G The internal extender
of the wrest. H The external extender of the wrest, having here but one tendon.
I The special Abductor of the fore finger with but one tendon. K The extendors
of the second and third Internodij of the fingers united. L The extendor of the
third Internodium of the thumb. M The extendor of the first Internodium of the
thumb, having here but one single body and tendon. aa The process of the
Scapula called Spiniformis. a The muscle Anconeus. bb The bone of the shoulder.
c The external knob of the shoulder. d The internal knob of the shoulder. e The
tendines which extend the second and third Internodium gathered together. ff
etc. The tendons of the same muscles applying to the Internodij. g The annular
Ligament of the wrest loosed.
FIG. IV. A The external face of the Scapula. B The bone of the shoulder
covered with the Periostinum. C Os Radij. D Os Ulnae. E The muscle of the
Radius called Supinator longus. F The muscle of the Radius called Supinator
brevis. G The muscle Anconeus. H The membranous Ligament of the Radius and
Ulna. IIII The three interosseal muscles with their Auxiliary. K The Abductor
of the thumb.
FIG. V. A The muscle bowing the second Internodium of the fingers called
Perforatus. aa etc. Their tendons. B The muscle bowing the third internodium of
the fingers called Perforans. bb Its tendines passing through the clefts of the
tendines of the former. CCCC The muscles bowing the first Internodium, or
Lumbricals. DD The bowers of the thumb in their situation. cc A portion of the
tendon bowing the third internodium of the thumb.



AN EXPLANATION OF THE TABLE of the three and twentieth Brass Plate in this
Book.
This Table shows the Muscles produced by Nature for the various motions of the
Thighs, Legs, and Feet.
FIG. I. A The greater part of the muscle called Psoas, which you may see in
Table x. figure 1. in its Natural situation, here it is separated from its
beginning, and joined to the internal Iliack muscle, and descends to the thigh.
B The internal Iliack muscle. CC The muscle Triceps something uncovered: you
may see it whole in the ne^t Figure. D Musculus Lividus. E The membranous muscle
conspicuous with a fleshy body about his beginning, whose broad tendon is
separated from the parts under it. FF The right muscle. GG Musculus vastus
externus. HH Musculus vastus internus. II Musculus facialis. K Musculus
Tibialis anticus. LL Musculus Peroneus secundus. MM The Extendor of the third
internodium of the toes. N The extender of the third internodium of the great
toe. aa The appendix of the Os Ilium laid open before. b The extremity of the
Os Pubis. cccc The tendon of the membranous Muscle. dd A portion of the muscle
Gasterocnemius hanging out, the leg being depressed: the third Figure shows it
hanging out of its situation under the character KK. e The membranous Ligament
of the Tibia and Fibula. ffff The tendines of the muscles extending the third
Internodium. g The transverse Ligament of the foot separated.
FIG. II. A The internrl face of the Os Ilium. B A portion of the great muscle
Glutaeus, which the following figure represents separated from the middle
Glutaeus. CCC Musculus Triceps. DD A portion of the Gasterocnemius and Soleus
as yet joined. EE Tibialis posticus. FF Peroneus primus. G The extender of the
second internodium of the toes in its situation. aaaa The interosseal muscles.
FIG. III. A Glutaeus major separated and depressed to the side. B Glutaeus
medius in his situation. C Musculus Pyriformis. D The fourth muscle moving the
thigh about. E Obturator internus entering the fleshy purse. FF Musculus
gracilis. GG Musculus Seminervosus. HH Musculus Semimembranosus elegantly
expressed. III Musculus Biceps. KK The Gasterocnemius turned backwards, to
whose beginnings two small bones called Sasamoides stick. LL Musculus soleus in
his situation. M The little muscle called Plantaris. N The tendon spread
abroad from the heel under the soal of the foot. O The Abductor of the great
toe. P The Abductor of the little toe. Q The interosseal muscle pertaining to
the little toe. aa The brim of the Os Ilium. b The fleshy purse.
FIG. IV. A The internal face of the Os Ilium. B Musculus Glutaeus minor in his
situation. C Musculus Glutaeus medius out of his situation. D Musculus
Pyriformis. E The fourth muscle moving the thigh about. ^ The external
Obturator. F The internal Obturator. G The fleshy purse. H Musculus Popliteus.
II Musculus perforans. K The muscle bowing the third internodium of the great
toe. L Musculus perforatus in his situation. M The Abductor of the little toe.
N The Abductor of the great toe in his situation.
FIG. V. a The greater Adductor of the great toe. bb The Abductor of the great
toe. c The Abductor of the little toe. dddd The internal interosseal Muscles. e
The lesser Adductor of the great toe.
FIG. VI. A The muscle Perforatus which bows the second internodium. B The
bower of the third internodium of the great toe. C Musculus perforans, or the
bower of the third internodium. DD A portion of the musculous flesh joined to
the beginnings of the lumbrical muscles. eeee The lumbrical muscles. ffff The
interosseal muscles with the Abductors of the great and little toe.



AN EXPLANATION OF THE TABLE of the four and twentieth Brass Plate in this Book.
This last Table shows the Veins, Arteries, and Nerves of the extreme Parts,
being not careful of the smallest branches, the huge multitude of which would
obscure the greater, and dull the Brain of the Learner: The most famous are
delineated, such as are showed publicly in the Theater in Dissection of Men of
perfect age.
FIG. I. Shows the Veins distributed to the Hand. A The axillar branch of the
Vena Cava. BBB Vena Cephalica. CCC Vena Basilica. a The external Scapular. b
The branch of the Cephalica, which is carried to the Deltois. c d Branches of
the Cephalica distributed to the bowers of the arm. e The deep branch of the
Cephalica. ff The internal branch of the Cephalica making the Median. g The
Median vein descending. h The Cephalica of the Hand. ii The external branch of
the Cephalica. ^ The Salvatella of the Hand. k The internal Scapular. l The
superior breast-vein. m The inferior breast-vein. nnn The Basilick branches
carried to the Extendors of the Cubit. oo The deep branch of the Basilica. p A
singular branch of the deep branch, which is carried out to the cubit, with the
fourth pair of Nerves. q The external branch of the deep basilical. r The
internal branch of the same. s The Subcutaneus branch of the basilica. tt The
internal branch of the Subcutaneus branch, which with the cephalical, procures
the median. u Its branch joining it self to the common vein. x The external
vein of the Subcutaneus branch of the Basilica. yy The greater branch of the
external Subcutaneus. z The lesser branch of the same.
FIG. II. The Arteries distributed to the Arm. A The axillar branch of the
artery. a The internal scapular. b The external scapular. c The superior
Breast-artery. d The inferior breast-artery. e f g Branches of the artery
distributed to the muscles of the shoulder. hhh Branches of the artery
distributed to the joint of the Elbow. B The external branch of the artery in
the cubit. C The internal branch. ii The branch which is carried to the muscles
of the Radius. k The branch carried to the muscles of the Ulna. l m n o
Branches carried from the internal branch to the wrest, little, ring and middle
finger. pp Branches carried to the hands from the external branch. qq r s
Branches pertaining to the thumb, fore, and middle finger.
FIG. III. Designs the Nerves distributed to the hand. 4 5 6 7. The four
Vertebrae of the Neck. 1. The first Verbra of the breast. a b c d The five
Nerves proceeding out of the holes of the Vertebrae. ff The first pair of
Nerves descending from the plexure *. ^. gg The second pair. hh The third pair.
ii The fourth pair bigger than the rest. kk The fifth pair. ll The sixth pair
which is subcutaneus.
FIG. IV. Contains the veins of the foot. A The crural branch of the Vena Cava.
aaaa The Vein Saphena. bbb The branches of the Saphena distributed by the
interior part of the thigh. cc The Vein Ischias. dd The internal Musculae. ee
The external Muscula. fff The vein Poplitea consisting of a double beginning.
gg The internal branch of the crural vein. hh The external branch of the same.
i The first branch of the external crural. kk The second branch of the same. ll
The remainder of the same. m The vein of the foot called Ischias.
FIG. V. Contains the Arteries of the Foot. AAA The crural Artery produced from
the external Iliack branch of the great Artery. a The artery Pudenda. b The
artery carried to the internal Iliack muscle. c The artery Ischias. dd The
external Muscula. e The internal Muscula. ffff The arteries distributed to the
membrane and fat. gg The artery Poplitea. hh The arteries called Surals. ii The
foremost branch of the crural artery. kk The first hindmost branch of the same.
ll The second hindermost branch of the same.
FIG. VI. Represents the Nerves of the Foot. 2. 3. 4. 5. The four Vertebrae of
the Loins. 66 The Os Sacrum. A A pair of Nerves pertaining to the tranverse
muscles of the Abdomen. BB The first pair of Nerves of the foot. CC The second
pair. aaa A branch of the same which accompanies the Saphena. bb The remainder
of the same branch. DD The third pair of of the Nerves of the foot. EEE The
fourth pair, which is the greatest. c Its Branch which turns back to the
Buttocks and skin of the thigh. ddd Branches sent to the bowers of the leg.
eeee Branches sent to the bowers of the Thigh. f A branch sent to the muscle
Plantaris and the extenders of the Tarsus. g* h Two external branches sent to
the toes and the muscles of the Fibula. i The internal branch carried to the
great and second toe. k* l The internal branches sent to the sural muscles. m
The remainder of the Nerve of the sixth pair, dispersed by a double branch under
the foot to the toes.
FIG. VII Shows the Basilica vein open, in which three shutters appear. FIG.
VIII. Shows a branch of the crural vein open, and three double, and one single
shutter. FIG. IX. and X. Show a portion of the Nerve of the fourth pair divided
into small Nerves like threeds, in gathering together of which, the wonderful
power of Nature appear^.



