A true Prospect For the BISHOPS, Priests and Deasons.

And all other within the jurisdiction of the Church of England, who are
Professors of the Common Prayer, through which they may see how far they are
short in Faith, Principle and practice of diverse sound truths therein specified.

Also the proper right of the Quakers, to diverse good things therein vindicated
and pleaded for, which no other people upon the earth can justly challenge.

And instead of being persecuted, the Quakers ought to be protected by the Laws
of King Edward the sixth Queen Eliz. Charles the 1st. and Charles the Second,
which established the book of Common Prayer, in Equity and Right Reason, which
is the life of all just Laws.

Whereunto is annexed diverse of the Priests practices, for which they have no
proof in the Scripture.

Published by a lover of truth and Righteousness where ever it appears, known
by the name of Ambrose Rigg.

And this is the confidence that we have in God, that if we ask any thing
according to his will, he hears (...) John 5. 14. But let him ask in Faith
nothing wavering for he that wavereth is like a Wave of the Sea, driven with
the winds, and to s^ed, Jam. 1. 6. For let not that man think that he shall
receive any thing from God, Verse 7. Printed for. M. W.

To the moderate and Courteous READER,
MY principle end and aim in this small Treatise, is to set forth, and
vindicate the sound and ancient Truth in the Common Prayer Book, as it is now
established, and to bring the same forth, as the Sun from under the Clouds,
that they may shine in brightness to the ends of the earth* which thou will
find true, if thou read over this small book with a single eye, and not
stumble at my plain downright dealing, with the men who so much cries up that
book at this day, and yet cannot away with those who answers the same in life
and practice, even every particular thereof, which is gathered out of the
Scriptures; and only denies those things, and them for practicing those
things, which are not taken out of the Scripture, wherein does lie the great
difference between them at this day, wherein the Lord is bringing to light many
things which long has laid hid and vaild in secret, and is revealing the
Mysteries of his Kingdom unto his sons and daughters, servants and handmaids:
And all Superstition, and superstitious Ceremonies* he will utterly deface and
demolish* though never so strongly fortified outwardly, and will set up his own
righteousness and way of worship, which is in spirit and truth according to the
testimony of his Son in former Ages. John 4. 24. In which alone he will
manifest his love, power, presence, and virtue, unto mankind again in the way
of their recovery from the snares of death and darkness, under which their
souls have long mourned, that they may set forth his noble Acts, and declare
his wondrous works unto generations to come. And for this cause he has raised
up many at this day to testify unto his Name and power, and is leading them
from one Nation to another people (...) testimony unto his Son who is come into
the world to save sinners and to finish transgression in the earth, that his
praise may be perfected among the Sons of men, and he will suffer one Potshard
of the earth to dash in pieces another, until this be accomplished, and no
weapon formed against this decree shall prosper, for this is that cause for
which he ever appeared in any age and time whatsoever, and for which he has
manifestly appeared in diverse manners in this our age, and has overturned many
high Mountains of the earth that he might fully vindicate his own truth where
ever it appears without respect to rich or poor, bond or free, male or
female, high or low, but in every Nation they who fear him and work
righteousness he will accept, that no flesh may glory before him who is rich in
mercy, and tender in compassion, to all who early seek his face inrighteousness.

Therefore be not rash, nor inconsiderate in these things which are of great
moment, but weigh every sentence in the balance of equity, so will thou come
to a right understanding of the truth herein declared.

And my end is not in this treatise that the Priests who so grossly abuses their
own principles and Prayers, should be destroyed with a carnal weapon, (for my
weapon to them is not carnal) but that they may come to repentance, and find
mercy with the Lord, and that the people may be truly founded upon the Rock of
Ages, never more to slide nor fall: and for this does my soul travail in
suffering and heaviness even to this day, waiting for the promotion of that
truth spoken of in the book of Common Prayer, which the Scriptures of the
Prophets, Christ and the Apostles bears witness unto, in patience enduring all
things till the words of God be fulfilled.

written the 22. day of the 4th. month 1663. Who am a lover of Righteousness
and truth, and a sufferer for the same, Called, Ambrose Rigge.

A true prospect for the Bishops, Priests and Deacons, and all other within the
Jurisdiction of the Church of England, etc.
GOd who in the beginning made man upright in his own image and likeness, and
gave him life and dominion over death and darkness, and the power thereof,
making him an instrument to show forth his praise and glory in the earth, far
above any other living creature which his hand made. In which dominion and life
while man stood, he had the blessing and presence of Almighty God upon him, and
with him, and had perfect dominion over all the Beasts of the field, and the
Fowls of the Air, and knew no sin, neither curse, death nor darkness, but
stood in perfect freedom as the son and heir of God, in whom God had more
delight then any other creature which he made, insomuch that he set him in that
place in which his chiefest delight was, that he might dress it and keep it,
for his Creator to walk in, where also was the tree of life which yielded food
to man, so that he was altogether unsencible of any misery, sorrow, or
tribulation of body, or soul; neither was he in bondage to any creature, but
Lord and Ruler over all the whole creation according to the word of the Lord,
Genesis 1. 28. in which free covenant of life he perfectly stood till the Serpent
grudged his glory, and in the envy sowed a cursed seed which took root in his
heart, since which time has brought forth many wicked branches which has long
cumbred the ground.

And for receiving this and disobeying the word of the Lord, he was disthroned
from all his glory, and was exposed to all misery, and cursedness of body and
soul, with all his seed end race after him, and was driven into the earth from
the presence of the Lord, and then was altogether unsencible of life and
immortallity with God, it being wholly departed from him by reason of
transgression, so that he was only a slave in Satan's kingdom, wholly led
captive at his will, where death and darkness only was, which got dominion over
him, and then he became a degenerate plant of a strange Vine unto God, and
brought forth fruit in which God had no delight, therefore he hid his face from
him, so that man could not find him nor his power and glory.

Then the Lord in love and tender compassion to his stock and race, did raise
up Moses his faithful servant to testify unto his righteousness, though one
not elloquent but of a slow speech, as he himself testifies Exodus 4. 10. yet
him he chose to go unto Pharaoh King of Egypt, to declare his power and glory
to man again, from which he was separated by transgression, by whom he gave
forth his righteous Law, John 1. 17. as a flaming sword which turned every way
upon man in his fallen state under the power of which he was to remain, till
the promised seed was come to break the head and power of the Serpent, which
had thus captivated man unto his will, as is abovesaid: For the recovery of
which the Lord raised up many faithful witnesses to testify unto his power, as
Isaiah Ier. Ezeck. Dan. and the rest, yet in their days did the false Prophet
appear who violated the Law which Moses had given forth and sought for their
gain from their quarter as many do now, and could never have enough Isa. 56.
11. and Jeremiah cried, woe unto the Pastors that did destroy and scatter the
sheep of the Lords pasture, who cried peace unto them who despised the Lord as
such does now, Ier. 23. 1. 17. and Ezekiel. said they fed of the fat, and clothed
of the wool, but they killed them that were fed, unto such he cried woe, Ezekiel.
34. 1. 2. 3. and Hosea said, they were like troops of robbers Hosea 6. 9. and
Micha said, they built up Zion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity, Micha
3. 11. 12. and said the best of them was as a bryer, and the most purest of
them sharper then a thorn hedge, Mic. 6. 4. and Christ said in Matt. 7. Do men
gather grapes of Thorns? for so he described the false Prophets who did rent
and tear the wool from his Lambs which he had chosen, even as they do at this
day, bearing the same mark as the same does at this day; and for this purpose
was the Son of man manifested to convince man of all his ungodly deeds, words
and thoughts, and to make him an instrument of his glory again, and to restore
him into that freedom which he lost by transgression out of the curse, death
and darkness into which he was cast, and for the full perfecting of this great
work did the Son of God lay down his life, which life after it was offered up
was manifested in mortal flesh, and raised up many from the Graves in which
they had long laid dead, by reason of sin, and by the virtue thereof many was
brought into unity with God, and the full enjoyment of his presence again, as
man had before he fell, and was more then conquerors over death, darkness, and
him that had the power thereof, though into this state they came through many
and great tribulations, which they sustained from them in whom the seed of
enmity did rule, who always hated and persecuted them wherever they appeared,
as a cloud of witnesses in the Scripture of truth does testify hereunto.

In that estate did the serpent appear as a beast having great power, and made
war with the Lamb and the Saints of the most high and overcame them, and power
was given unto him over all kindreds, tongues and nations, Rev. 13. 7. to
impose what kind of worship as he would, then he set up the whore spoken of in
Rev. 17. who made all Nations drunk with the wine of her fornication, yea the
Kings of the earth also was made drunk with her cup, verse 2. Since which time
all nations has gone a whoring from the Lord and has worshipped the beast,
and received his image through imposition, being forced by violence into that
which the Lord was not found in, so then a dark and gloomy night overspread the
whole earth, which endured many generations, in which many stumbled and fell,
and went astray like lost sheep, and were made a prey upon by the Owls of the
desert, who then croppe out and ravened for their bellies and sought to the
Kings of the earth, (who was made drunk as aforesaid) to exercise Lordship over
the consciences of thousands, which was granted them, then they invented diverse
kinds of punishments for them who would not worship the beast and receive his
image, Rev. 13. 15, 16. till the earth was wholly void both of the knowledge of
God and his power; and then the night came over the earth wherein no man could
work, then the Devil wrought in darkness, and filled the earth with his power
and violence, till Popery was fully rooted and sprung up into many great
branches, and brought forth much cursed fruit as fire, faggot inquisition,
racking, and renting of the persons of men and women to set up and maintain the
beast in his throne, who had got power over all the kindreds of the earth, in
which dominion he long stood and magnified himself in the greatness of his
strength, saying who is like unto the beast, and who is able to make war with
him.

In this power he stood complete in this Nation until the days of King Edward
the 6th. whom the Lord raised to do mighty and notable acts against this
monster, insomuch that he utterly abolished his power and worship in that way
and form as it then stood, and erected another more near unto the truth and way
of God as he then judged, and called it the Common Prayer, which he established
by Law* enjoining all his Subjects to a conformity thereunto, into which the
Priests readily crept, though such as formerly had read the Mass because it was
like to bring them in some gain, yet notwithstanding there was a thirst in
thousands after righteousness, and the way thereof, yea even in the contrivers
of the aforesaid book, though now the Merchants of Babylon does make a trade
thereof for dishonest gain, who neither desires righteousness nor the way
thereof. So here I shall pass by all the vain Superstitions in he said book
which has no ground in the scriptures, for my principle aim is in this
discourse to instance only those things which are of weight and concernment,
which is the sound truths laid down and inserted in this book, which is
collected out of the scriptures, and many things prayed for in that book which
the Priests say now cannot be received nor attained to, as hereafter I shall
make appear.

So that if any should question us who are called Quakers, why we come not to
hear them read the Common Prayer, or persecute us for not hearing of them.

Our plea is to such, that forasmuch as the teachers of this age who reads the
Common Prayer does deny those solemn covenants which they cause many to take
at the first receiving of a child into their Congregation, causing them to
promise and vow three things in the child's name.

First that he shall forsake the Devil and all his works, and all the sinful
lusts of the flesh, which covenant they say when the child comes of age he is
bound to perform.

And we find by daily experience that when the child comes of age, the Priest
tells him that he cannot forsake all the Devils works, but must have a body of
sin while he is upon the earth, as they commonly do, which is absolutely
contrary to their promise and vow in Baptism, and therefore we deny them as
Covenant-breakers, and turn away from them according to the Apostles command 2 Timothy 3.

Our second plea is, that notwithstanding they injoine the Godfathers and
Godmothers (as they call them) to promise and vow that the child shall keep
Gods will and Commandments, and walk in the same all the days of his life:
and afterward in their preaching says, it is impossible to keep Gods holy will
and Commandments, as many can witness, but break them every day in thought
word and deed as they commonly say. And therefore we turn away from such
confusion in which they (as Babylons Merchants) are daily found answering the
word of the Lord, which says, Come out of her my people, be not pertaker of
her sins, least you partake of her plagues; and we finding them so grossly
overthrowing the foundation principles of the Church of England by their
preaching and practice, that we are neither bound by the law of God, nor right
reason to uphold or follow them.

Yet nevertheless though we deny them for abusing their own principles and
duties which in words they prosess and vow to pursue, yet we retain that pure
principle in life and practice, which brings young and old to forsake the Devil
and all his works, with all the sinful lusts of the flesh, which can never be
performed or kept by the carnal man in his will, though he may promise and vow
to do it, neither have we attained to the performance of this while we followed
them; but as we received that which discovered their confusion unto us; and we
standing in this principle at this day which the Laws of King Edward, Queen
Eliza. Charles the 1st. and Charles the 2d. does protect, we ought not by right
reason to be persecuted but rather the Priests, who daily confound this
principle, which gives every Infant admittance into the Church of England to be
a member thereof.

2. We retain that which brings us to keep Gods holy will and Commandments,
which is Gods love shed abroad in our hearts, and by this does many know that
we love him because we keep his Commandments, and his Commandments are not
grievous but joyous, Joh. 14. 15. Therefore it is contrary to right reason that
we should suffer for keeping these principles pure and inviolable, which the
Church of England imposes upon every Infant, while their own teachers in
doctrine and practice are opposers of these principles, in affirming that no
man on this side the Grave can keep Gods will and Commandments, but must have
a body of sin while they live, through which the Commandments of God is broken
every day, witness their daily outcry against perfection in this life, which
the aforesaid principles holds forth, for he who forsakes the Devil and all his
works, and all the pomps and pleasures of the world, and all the sinful lusts
of the same, and keeps Gods holy mark that
will and Commandments and walks in the same all the Mark that also
days of his life, is not such a perfect man all the days of his life? and if
so, is not this contrary to the Priests Doctrine who daily affirm the
contrary, therefore let any rational man judge whether we or they ought to
suffer by the Kings laws.

Furthermore our plea is against them in this thing, in causing men and women
to promise and vow such things as aforesaid, which cannot be performed, and so
lays heavy burdens upon them, which they themselves are so far from touching,
that they cry out it is impossible to be born, and so makes them
truce breakers, and teaches the children to call such Godfathers and
Godmothers, which is not so, for they are neither the childrens God nor their
father, nor mother, neither has their God a father or a mother. So this thing
we cannot but deny them in, because we believe it is not of God, neither do we
read that any of the sons or daughters of God in the Scripture of truth did use
such sayings, nor the Ministers of the Gospel impose such things upon any in
their infancy; but if any ask how this was instituted first, and how these
Ministers came by such things who now use them, my answer is according to the
ancient writers.

In the year of the world 4102. and of Christ 142. being the first year of the
reign of Anthonius the Emperor, was Iginus consecrated Pope, he reigned four
years three months and six days, he ordained that every child in Baptism
should have a Godfather and a Godmother standing at the Font, and so likewise
at the time of confirmation.

Therefore we not finding such a practice warranted by the Scripture, but
invented by the Pope as aforesaid, we cannot own it nor them in it, or think it
to be requisite to salvation, nor believe it is of God at all, but a blind
ceremony set up in the invention of man, and practiced by them who cannot keep
the commands of God, and therefore is not to be required of any man according
to the 6th. Article of the book of Canons in these words.

Holy Scripture contains all things necessary to Salvation, so that
whatsoever is not contained in the Scriptures nor may be proved thereby, is not
to be required of any man that it should be believed as an Article of the faith
or to be thought requisite or necessary to salvation.

Likewise in the 20th. Article.

The Church has power to decree Rites and Ceremonies of faith, and yet it is
not lawful for the Church to ordain any thing that is contrary to Gods word
written, neither may it so expound one place of Scripture that it be repugnant
to another, wherefore although the Church be a witness and a keeper of holy
writ, yet it ought not to decree any thing against the same, so besides, the
same ought not to enforce any thing to be believed for necessity of salvation.

Likewise in the 21. Article of the Canons.

General counsels may not be gathered together without the Commandment and
Writ of Princes, and when they be gathered together, forasmuch as they be an
assembly of men, whereof all be not governed by the spirit and word of God,
they may err, and sometimes have erred even in things appertaining to God,
wherefore things ordained by them as necessary to salvation, have neither
strength nor Authority unless it may be declared that they be taken out of the
holy Scriptures.

Therefore this invention of sprinkling Infants, with Godfathers and
Godmothers, being not taken out of the Scripture neither can be proved thereby,
has no strength nor Authority, neither is to be believed as requisite to
salvation, but is judged, deemed and taken to be an error first of Pope Iginus,
and since of the general counsels according to the abovesaid Articles,

Furthermore our plea is that forasmuch as the contrivers and setters forth of
the book of Common Prayer, has collected many good and true sayings out of the
Scripture, and has put them into diverse Prayers, in which they desire to come
into the same condition which the holy men of God witnessed in former ages; of
which things the Lord has made us witnesses at this day in life and practice
and in measure have obtained of the Lord according to our desire, having asked
the same in faith without wavering, which are set down in diverse places of the
Common Prayer book, which the Priests and professors of this generation
affirms can never be obtained while men live, and therefore these prayers set
down in the Common Prayer Book, and the things prayed for therein is quite
contrary to their faith, as hereafter shall be made appear.

In the Collect upon the Circumcision of Christ.

They pray to God to grant them the true Circumcision of the spirit, that their
hearts and all their members may be mortified from all worldly and carnal
lusts, and that they may in all things obey Gods blessed will, etc.

Now let the wise in heart judge of this thing whether they do believe that
their hearts and all their members can be mortified from all worldly and carnal
lusts, and whether they can in all things obey Gods blessed will while they are
upon the earth? for after it is impossible they should, and if they believe
they can, why are the Quakers persecuted for being of the same faith and
praying for the same things, but if they believe these things cannot be
attained, then what is their prayers worth, For whatsoever is not of faith is
sin. Romans 14. 23. So these good desires are turned into sin by this faithless
generation of teachers, who instead of propagating these prayers they are found
depravers of them, but the Collossians witnessed the body of sin put off by the
circumcision of Christ, Coll. 2. 11. So whether the Apostles testimony or the
Priests testimony is according to the Scripture let the honest heart judge.

In the Collect for the first Sunday in Lent.

They pray to God to give them grace to use such abstinance, that their flesh
being subdued to the spirit they may ever obey his godly motions.

Herein they seem to own the spirits motion in words, which they do, and have
so long cried against, scoffing and scorning them who witness this spirit to
lead them, calling it error and Heresy in the Quakers thus to affirm, though
they read these things daily in their assemblies, yet they do not mean that
ever they shall come to pass, for if people were subdued to the spirit, and
came to obey the Godly motions thereof they know people would soon leave them
as the Quakers have done, so whether the Quakers or them are enemies to those
good things in the Common Prayer, let sober minded people judge.

In the Collect for the third Sunday after Easter.

They affirm that God shows to all that be in error the light of his truth
to the intent they may return into the way of righteousness.

This is most true, and that which the Quakers from the beginning have
testified of for which they are and have been all along oppressed and
persecuted, for if men that be in error be lighted with the light of Gods truth
which is Christ, and that to the intent they may return into the way of
righteousness; then they who turns people to this light, turns them into the
way of righteousness, but they who instead of turning people to this light
cries against it, and keeps people from following of it, such does not bring
people into the way of righteousness as we see by daily experience, and so are
not promoters of the truth in the Common Prayer book, though for their own gain
they may read it outwardly, yet it is manifestly seen that these blind guides
are more for the promoting of Superstitious Ceremonies in the said book which
has no ground nor proof in the Scripture, and so by the 20. and 21 Article of
the book of Canons is declared to be of no force nor strength; yea far more
then the testifying and vindicating the sound fundamental truths therein, which
is collected out of the Scripture of truth which the Quakers both own and
practice in life, doctrine, and conversation; which light being followed and
regarded would lead people to life and salvation, if it were not eclipsed and
veiled through these faithless generation of men, who seeks to take away the
Key of Knowledge which is the true light of Christ the truth, wherewith he has
lighted every man that comes into the world, John 1. 9. and so will neither
enter themselves nor suffer them that would, so let any judge whether the
Quakers or the Priests ought to be protected by the Laws of King Edw. the sixth
Queen Eliza. King James, and King Charles, and whether of them lives more in
obedience to the sound fundamental truths in the Common Prayer book.

In the Collect for Whitsunday.

They say, God has taught the hearts of his faithful people by the sending to
them the light of his holy spirit, and they desire by the same spirit to have a
right judgment in all things.

If this affitmation be true as certain it is, then what need has people of
their teachings, unless it be to keep them in blindness of heart from the
dictates of this spirit, whereby the hearts of his faithful people is taught
according to this Collect, which is agreeable to the Scripture, which says,
All thy children shall be taught of the Lord, Isa. 54. 13. Joh. 6. 54. And
again the Apostle says to confirm this, The grace of God which brings
salvation has appeared to all men teaching us, etc. Titus 2. 11. 12. all which
the Quakers own and witness, and therefore they deny them who denies these
things, and would have people ever learning of them, that they may ever feed
them with money, and if people have a right judgment in all things by the holy
spirit of God according to this collect, then they who are against this spirit
in its teachings and leadings, must of necessity have no right judgment in any
thing, and this the Priests has manifestly appeared against both in word and
righting; and therefore let their own Common Prayer book be a witness between
them and us, whether we or they walks more according thereunto in doctrine and
conversation.

In the Communion upon the Feast of Trinity.

They pray that their sinful bodies may be made clean by the body of Christ and
their souls washed through his precious blood, and that they may evermore dwell
in him and he in them, etc.

Here again is that confessed in words and prayed for, which the Quakers has
long traveled and labored to see accomplished, who has been long cried
against as absurd and Heretical (for affirming that they dwelt in Christ and he
he dwelt in them, which is no more then this Collect plainly holds forth, and
for saying they were washed by his precious blood) by the chief Priests and
Rulers of this generation as many can witness, yet they themselves can confess
such things in words though in works they wholly deny them, and not only so
but stirs up the Rulers to persecute all those who practice the same in life
and conversation, if they will not bow to every ceremony which they have woven
in amongst the sound truths which will remain for ever as living witnesses
against them and their Idols: And therefore the Quakers do own what is truth in
the Common Prayer, and what is collected out of the Scripture of truth, which
they practiced and lived in and suffered for, when they who now so highly
magnifies the Common Prayer, durst not show themselves, but now for their own
bellies extols that which they will as much cry against if another thing arise.

In their Prayer before sprinkling of Infants.

They pray, That all carnal affections may dye in them, and that all things
belonging to the spirit may live and grow in them, and that the new man may be
raised up in them.

In this Prayer is several good things, if rightly applied and understood, but
whether they now who are Minsters and hearers of the Common Prayer, either
knows what they ask or beleives that ever they shall receive what they pray
for, is greatly questionable, their principles being so much for a body of sin,
to be in young and old, while they live on the earth, which is not death but
life to all carnal affections, and death to all things belonging to the spirit,
and to the raising up of the new man, which cannot be raised up in any nor put
on, but as the old man is put off with his deeds which is the body of sin.

In their Prayer for Sunday.

They desire the Lord to grant them his holy spirit, to bear witness with
their spirits, that they being his children and heirs of his kingdom, and that
by the operation of the same spirit they may kill all carnal lusts and unlawful
pleasures concupicences and evil affections contrary to his will.

What man or people can be more perfect before the Lord then they who come to
attain all those things here desired, which is the highest degree of
perfection, for if all carnal lusts and unlawful pleasures, concupissences and
evil affections be killed, the ground and root of all ^^n is killed, and there
can be no more living in sin, nor branches of the same, for where the root of
sin is killed, the branches cannot remain, but if many in this age who now
reads over these prayers, would but recollect their memories, they would
perceive that those prayers is not suitable to their faith, and so cannot be an
acceptable sacrifice to God out of their mouths, Prove. 15. 8. and 27. neither
can they ever receive those things they pray for unless they had more faith in
the asking of them, so whether the Quakers or they have more right to those
Prayers, let them who best knows their lives and doctrines only judge.

In their prayer for the morning.

They desire Christ to take them into his tuition ruling and governing them
with his holy spirit, that all manner of darkness and all carnal affections may
be utterly chased and driven out of their hearts, and that they may be
justified and saved both in body and soul.

If any should ask one of these Metamorphosed men called Ministers, if they do
believe that all these things desired can be received while they are in the
body; they would say no (I verily believe) it is so common with them to plead
for Satan's kingdom to stand while people live upon the earth, and so has kept
thousands from being justified or saved, either in body or spirit, as by sad
experience we have seen overthrowing the faith of many, through cunning devised
Fables, which has been more pleaded for then the sound truths therein
prescribed, for if it be asked any of them for what the Quakers are persecuted,
their answer is presently, because they will not come to Church, nor be
conformable to the ceremonies thereof, or some such like frivolous thing, which
has no strength nor authority in it, nor is of substance to convince any that
they err in this, so long as they retain the ancient, truths declared and
testified unto in the Scripture of truth which their persecutors have erred
from in principle and practice, and therefore the Quakers denies them and all
their inventions, and are come out from among them according to the word of the
Lord, Isa. 52. 11. 2 Cor. 6. 17.

In another of their Prayers for the morning.

They desire Christ to shine into their minds, that they may not any where
stumble nor fall into any sin.

Here is the light within prayed for to guide them out of stumbling and falling
into any sin, which is a principle that they have cried against this several
years counting it heresy to acknowledge a light to shine in peoples minds to
guide them out of stumbling, nay they have been so far from beleiving that this
light would keep them from falling into any sin, that they have leavened all
people with the contrary mind that will believe them, so here again their faith
and their Prayers are as much opposite one to another as light is to darkness,
and therefore the Quakers has good grounds to deny them, they certainly
knowing that such sacrifices did always stinck in the nostrils of the Lord,
and though they make many Prayers, he will not hear, because their hands is
full of blood, Isa. 1. 14. 15. Pro. 1. 28. Jer. 14. 12. and their fingers is
polluted with iniquity, and they can never believe any other thing but that
people must continue in sin during life, and so manifests themselves to be such
as James spoke unto, Ia. 4. 3.

In their Prayer for Wednesday.

They pray that they may overcome the chief enemies of their Souls, (viz.) the
desires of the world and the pleasures of the flesh and the Suggestions of the
wicked spirit according to their promise in Baptism.

In this prayer is many good and weighty things desired, if the desirers had
but faith as a grain of Mustard seed, these mountains before mentioned would be
removed and cast into the Sea, never more to arise, Mat. 17. 20. but while they
remain in unbeleif they may pray and use many vain repetitions as the
Hypocrites in former ages did, and have no more answer from God then they had,
for we know that God hears not sinners, but if any man do his will him he
hears, John. 9. 31. Now if this Scripture be true what is all these men's
Prayers worth, who both are sinners and can never believe they shall be
otherwise in this life, this is a degree of unbeleif beyond what ever I read of
among the Jews, therefore such we can never receive as Ministers of Christ, who
has no more faith in him, but we do renounce them as a faithless Generation,
who cannot please God in these their Prayers being not in faith, for without
faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11. 6, So it is far contrary to
justice and right reason to persecute us for coming out from such whose works
declares to all men that their faith is not according to their words, and this
is the only cause for which we have undergone such afflictions this many years,
and not only that we have or do deny any thing that is sound truth either in
the Common Prayer book as it is now established, or in any other way of
worship; for it is not unknown to many thousands what our lives, practices, and
principles are, both in things appeartaining to God, and also in civil things
amongst men. So it is and will be very ridiculous to persecute us under the
notion of Heriticks when it is so manifestly contrary.

In another of their Prayers.

They desire God to shine into their hearts, that the night and darkness of sin,
and the mists of errors on every side driven away, he brightly shining within
their hearts, they may all their life space go without stumbling or offense,
and may decently and seemingly walk as in the daytime being pure and clean from
the works of darkness.

Let all who reads over these lines with a single eye, judge, how far these men
are from beleiving what they here desire, for if men by the light of God
shining within their hearts can go all their life space without stumbling or
offense, why is the Quakers persecuted for holding forth this light for all
people to be guided by? do we think that the Common Prayer Readers of these
times will own this? if so; why do they so much condemn it in Pulpit and
Press? if not, why do they profess it with their mouths, when their hearts are
so far from the belief thereof? this is but feigned humility and will worship,
which is double Hypocrisy; so either they must deny their own words in all
these foregoing Prayers, or else they must acknowledge the Quakers holds more
of the sound truths in the Book of Common Prayer then they themselves do in
principle and practice; and therefore for shame give over persecuting of them,
and reprove the Priests for their confusion and hypocrisy and unbeleif, that
they may repent thereof, if the day of long-suffering be not over, for many
has been turned aside through their enchantments, from the way of truth and
life, which the Lord has set before them: Therefore by the Law of God and the
King they are not to be upheld nor protected in their hypocrisy and
will worship, being utterly repugnant to the sound truths in the Common Prayer
book which by law is established.

In the Collect for the 19th. Sunday after Trinity.

Wherein they desire the Lord mercifully to grant that his holy spirit may in
all things direct and rule their hearts, etc.

This has been counted absurd also in the Quakers to believe any such thing as
the spirit of God to direct and rule their hearts in all things; oh how they
have been abused by the Priests and their followers for owing what is prayed
for in this Collect; and if it be the mercy of God to grant his holy spirit to
direct and rule the hearts of his people in all things, then why are such made
a prey upon unto whom God has showed this mercy in giving them his holy spirit
to direct and rule them in all things, who are not under the Law of God neither
has it power over them, Gal. ^. 18. much less ought the penalties of the Law
of man to be inflicted upon them, yet such now are and in all ages have been
oppressed by the Laws, decrees, and constitutions of men, who erred from this
spirit, though they professed it in words, because such who were guided by this
spirit in all things, could never walk answerable to their wills, witness the
Apostles who were guided by this spirit, Acts 5. 28. 29. witness the three
children who was directed with the spirit of God, Dan. 3. witness Mordecai,
Esther 5. 9. and a cloud of witnesses more in the Scriptures: So here again the
Quakers life and doctrine are answerable to the truth here inserted, and the
Priests manifestly contrary.

In the Collect for the 21. Sunday after Trinity.

Wherein they desire God to grant unto his faithful people pardon and peace,
that they may be cleansed from all their sins, and serve God with a quiet
mind.

Again this is as far from the Priests faith as the east is from the West, for
if it be possible for men to be cleansed from all their sins, and serve God
with a quiet mind according to this Prayer, how will this suit with the Priests
doctrine, who says men cannot be cleansed from all their sins nor never come
to peace here, but must be in a continual warfare as long as they live, and
consequently not serve God with a quiet mind according to this Collect, I
suppose their faith is much repugnant to this if they were thoroughly examined,
yet notwithstanding they make use of these Prayers and sentences now for their
gain, and for fear of punishment, yet I verily believe there is not one among
500 of them that beselves ever to receive these things prayed for while they
live, for what is counted more absurd at this day, then for any to believe that
they can be cleansed from all their sins, and serve God with a quiet mind, yet
these very men that cries out blasphemy against such (and tell them they need
no Savior as the Priests has often said of the Quakers) will pray for the
attainment of these things aforementioned: therefore let all Gods faithful
people judge how feigned, formal, Hypocritical and faithless their prayers are
which can never enter into the ears of the Lord of Sabboths who only has
respect unto the righteous and his ear is open to their cry, Psalm. 34. 15. but
the face of the Lord is against them that do evil, to cut off the remembrance
of them from the earth, ver. 16. If this be true as certain it is then the
Prayers of these sinful men are an abominable sacrifice, which is neither heard
nor regarded by the Lord nor his people, but here also let the Quakers and the
Priests be laid in the balance together, and see whether is more equivolent to
Scriptural truth in the Book of Common Prayer, and then they will suddenly see
whether of these ought by law and right reason to be upheld and countenanced.

In the Collect for the 6th. Sunday after Epaphany.

Wherein they desire God to make them his sons and heirs of eternal life, and
that they having this hope may purify themselves even as he is pure, etc.

This is a good desire indeed, and that which the Lord has granted to many at
this day, who are now the sons of God and heirs of life, but who are made more
objects of the worlds wrath then such, even by them who are praying for the
same condition in words, though their works shows them to be more like the sons
of Belial, in whose steps they tread, who are far from being pure as God is
pure, neither I do think they ever believe they shall, though they pray for the
same, but are not these the principles which the Quakers have been condemned
for owning, and counted Heretics for professing which is now the public
Prayers of this Nation, established by law, all which (as they are taken out of
the Scripture) we both have practiced since we were a people, and do at this
day if they had never been written in the Common prayer book.

Object. But if it be objected that these are not principles but good desires
and godly Prayers.

Answ. That cannot be a good desire nor a godly prayer wherein the thing
desired cannot be believed to be obtained, for whatsoever is not of faith is
sin, Romans 14. 23. and therefore the Quakers cannot own them who turns the truth
of God in these foregoing lines into a lie and sin, and worships they know not
what, as it is too too manifest, and therefore the Quakers pleads the general
issue of all these things which (I hope) there is not a rational man who reads
the aforegoing passages with understanding, but will bring in their verdict for
them, and against the faithless prayers of these times, yet nevertheless these
men cannot handsomely deny, but all the aforesaid Collects either is or ought
to be the substance of things hoped for; and if they will not own them to be
principles, they must own them conditions attainable to the children of God, or
else why do they pray for them, and if so then they must either own the Quakers
Doctrine or deny that part of the Common-Praier, which may be proved by the
Scripture, and is taken out of the Scripture, and so vindicate none but that
part which is neither taken out of the Scripture nor can be proved by the
Scripture, which they are most ready to do, and always have done, though it is
of no strength nor authority nor ought to be forced upon any as necessary to
salvation as may appear by the 6th. Article of their own Canons, and also by
the 20. and 21. Articles of the same: So whether the Quakers are to be
condemned for vindicating that part of the Common Prayer which is taken out of
the Scripture, which has strength and authority in it, or the Priests for
vindicating that part of the Common-Praier which is not taken out of the
Scripture nor can be proved thereby is left to the verdict of every judicious
man.

Here follows several perticulars of the Priests practice which is not taken
out of the Scripture nor can be proved thereby, which the Quakers judges of no
strength nor authority, neither ought to be forced upon any as necessary to
salvation, as may appear by the 21. Article of the book of Cannons.

1. First their sprinkling Infants with water, and signing them with the sign
of the Cross in their foreheads, is not taken out of the Scripture nor cannot
be proved thereby, therefore it is of no strength nor authority.

2. Having Godfathers and Godmothers standing at the Font is not taken out of
the Scripture nor cannot be proved thereby therefore of no force.

3. Their saying that people must have a body of sin as long as they live,
cannot be proved by the Scripture, nor is not taken out of the Scripture,
therefore is an error in all the beleivers thereof.

4. Their saying that none can keep the commands of God, is not taken out of
the scripture, nor can be proved by the scripture, herein they show they are
led by the spirit of error.

5. Their abstaining from slesh in the time called Lent, is not taken out of
the scripture, nor can be proved thereby.

6. To read and Preach in a Tippet-hood or surplice, is not taken out of the
scripture, nor can be proved thereby.

7. To keep so many days in a year from working, calling them Holy days, and
therein tollerating drunkenness, wantonness, and plays, and vice, is not taken
out of the Scripture nor can be proved thereby.

8. To take a Text of scripture and raise so many arguments and doctrines,
reasons and uses from it, is not taken out of the scripture nor can be proved
thereby.

9. To erect an Altar in their Church and to bow so many times thereunto, is
not taken out of the scripture nor can be proved thereby.

10. To give bread and wine to people kneeling twice a year is not taken out of
the Scripture nor can be proved thereby.

11. To have ten shillings more or less as they can get for a Funeral sermon
(as they call it) is not taken out of the Scripture nor cannot be proved
thereby.

12. To cause women to come into the Steeple-house in a white cloth, and to
have money for speaking words over them after child birth, is not taken out of
the scripture nor can be proved thereby.

13. To have a Sexton to ring the bells three times before their service, is
not taken out of the scripture nor can be proved thereby.

14. To take so much a year of every Parish for preaching or reading is not
taken out of the scripture nor can be proved thereby.

15. To take Tithes and offerings of people for the aforesaid work, yea of
those for which they do no work, cannot be proved by the Scripture.

So all the particulars, and many more which now are and have been used and
practiced by the teachers of this generation which they have no ground in the
scripture for, which has been set up in the night of Apostasy from the life
and spirit of God by the false Prophets and Antechrists, which entered into the
world above 1600. years ago, being prophesied of by Christ, Matt. 7. 15. 16.
17. by their fruits he then said they should be known, comparing them to thorns
and thistles, of which men cannot gather grapes nor figs, as appears at this
day, for neither of these can be gathered of these false Prophets of our age;
and are they not inwardly ravening wolves according to Christ's words, for if
any come to receive and follow the light of Gods spirit within, to guide them,
such they seeks to devour with all their strength, though outwardly they will
cover themselves with the same words as appears by the aforesaid Treatise, that
they may appear outwardly like sheep, though inwardly they are quite contrary;
and in Matt. 24. Christ said unto his Disciples, When these false Prophets
should say, lo, here is Christ, and lo there, believe them not, and has not
these fulfilled his words, who sometimes has cried, lo here is Christ in the
Common-Praier, and then afterward has cried, lo there is Christ in the
Presbiterian-worship, and in the Independent worship, and has cried down the
Common-praier, as Popish and Superstitious, when the powers of the nation
turned against it, of which thousands in this nation are witnesses, and now
they cry lo here is Christ again in the Common-praier-worship, because it is
set up by an outward law, but still they are as briers and thorns, through
which a Lamb cannot pass without his wool rent from him and his life sought for
a prey, witness, Leonard Letchfor of Hurst Perpoint, George Butler of
Broadwater, Rob. Baker of Rottingden, Richard wellar of Warbleton, Charles
Blackwel of Stening, George Vinter of Coveold, Henry Hollowel of Ivil, all
Metamorphosed men called Ministers in Sussex, with diverse others who have been
grievous ravenors of the Lambs of Christ this several years last past, and has
changed out of one shape into another, and then back again for their own
intrests; and notwithstanding they cry up the Common-praier, yet they imprison
and persecute those who walks answerable to the good things therein contained,
because they cannot countenance them in their hypocrisy but are in all things
led and guided by the spirit of God which always cried, Woe to such, Mat. 23.
So these and others are left to the judgment of Almighty God who will plead
with them for all these things, who both has delivered and will deliver his
sheep from their mouths, that they shall not always make a prey upon them as
hitherto they have done, so let all sober people who can but read the
Scriptures, judge of the aforesaid men, whether they are Ministers of Christ or
of Antichrist, who went out into the world with many false Prophets in the
days of John ^s himself testified, 1 John 2. 18. these Antichrists sought to
seduce the children of God from the anointing within them, as they do now,
verse 26. 27. of whose race these are of this age, who though they daily read
of the light and spirit of God within people in their Common-praiers, yet they
would seduce people from it if possible they could, and this testimony I was
moved of the Lord to give concerning them under whose iniquity I do at this
time suffer, and several years have done for keeping a good conscience toward
God and all men, as many hundreds of my dear companions have done, and for
testifying against their evil deeds, in which we all remain in patience till
the words of God be fulfilled, rejoicing in heart that we are counted worthy to
suffer for him who is gone before who was made perfect thereby, as we hope to
be in the Lords appointed time, who has caused all things to work together for
good unto us hither to, Blessed, praised, honored, be his eternal name, of us
and all who know him, henceforth and for evermore.

Here follows a few words of Exhortation unto all who inhabiteth in the
skirts and Suburbs of Babylon, that they may come forth and not partake of her
sins, least they partake of her judgments. And a salutation of Love to the
seed of God who are come forth already.

AWake awake ye people all
And mark what I do say,
This day the Lord to you does call,
See you no longer stay*
Out from these wicked workers come
While you have day and time,
That with the Lord you may have room
And lay down in his arm.
For he will thoroughly avenge
The wrongs of his Elect,
Who many years oppressed have been
By this ungodly Sect.
Who for their bellies devoured have
Both widows and fatherless.
And mightily they do now crave
To have the life at last.
Of all who will not to them bend
Their Image to adore
Their lives they now seek for to end
As did Herod before.
But God will save his chosen seed
By his Almighty power,
And only bring his wrath and dread
Upon the painted Whore.
Who from the days of Joh. till now
She as a Queen has raignd
To her all Nations yet has bowd,
Who has not life obtained.
But now is her judgment and her woe
Appeared in the earth,
With all her Merchants high and low
Who must now bear Gods wrath.
And when all these things comes to pass
Then shall they all confess
That God did give them time and space
Wherein they might have rest.
But they rejecting of his love
When he invited them,
So from his presence they must move
And not return again.
But oh ye Saints and servants all
Who in Gods house does dwell,
Let not your hearts and spirits fall
Till God these things fulfill.
Who for the sake of his Elect
These things shall greatly have,
And all his Lambs he will protect
Till this be overpast.
He will as greatly now appear
For his own chosen's sake,
As he did in the day and year
When Israel he did shake.
And all his enemies now shall
Both mourn and sore lament,
Who long refused to hear his call,
Nor would not then repent.
Even till his patience wearied was
His mercy turned to ire,
Such now for ever must cry alas
In the devouring fire.
Which was prepared of old
For all that wicked crew,
Who will not hear when they are told
That all these things are true.
But in Rebellion has gone on
Against the Lord of might
And has refused to be won
When he did them invite.
Therefore his patience now shall cease
To all his enemies
And only judgment shall increase
To all eternities.
But he will bless his Heritage
With happiness and peace, rage
And save them from the heat and
Of such as do increase.
In wickedness and cruelty
Upon his children dear
Who has respect unto their cry
And their complaint does hear.
Therefore ye Plants of Gods renown,
In faith and patience dwell
This will preserve you to the Crown
In which I say farwell.
This was written the 24. day of the 4th. month in the year 1663. By a Brother
and companion to all the servants of Christ who is called

Ambrose Rigge.

The END.

